
Wilkesboro, NC Code of Ordinances


TOWN OF WILKESBORO, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES



2018 S-6 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018; and
State legislation current through 2018 A.L.S. #4



 



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



THE CHARTER




THE TOWN CHARTER
OF
WILKESBORO, NORTH CAROLINA





_____________





The Charter





_____________





PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS





____________




   Catchlines have been added and a uniform system of capitalization has
been utilized. A frontal analysis has been added for the convenience of the
user.



   Some of the provisions of the Charter, though not specifically repealed
or amended, are now obsolete because they have been superseded by general law
applicable to this town and other municipalities. For this reason, some
material is indicated as having been omitted. However, the material remaining
should be carefully checked against the General Statutes of North Carolina in
determining the present applicability of any provision of this Charter.



Editor’s note:



   The Charter herein set out is contained in Private Laws 1889, chapter
240.



   § 1.   Town boundaries.



   § 2.   Town government.



   §§ 3 to 10.   Omitted.



   § 11.   Election, term of office, compensation, etc., of mayor.



   § 12.   Oath of office.



   §§ 13 to 15.   Omitted.



   § 16.   Board of commissioners–Mayor to be presiding officer.



   § 17.   Same–Meetings.



   § 18.   Same–Ordinances generally.



   § 19.   Same–Powers generally.



   § 20.   Appointment of clerk and treasurer.



   § 21.   Duties of clerk.



   § 22.   Powers and liabilities of tax-collector.



   § 23.   Police force generally.



   § 24.   Fees of chief of police; temporary police.



   § 25.   Suspension of police.



   § 26.   Police uniforms; police powers generally.



   § 27.   Weighmaster; inspector; town engineer; town attorney.



   § 28.   Auctions and auctioneers.



   §§ 29 to 37.   Omitted.



   § 38.   License taxes.



   § 39.   Tax levy.



   § 40.   Streets and sidewalks.



   § 41.   Condemnation of land.



   § 42.   Cemeteries.



   § 43.   Fire companies; fire limits.



   § 44.   Additional miscellaneous powers of board of commissioners.



   § 45.   Nuisances.



   § 46.   Street and market sales.



   § 47.   Alcoholic beverages.



   § 48.   Fines and penalties.



   § 49.   Conflicts of interest.



   § 50.   Public buildings.



   § 51.   Penalties for violation of ordinances generally.



   § 52.   Recovery of penalties.



   § 53.   Omitted.



   § 54.   Violation of ordinance a misdemeanor.



   § 55.   No increase or diminution of salary during term.



   § 56.   Vagrants.



   § 57.   Omitted.



   § 58.   Repeal of conflicting laws.



Sec. 1.  Town boundaries.



   That the inhabitants of the Town of Wilkesboro, living within the
territory bounded as follows, viz.: Beginning on the south bank of the Yadkin
River at the iron bridge, running westwardly with the base of the hill on to
a poplar and three white oaks at a spring in the edge of Col. E. J. Cowles’
bottom; thence same general course to a large red oak on bank of old
Jefferson Road at the top of the Curtis Hill; thence across said road
southwest to a white walnut, J. M. Walton and L. T. Pruette’s corner;
thence southwardly across the river road on to a bunch of dogwoods in D. E.
Smoak’s line; thence eastwardly to a red oak on the old Burke Road; thence
across the same, including C. H. Craven’s lot, to a stake at I. S. Call’s
gate on the ridge above his barn; thence east to bend of mountain road near
Wm. Harris, and on east with said road, including James Harris et al., on to
a large poplar and Spanish oak on east bank of Still-house Branch; thence
down said branch to Cob Creek, and down the same to a birch on north bank of
said creek south of J. P. Rousseau’s house; thence north to the base of
hill; thence eastwardly with the base of said hill to the old Salem Road;
thence across same with base of hill in Capt. J. T. Peden's bottom and north
to a sycamore on the bank of Yadkin River; thence up said river to the
beginning, containing the Town of Wilkesboro.



Sec. 2.  Town government.



   The Town Board of Commissioners does hereby adopt a Council-Manager
form of government pursuant to G.S. 160A-101(9)b. Wherein, “The city shall
operate under the Council-Manager form of government in accordance with Part
2 of Article 7 of this chapter and any charter provisions not in conflict
therewith.”  The Town Manger shall appoint the Chief of Police with the
advice of Mayor and Town Council.



   Further, in accordance with G.S. 160A-101(3), the governing board shall
be styled the Town Council.



Editor’s note:



   This section was amended by the Town Board of Commissioners by
ordinance with the intent to amend the governing board to be styled the Town
Council.  Said ordinance was passed on June 5, 2006.



Secs. 3 to 10.  Omitted.



Sec. 11.  Election, term of office, compensation, etc., of mayor.



   The mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the Town of
Wilkesboro for the term of one year and until his successor shall be elected
and qualified. The town commissioners may allow said mayor an annual salary
not exceeding three hundred dollars, to be paid out of the town treasury. In
case a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor, the town commissioners
shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term.
In case two or more persons receive an equal number of votes for the office
of mayor, the sheriff of Wilkes County shall determine the matter by his
vote. If a vacancy occur in the office by death, resignation or otherwise,
and there is not a board of commissioners competent to fill such vacancy, the
board of commissioners of Wilkes County, on such fact being certified to them
by the town clerk, shall appoint a recorder for said town, whose duty it
shall be to preside at the town court, known as the mayor’s court, with as
full and ample authority to try and dispose of all cases within the
jurisdiction of said court as the mayor has under this Charter, and to
perform all other duties incumbent on the mayor, who shall for the time being
be entitled to the emoluments of the office, and shall continue to hold his
office and exercise the duties thereof until the office of mayor is filled
according to law.



Sec. 12.  Oath of office.



   That on or before the fifth day after the election, the mayor and
commissioners so elected shall meet at the town hall or some other place by
them appointed and shall then and there take an oath to support the
constitution and laws of the United States and the constitution and laws of
North Carolina, and to discharge the duties imposed upon them by virtue of
their office as mayor and town commissioners with fidelity and integrity to
the best of their ability, which oath shall be administered by a judge,
justice of the peace or former mayor.



Secs. 13 to 15. Omitted.



Sec. 16.  Board of commissioners–Mayor to be presiding officer.



   That the mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the town
commissioners, and where there is an equal division upon any question or in
the election of officers by the board he shall determine the matter by his
vote. He shall vote in no other case; and if he shall be absent the board may
appoint one of their number pro tempore to exercise his duties.



Sec. 17.  Same–Meetings.



   That the commissioners shall form one board, and a majority of them
shall be competent to perform all the duties prescribed, unless otherwise
provided. At their first meeting they shall fix stated days or times of
meetings, which shall be as often, at least, as once in every two months.
Special meetings of the commissioners may also be held on the call of the
mayor or a majority of the commissioners. And of every such meeting, when
called by the mayor, all the commissioners shall be notified, and when called
by a majority of the commissioners, such as shall not join in the call shall
be notified.



Sec. 18.  Same–Ordinances generally.



   That the board of commissioners, when convened, shall have power to
make and provide for the execution thereof such ordinances, by-laws, rules
and regulations for the better government of the town as they may deem
necessary, not inconsistent with this act or with the laws of the land.



Sec. 19.  Same–Powers generally.



   That among the powers hereby conferred on the board of commissioners,
they may borrow money or create a public debt by issuing bonds or otherwise,
only after they have passed an ordinance by a two-thirds vote of the entire
board at a regular meeting submitting the question of creating a debt to a
vote of the people, and a majority of the qualified registered voters have
voted in favor thereof. Thirty days notice shall be given of such an election
in some newspaper published in Wilkesboro, at which election those who favor
creating the debt shall vote “approved,” and those who oppose it shall
vote “not approved.” The board may order a new registration of voters at
any and at all such elections, if they deem it proper to do so. They may
provide suitable town water works to supply all the necessities of the
town’s public and private wants, and regulate toll for same; take all
proper means to prevent and extinguish fires; regulate the markets; make
regulations to cause the due observance of Sunday; to appoint and regulate a
police force to execute such precepts as the mayor and others may lawfully
issue to them, to preserve the peace and order of the town, and to execute
the ordinances thereof; to suppress and remove nuisances; preserve the health
of the town from contagious or infectious diseases; and may appoint and
provide for the pay and prescribe the duties of all such other officers as
may be deemed necessary.



Sec. 20.  Appointment of clerk and treasurer.



   That at the first meeting of the board of commissioners, or as soon
thereafter as practicable, they shall elect a town clerk, who shall act as
treasurer, and a tax-collector, who shall respectively hold their offices
during the term of the board electing them and until their successors are
elected and qualified, subject, however, to be removed at any time and others
appointed in their stead for misbehavior or neglect in office. Before acting,
each of said officers shall take an oath before the mayor to faithfully
discharge the duties required of him by the board of commissioners, and each
shall execute a bond in such an amount as the board may require, with
security to be approved by the board. The bonds required by the clerk and
tax-collector shall be renewed every year.



Sec. 21.  Duties of clerk.



   That the clerk shall have such reasonable salary as the commissioners
may designate, and it shall be his duty to keep regular and fair minutes of
the proceedings of the board, and to preserve all books, papers and other
articles committed to his care during his continuance in office, and deliver
them to his successor; and he shall receive and faithfully keep all moneys
which shall be paid to him for the use and in behalf of said town, and
disburse the same according to an order given in obedience to the directions
of said board appearing on their minutes. He shall keep a fair and correct
account of all moneys so received and disbursed by him in a book kept for
that purpose, showing from what source money is received and for what purpose
paid out, and shall submit said accounts to said board whenever required. He
shall pay to his successor all moneys in his hands belonging to said town,
and faithfully perform all duties imposed on him as clerk by the laws and
ordinances of said board.



Sec. 22.  Powers and liabilities of tax-collector.



   That the tax-collector whose appointment is herein provided for shall
be vested with the same power and authority in the collection of taxes that
sheriffs have, and be subject to the same fines and penalties for failure or
neglect of duty. He shall be charged with sums appearing by the tax-lists as
due for city taxes. He shall be credited in settlement, as sheriffs are
credited, with amounts in suit by appeal, all poll-tax as in personal
property certified by the clerk of the commissioners of the county by order
of the board of county commissioners to be insolvent and incollectible. He
shall at no time retain in his hands over one hundred dollars for a longer
time than seven days, under a penalty of two per cent per month to the town
upon all sums so unlawfully retained. The board of commissioners, at the
meeting before the last regular meeting in each year, shall appoint one or
more of their number to be present and assist at the accounting and
settlement between the tax-collector and town clerk and audit and settle the
accounts of the town clerk. The accounts so audited shall be reported to the
board of commissioners, and, when approved by them, shall be recorded in the
minute books of said board, and shall be prima facie evidence of their
correctness and impeachable only for fraud or specified error. It shall be
the duty of said board to remove any tax-collector who shall fail to settle
and fully pay up the taxes by law due from him, and he shall not be eligible
to re-election to said office: Provided, however, that any male person so
certified to be insolvent or delinquent as aforesaid, not previously exempted
by order of the board of commissioners, who shall fail to pay said taxes to
the collector for six months after such return of insolvents or delinquents
as aforesaid, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction before
the mayor shall be fined double the value of the taxes so due, not to exceed
in any case fifty dollars; and the mayor, if said person be committed to
prison for failure to pay the fine, may employ such offender in working the
public streets and public works of said town, as set forth in section
fourteen of this act, and said mayor may allow such offender a credit of so
much per day on said fine and costs as to him may seem just and reasonable.



Sec. 23.  Police force generally.



   That the board of commissioners shall have the power to appoint a
police force, to consist of a chief of police and such number of policemen as
the good government of the city may require, who shall hold their office
during the term of the board appointing them and until their successors are
appointed. The chief of police or marshal shall give bond in such sum as the
board of commissioners may prescribe, for the faithful discharge of the
duties imposed by law and the ordinances of the town, and to faithfully
account for all moneys that may come into his hands from fines, penalties and
so forth. The chief shall have the supervision and control of the police
force, and it shall be his duty to report to the mayor any dereliction of
duty on the part of any member of the police force. It shall be the duty of
the chief of police to attend the mayor’s court each day and report any
violations of law or ordinances of the town, to collect all fines and
penalties imposed and pay the same to the town treasurer, and to execute the
orders and judgments of said court, see that the laws and ordinances of the
town are enforced, and to do such other things as are required of him by the
board. The chief of police and each member of the police force shall have all
the power and authority vested in sheriffs and constables for the
preservation of the peace of the town by suppressing disturbances and
apprehending offenders; they shall execute all process directed to them by
the mayor or others, and in the execution thereof shall have the same power
which sheriffs and constables have. The chief and members of the police force
shall take an oath before the mayor for the faithful performance of the
duties required by law and ordinances.



Sec. 24.  Fees of chief of police; temporary police.



   The chief of police shall be entitled to and shall receive the fees
arising from the execution of all precepts issued by the mayor or others,
which shall be the same as that of sheriffs and constables for like services.
The board of town commissioners shall pass ordinances for the government and
direction of the police, and fix their compensation. In time of exigency the
mayor may appoint temporary additional policemen for such time as may appear
necessary, not exceeding one week, who shall take the same oath and be
subject to the same control as regular policemen.



Sec. 25.  Suspension of police.



   The mayor, at any time, upon charge being preferred, or, upon finding
said chief or any members of said police force guilty of misconduct, shall
have power to suspend such member from service until the board of
commissioners shall convene and take action in the matter, and upon hearing
the proofs in the case the board may discharge or restore such member, and
the pay of such member may, in the discretion of the board, cease from the
time of his suspension to the time of his restoration to service. Any
violations of the regulations or orders of any superior shall be good cause
for dismissal, and the mayor shall suspend the chief or any member of the
police force if drunk while on duty.



Sec. 26.  Police uniforms; police powers generally.



   The board of commissioners shall require the entire police force to
wear badges, and be so armed and uniformed as to be readily recognized by the
public as peace officers. And the police shall generally have power to do
whatever may be necessary to preserve the good order and peace of the town
and secure the inhabitants from personal violence and their property from
loss or injury.



Sec. 27.  Weighmaster; inspector; town engineer; town attorney.



   That the said board of commissioners may, in their discretion (as soon
after their election as necessary), appoint a weighmaster, whose duty it
shall be to weigh all merchantable commodities sold in said town; and an
inspector, whose duty shall be to inspect all flour, provisions, forage, and
all other marketable produce in said town in their judgment requiring
weighing or inspecting. And the weighmaster and inspector so appointed shall
give bond with approved security, payable to the Town of Wilkesboro, in an
amount to be fixed by the board, conditioned for the faithful discharge of
all duties imposed by law and the ordinances of the town; and shall take an
oath before the mayor before entering upon their duties. And the board of
commissioners shall have power to remove either of them for misbehavior or
neglect or malpractice in office and appoint a successor, in his stead. And
the board of commissioners are hereby authorized and empowered to regulate
the fees to be paid for such weighing and inspection, and by whom to be paid;
and to make all necessary ordinances for the government of said officers, and
to impose fines and penalties for their violation. They may also appoint a
town engineer, a town attorney and a sanitary policeman, and prescribe the
duties of each and fix their compensation.



Sec. 28.  Auctions and auctioneers.



   That the said board of commissioners shall have power, at any time, to
elect one or more auctioneers for the Town of Wilkesboro, who shall give
bond, with approved security, in the sum of one thousand dollars, payable to
the State of North Carolina, conditioned that he will faithfully perform the
duties of auctioneer by law, which said bond shall be filed with the mayor to
be by him safely kept; and when the town commissioners shall have appointed
said auctioneer, and he shall have filed his bond, no person shall exercise
the office of auctioneer in said town except those duly appointed by the
board of commissioners; and the said board may make ordinances regulating
auction sales in said town; and the said auctioneer shall pay as a tax a
certain per centum on all sales, hires and profits made by virtue of his or
their office not to exceed one per centum, to be levied by the board.



Secs. 29 to 37.  Omitted.



Sec. 38.  License taxes.



   That in addition to the subjects listed for taxation, the commissioners
may levy a tax on the following subjects, the amount of which tax, when
fixed, shall be collected by the town collector immediately, and if the same
be not paid on demand, the same may be recovered by suit on the articles upon
which the tax is imposed, or any other property of the owners may be
forthwith distrained and sold to satisfy the same, viz.:



   1.    Upon all itinerant merchants or peddlers selling or offering
to sell in the town, a tax not exceeding fifty dollars per year, except such
only as selling books, charts or maps.



   2.    On every bowling alley, and every billiard table, and every
pool table, and every bagatelle table, and every other table or gaming
contrivance, the object of which is gain, and for the use of which a charge
is made, a tax not exceeding fifty dollars, reserving the right to remove it
or them at any time as a nuisance.



   3.    On all keepers of eating-houses or restaurants, fish or meat
or vegetable or bread stands or fruiterers, a tax not exceeding twenty-five
dollars per year.



   4.    Upon every company of circus riders who shall exhibit within
the town or with-in one mile thereof, a tax not exceeding one hundred dollars
for each day, the tax to be paid before the exhibition, and if not, to be
double.



   5.    Upon every person or company exhibition [exhibiting] in the
town stage or theatrical plays, sleight-of-hand performances, rope-dancing,
tumbling, wire-dancing or menageries, a tax not exceeding fifty dollars for
every day they exhibit.



   6.    Upon every exhibition for reward of artificial curiosities
(models of useful inventions excepted) in the town, a tax not exceeding
twenty-five dollars, to be paid in advance.



   7.    Upon each show or exhibition of any kind, and on each concert
for reward, and on every strolling musician, except for charitable purposes,
a tax not exceeding ten dollars, to be paid before exhibition.



   8.    On every license to sell wines, cordials, malt and spirituous
liquors, a tax not to exceed two hundred dollars, reserving the right in each
instance to levy a tax on wines, malt and spirituous liquors as merchandise.



Sec. 39.  Tax levy.



   That taxes for town purposes shall be levied on all real estate and
personal property, trades, licenses and other subjects of taxation as
provided in section three, article five of the State Constitution; that all
moneys arising from taxes, donations or other sources shall be paid to the
clerk, and no appropriation thereof shall be made but by a board constituted
of a majority of all the commissioners.



Sec. 40.  Streets and sidewalks.



   That the board of commissioners shall have power to grade, macadamize,
pave, curb and otherwise keep in repair the streets, alleys and sidewalks, to
lay out and open new streets, widen those already open, build and repair
bridges within the corporate limits, construct a system of sewerage or
drainage and make such other improvements in the streets as the public
convenience may require.



Sec. 41.  Condemnation of land.



   That when any land or right of way shall be required for the purpose of
opening new streets or for widening those already opened for other objects
allowed by this Charter, and for want of agreement as to the value thereof,
the same cannot be purchased from the owner or owners, the same may be taken
at a valuation to be made by three freeholders of the town, to be chosen, one
by the land-owner and one by the commissioners, which two so chosen shall
choose the third freeholder, or if the land-owner shall refuse or fail to
choose one of the freeholders as above directed, the town commissioners may
choose two, who shall select the third; and in making said valuation, said
freeholders, after being duly sworn by the mayor or justice of the peace or
clerk of a court of record, shall take into consideration the loss or damage
which may accrue to the owner in consequence of the land or right of way
being surrendered; also any benefit or advantage such owner may receive from
the opening or widening such street or other improvements, and ascertain the
sum which shall be paid to the owner of said property, and report the same to
the board of commissioners under their hands and seals; which report, on
being confirmed by the board and spread upon their minutes, shall have the
effect of a judgment against said board of commissioners, and shall pass the
title to the board of commissioners, in their corporate capacity, of the land
so taken: Provided, that if any person over whose land the said street may
pass or improvements be erected, or the commissioners, be dissatisfied with
the valuation thus made, then, in that case, either party may have an appeal
to the next superior court: Provided, however, that such appeal shall not
hinder or delay the commissioners opening or widening such street or erecting
such improvements.



Sec. 42.  Cemeteries.



   That the board of commissioners shall have power to purchase suitable
land for public cemeteries at a convenient distance from the center of the
town; that they may cause the same to be laid out in lots and kept in proper
repair, and regulate the terms and manner in which bodies may be interred
therein. They may sell the exclusive privilege of burial in any given plot
and execute a deed for the same, and the moneys so realized may be expended
under the direction of the board in beautifying, extending and keeping said
grounds. Suitable provision shall also be made for the interment of the poor.



Sec. 43.  Fire companies; fire limits.



   That they may provide for the establishment, organization and
equipment, government and pay of such number of fire companies as they shall
deem necessary and proper. And in case of a fire occurring in said town, the
mayor, or, in his absence, a majority of the commissioners who may be
present, may order the blowing up or pulling down or destroying any house or
houses deemed necessary to stop the progress of the fire, and no person shall
be held liable, civilly or criminally, for acting in such case in obedience
to such orders. They shall also have power to establish fire limits within
said town within which it shall not be lawful for any person to erect or
build any wooden house, make any wooden addition to any building or cover any
building with any material other than metal or slate; they may prohibit
wooden buildings from being removed from without into said fire limits, or
from being removed from one place to another within the same, under such
penalties as the board of commissioners may establish, and such penalty may
be sued for and recovered from the owner in an action of debt in any court
having jurisdiction.



Sec. 44.  Additional miscellaneous powers of board of commissioners.



   That they shall have power to make ordinances to prohibit or control
the firing of fire-arms, fire-crackers, torpedoes and other explosive
material, and to govern the sale thereof in the town; the pace and speed at
which horses may be ridden or driven through the streets; the speed at which
railroad engines and trains shall run within the town limits; to prohibit
said railroad from stopping their engines or cars on said streets, and to
require said railroads to keep the street crossings in good repair; the
manner in which powder and other explosive and inflammable substances may be
kept and sold; the manner in which commercial fertilizers may be stored; the
manner in which dogs and hogs may be kept, and to prevent them from running
at large in said town; to cause all alleys, cellars, lots, privies, stables,
sties and other places of like character to be examined by a sanitary
policeman to be appointed for that purpose. It shall be their duty, on
complaint, to cause, by their order, the sanitary policeman to have said
places cleaned and the nuisance abated, and the said sanitary policeman, or
any other person appointed by the board and charged with that duty, shall
have authority to enter the premises described to be in bad order and inspect
and have the same cleaned; and the expense of abating such nuisance shall be
recovered from the occupant or owner of said premises by action of debt in
any court having competent jurisdiction.



Sec. 45.  Nuisances.



   They shall have power, and it shall be their duty, to prohibit all
trades or occupations which are a nuisance from being carried on in said
town. They shall have power, and it shall be their duty, to cause all ponds,
sunken lots and other places in which water stands and stagnates to be
drained and filled up, and to recover from the owner or occupant the expense
as above, which expense shall be a lien on the lot: Provided, the owner or
occupant of said lot, after ten days notice, shall neglect or refuse to
remove or abate said nuisance. They shall have authority to cause all
nuisances arising from any cause within the town limits to be removed or
abated, and for the removing or abating any such nuisance the persons
creating the same shall pay the expenses as above required.



Sec. 46.  Street and market sales.



   That the said board shall have power to regulate the manner in which
provisions and all other articles shall be sold in the streets and markets of
said town, and to regulate the manner in which the streets and markets of
said town may be used and kept.



Sec. 47.  Alcoholic beverages.



   That the board of commissioners shall have power to grant and cancel
license to sell wines, malt or spirituous liquors within said town to any
persons to whom they may think proper: Provided, the person to whom the
license is issued shall pay first such tax as may be imposed by the board,
and give bond for one thousand dollars, with approved security, conditioned
for the keeping of an orderly and lawful house, and no person shall be
permitted to sell wine, malt or spirituous liquors within said town unless
licensed by the town commissioners.



Sec. 48.  Fines and penalties.



   That all fines and penalties imposed by this act, or which are or may
be imposed by the ordinances of said town or the laws of the state, when
tried and recovered before the mayor of said town, shall be paid to the town
clerk for the use of said town.



Sec. 49.  Conflicts of interest.



   That no mayor or commissioner, or other officer of said town, shall
directly or indirectly become a contractor for work to be done for the town,
and any person herein offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



Sec. 50.  Public buildings.



   That they may establish all public buildings necessary and proper for
the town, and prevent the erection and establishment of wooden buildings in
any part of the town where they may increase the danger of fire.



Sec. 51.  Penalties for violation of ordinances generally.



   That for the violation of any ordinance or by-law made by said board of
commissioners they may prescribe penalties not exceeding fifty dollars for
each offense, to be recovered before the mayor without stay of process, mesne
or final; and when judgment shall be given for any such penalty the party
convicted may, unless the penalty and cost be paid, be immediately committed
to jail for the space of thirty days or until payment thereof be made.



Sec. 52.  Recovery of penalties.



   That all penalties imposed by law relating to the town, or by this act,
by any ordinance of the town, shall be recoverable in the name of the Town of
Wilkesboro, before the mayor or other tribunal having jurisdiction thereof.



Sec. 53.  Omitted.



Sec. 54.  Violation of ordinance a misdemeanor.



   That any person or persons violating any ordinance of the town shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to the provisions of
chapter sixty-two of the code, volume two, entitled “towns and cities.”



Sec. 55.  No increase or diminution of salary during term.



   That the salary or pay of no officer elected or appointed under this
Charter shall be increased or diminished during the time for which he is
elected or appointed.



Sec. 56.  Vagrants.



   Any person who may be able to labor and who has no apparent means of
subsistence, and neglects to apply himself to some honest occupation for the
support of himself and family, or if any person shall be found spending his
time in dissipation or gaming, or sauntering about without employment, or
endeavoring to maintain himself or his family by any undue or unlawful means,
such person shall be deemed a vagrant and guilty of a misdemeanor and
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars or by imprisonment not to
exceed thirty days, and the offense shall be cognizable before the mayor of
said town, who may release the party on his giving a recognizance, with
security, for his industrious and peaceable deportment for one year or less
from the date thereof, or may also impose on him a punishment not to exceed
that above mentioned. And the said mayor may cause such person or persons to
be farmed out to work the public streets or other public work of said town as
set out in section fourteen of this act.



Sec. 57.  Omitted.



Sec. 58.  Repeal of conflicting laws.



   That all laws or parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby
repealed, and that this act shall take effect from and after its ratification.



   Ratified the 11th day of March, A. D. 1889.



TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY




CHAPTER 10:  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY



Section



   10.01   Title of code



   10.02   Interpretation



   10.03   Application to future ordinances



   10.04   Captions



   10.05   Definitions



   10.06   Rules of interpretation



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to other sections



   10.09   Reference to offices



   10.10   Errors and omissions



   10.11   Official time



   10.12   Reasonable time; computing time



   10.13   Ordinances repealed



   10.14   Ordinances unaffected



   10.15   Effective date of ordinances



   10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances



   10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances



   10.18   Supplementation of code



   10.19   Section histories; section headings; statutory references



 



   10.99   General penalties; enforcement of ordinances; continuing
violations



§ 10.01  TITLE OF CODE.



   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Wilkesboro shall
be designated as the Code of Wilkesboro, North Carolina and may be so cited.



§ 10.02  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.03  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.04  CAPTIONS.



   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.



§ 10.05  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   General rule.  Words and phrases shall be taken in their
plain, or ordinary and usual sense.  However, technical words and phrases
having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood
according to their technical import.



   (B)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.  The Mayor and Commissioners, or
governing body, of the Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina.



      CHARTER.  The Charter of the Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina.



      CODE,THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES.  This  municipal
code as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters
or sections.



      COMPUTATION OF TIME.  The time within which an act is to be done
shall be computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last
day is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.



      COUNTY.  The County of Wilkes, North Carolina.



      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES.  The latest edition of the General
Statutes of North Carolina, as amended.



      GENDER.  Words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and neuter.



      GOVERNOR.  The Governor of North Carolina.



      JOINT AUTHORITY.  All words giving a joint authority to 3 or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of persons or officers.



      MAY.  The act referred to is permissive.



      MONTH.  A calendar month.



      NUMBER.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and the
plural includes the singular number.



      OATH.  An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an
affirmation may be substituted for an OATH, and in those cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.



      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT.  An
officer, office, employee, commission or department of this municipality
unless the context clearly requires otherwise.



      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD.  Whenever certain hours are named in
this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in
current use in this town.



      OWNER.  Applied to any property, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of the property.



      PERSON.  Extends to and includes person, persons, firm,
corporation, copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as
applied to any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members
thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.



      PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Every species of property except real
property.



      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING.  Next before or next after, respectively.



      PROPERTY.  Includes real and personal property.



      REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.



      SHALL.  The act referred to is mandatory.



      SIDEWALK.  Any portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION.  Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.



      STATE.  The State of North Carolina.



      STREET.  Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches
thereto within the town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way
between abutting property lines.



      SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by
a bold, italicized heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized, bold
and italicized heading in the body of the chapter, setting apart a group of
sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have
SUBCHAPTERS.



      TENANT or OCCUPANT.  When applied to a building or land, shall
include any person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land,
whether alone or with others.



      TENSE.  Words used in the past or present tense include the
future as well as the past and present.



      TOWN.  The Town of Wilkesboro, in the County of Wilkes, North
Carolina.



      WRITTEN.  Any representation of words, letters or figures
whether by printing or otherwise.



      YEAR.  A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.



      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  One designated by the Board of
Commissioners.



Statutory reference:



   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593



§ 10.06  RULES OF INTERPRETATION.



   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent
of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:



   (A)   AND or OR.  Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.



   (B)   Acts by assistants.  When a statute or ordinance requires an
act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the
principal, requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an
authorized agent or deputy.



   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses.  Words denoting the
masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders;
words in the singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall
include the singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include
the future, if applicable.



   (D)   General term.  A general term following specific enumeration
of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so
limited.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity
does not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application.



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.



   Whenever in 1 section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



§ 10.09  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.



§ 10.10  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning
can be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express that intent, the spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though
the correct words were contained in the text as originally published.  No
alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the
nature or extent of the error.



§ 10.11  OFFICIAL TIME.



   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.



§ 10.12  REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.



   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in
a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of notice.



   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein
provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last.  If the last day be Sunday, it shall be excluded.



§ 10.13  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.



§ 10.14  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.



   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall
be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the
following:



      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or
forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before
the effective date of this code;



      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the town or any evidence of the town’s indebtedness;



      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;



      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or
employee;



      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the town;



      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or
public way in the town;



      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;



      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for
a stated or limited term;



      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and
assessing taxes therefor;



      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;



      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision
plat;



      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of
the town;



      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the
town not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;



      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included
herein;



      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades
in the town; and/or



      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.



   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance
or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is
repealed by this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at
length herein.



Statutory reference:



   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7



§ 10.15  EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.



   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided.  Ordinances not requiring publication shall
take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.



§ 10.16  REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.



   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be
repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an
ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due
publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is
required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.



   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty
instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous
to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had
continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.



   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or
provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly
provided.



§ 10.17  ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.



   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division, or any portion thereof,
the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by omission from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or
omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the
subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the
town.



   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made
by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of
this code in language substantially similar to the following: “Section  
            of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Wilkesboro, North
Carolina, is hereby amended as follows....” The new provisions shall then
be set out in full as desired.



   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be
added, language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The
Code of Ordinances, Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina, is hereby amended by
adding a section, to be numbered               , which section shall
read as follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as
desired.



   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters or provisions desired to
be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter
number, as the case may be.



§ 10.18  SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.



   (A)   By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this code
shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the code shall include
all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the
Board of Commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all
changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new
pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will
be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included
in the supplement.



   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the
code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission
thereof from reprinted pages.



   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier
(meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the
supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts
of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so
to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:



      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate
subdivisions;



      (2)   Provide appropriate headings and titles for sections and
other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes in
headings and titles;



      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other
subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate
new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers;



      (4)   Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the
same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this division”
and the like, as the case may be, or to “sections_____to_____” (inserting
section numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the
substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code); and/or



      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve
the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no
case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.



(1997 Code § 1-8)



§ 10.19  SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and
passage date of the original ordinance and any amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section.  Example:  (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980;
Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)



   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. 
Example:  (G.S. § 160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-1985)



      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory
reference” following the text of the section indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



      This municipality shall make available to any person for
inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state
law.



   Statutory reference:



      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.



   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of
ordinances of the town, the prior code section number shall be indicated in
the history by “(Prior Code, §       ).”  The history notes
following sections and the references scattered throughout the code are not
part of the code, but are merely for the benefit of the user of the code.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES; CONTINUING
VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Administration.



      (1)   Unless a greater amount is specified herein, an act
constituting a violation of the provisions of this code or a failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty of $100, which includes administrative fees. Each day any single
violation continues shall be a separate violation. Unless expressly stated
otherwise in a chapter or appendix, a violation of this code shall not
constitute a misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 14-4. If the offender fails to
correct this violation by the prescribed deadline after being notified of
said violation, the penalty may be recovered in a civil action in the nature
of a debt.



      (2)   In addition to the civil penalties set out above, any
provision of any town ordinance may be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the
General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may
be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the application of the town
for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.



      (3)   In addition to the civil penalties set out above, any
provision of any town ordinance that makes unlawful a condition existing upon
or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of
abatement by the General Court of Justice. When a violation of such a
provision occurs, the town may apply to the appropriate division of the
General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and/or
order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition
upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed
in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including
the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.



      (4)   An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other
structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures,
furniture or other movable property be removed from buildings on the
property; that grass and weeds be cut; that abandoned or junked vehicles be
removed; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be
taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with the
applicable town ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with
an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the
court, he may be cited for contempt, and the town may execute the order of
abatement. The town shall have a lien on the property for the cost of
executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and
materialman's lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of
abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for
compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by
the Clerk of Superior Court in an amount approved by the judge before whom
the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant's full
compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by
the judicial order. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend
or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith.



      (5)   The provisions of any town ordinance may be enforced by
one, all, or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this
section.



   (B)   Procedures.



      (1)   This section sets forth the procedures to be followed in
enforcing the provisions of the code of ordinances. They shall be utilized
unless an individual ordinance codified herein has different procedures, in
which event the procedures of the individual ordinance shall be followed.



      (2)   Unless otherwise provided by a specific provision of any
town ordinance, upon determination of a violation of any section of a town
ordinance, the enforcement official of the town shall cause a warning
citation to be issued to the violator. Such warning citation shall be issued
either in person or posted in the United States mail service by first class
mail addressed to the last known address of the violator as contained in the
records of the county. Such warning citation shall set out the nature of the
violation, the section violated, the date of the violation, and shall contain
an order to immediately cease the violation. If the violation is in the
nature of an infraction for which an order of abatement would be appropriate
in a civil proceeding, a reasonable period of time must be stated in which
the violation must be abated. The warning citation shall specify that a
second citation shall incur a civil penalty, together with costs, and
attorney fees.



      (3)   An appeal from a warning citation shall be taken within
10 days from the date of said warning citation by filing with the enforcement
official and with the Board of Adjustment, a notice of appeal which shall
specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Except in any case where
the ordinance violated, which is the subject of the warning citation,
specifically grants to the Board of Adjustment other powers in considering
appeals and such appeal is applied for, the Board of Adjustment in
considering appeals of warning citations shall have power only in the manner
of administrative review and interpretation where it is alleged that the
enforcement official has made an error in the application of an ordinance, in
the factual situation as it relates to the application of an ordinance or
both.



      (4)   Where the enforcement official of the town determines
that the period of time stated in the original warning citation is not
sufficient for abatement based upon the work required or consent agreement,
the enforcement official may amend the warning citation to provide for
additional time.



      (5)   Upon failure of the violator to obey the warning
citation, a civil citation may be issued by the enforcement official, either
served directly on the violator, his duly designated agent, or registered
agent if a corporation, either in person or posted in the United States mail
service by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the
violator as contained in the records of the county or obtained from the
violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation. The violator shall
be deemed to have been served upon the mailing of said citation. The citation
shall direct the violator to appear before the Town Manager of the town, or
designee, within 15 days of the date of the citation, or alternatively to pay
the citation by mail. The violation for which the citation is issued must
have been corrected by the time the citation is paid, otherwise further
citations shall be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the offense
continues until the prohibited activity is ceased or abated.



      (6)   If the violator fails to respond to a citation within 15
days of its issuance, and pay the penally prescribed therein, the town may
institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the appropriate division of
the North Carolina General Court of Justice for the collection of the
penalty, costs, attorney fees, and such other relief as permitted by law.



(Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 9-9-2013)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   BODY OF GOVERNMENT





         31.   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS





         32.   TOWN ORGANIZATIONS





         33.   FINANCES AND TAXATION





         34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES





         35.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES




CHAPTER 30:  BODY OF GOVERNMENT



Section




General Provisions




   30.01   Conflicts of interest; claims/warrants not to be purchased



   30.02   Ex officio officers; appointive officers



   30.03   Acting officers



   30.04   Authority of deputies, assistants and other subordinates



   30.05   Bond required of certain town officers, employees and agents



   30.06   Preparation of budget



   30.07   Removal from office or position held



   30.08   Town employees; use of vehicles




Specific Offices




   30.20   Mayor



   30.21   Town Clerk



   30.22   Town Accountant; term, qualifications, powers and duties



   30.23   Treasurer



   30.24   Tax Collector



   30.25   Town Attorney




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 30.01  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; CLAIMS/WARRANTS NOT TO BE PURCHASED.



   No officer or employee of the town shall have any interest (other than
as a citizen) in any town contract for materials or services; and no officer
or employee of the town shall buy any warrant issued by the town for less
than its face value; a violation of this section shall subject the offender
to a forfeiture of his or her office or position.



(Prior Code, § 2-27)



§ 30.02  EX OFFICIO OFFICERS; APPOINTIVE OFFICERS.



    The Wilkesboro Mayor, Town Manager and Finance Officer shall serve as
non-voting ex officio members and the immediate past chairman shall serve as
a non-voting ex officio member.



(Prior Code, § 2-28)  (Am. Res. 2017-38, passed 11-6-2017)



§ 30.03  ACTING OFFICERS.



   Whenever an appointive officer of the town is absent from town,
disabled or otherwise unavailable to perform the duties of his or her office
under circumstances not creating a vacancy in the office, the appointing
authority may designate another appropriate appointive officer to exercise
the powers and perform the duties of an unavailable officer during the
interim, and the appointing authority shall report the designation to the
Board of Commissioners at its next regular meeting for action as the Board
may consider appropriate. Any officer so designated shall have the title of
the office temporarily held by him or her, with the word acting preceding the
title, as, for example, acting Tax Collector. Acting officers shall give bond
in cases for which bond is required of the permanent officers in whose places
they act.



(Prior Code, § 2-29)



Statutory reference:



   General law as to general qualifications of town officers, see G.S. §
160A-60



§ 30.04  AUTHORITY OF DEPUTIES, ASSISTANTS AND OTHER SUBORDINATES.



   Authority vested in and duties imposed upon town officers by state law,
the Town Charter, this code and other ordinances and resolutions of the Board
of Commissioners may, when they so authorize, be exercised or performed by
their deputies, assistants and other subordinates to the extent not
prohibited by state law, this code or other ordinance or resolution of the
Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 2-30)



§ 30.05  BOND REQUIRED OF CERTAIN TOWN OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS.



   (A)   Every officer, employee or agent of the town who handles or
has custody of more than $100 of the town’s funds at any time shall, before
assuming his or her duties, be required to enter into bond with good
sureties, in an amount sufficient to protect the town, payable to the town
and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his or her duties and a true
accounting for all funds of the town which may come into his or her hands,
custody or control, which bond shall be approved by the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners and deposited with the town, except that the bond of any
employee may, in the discretion of the Board, be conditioned only upon a true
accounting for funds of the town.



   (B)   The bond of the Treasurer shall be in an amount not less than
$25,000; the bond of the Tax Collector shall be in an amount not less than
$25,000; and all other persons required to be bonded under the provisions of
division (A) of this section shall be bonded under a system of blanket
faithful performance or honesty bonding in the amount of not less than
$10,000.



   (C)   All bonds required by this section shall be approved as to
form by the Town Attorney, and the sureties thereon shall be bonding or
casualty companies licensed to do business in the state.



(Prior Code, § 2-31)



§ 30.06  PREPARATION OF BUDGET.



   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, with the assistance of the
other town officials, to file with the Town Accountant on or before May 1 of
each year information as to allow the Accountant to prepare a proper budget.



(Prior Code, § 2-32)



§ 30.07  REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OR POSITION HELD.



   Any officer or employee for whom the Mayor or head of a department or
office may appoint a successor, may be removed by the Mayor or other
appointing officer at any time. Subject to the authority of the Board of
Commissioners, the decision of the Mayor or other appointing officer shall be
final and there shall be no appeal therefrom to any other office, body or
court whatsoever.



(Prior Code, § 2-33)



Statutory reference:



   Fidelity bonds, see G.S. § 159-29



§ 30.08  TOWN EMPLOYEES; USE OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   The Town Board adopts as a matter of policy, that all persons
employed by the Town of Wilkesboro who use a vehicle belonging to the town to
go to and from the place of employment to their home and return, shall pay to
the Town of Wilkesboro the going rate as determined by the IRS per mile; that
each person who uses a vehicle to drive to and from his or her home to work,
and for his or her personal use, shall be required to keep daily log of the
milage; and at the end of the month, turn the daily log into the Town Clerk
and Town Manager. It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to check the logs
at the end of the months and see that the proper log has been kept and turn
the same over to the Town Clerk. The amount shall be charged to the employee
at the end of each month. The Clerk of the Town Board shall be required to
keep the logs on file for check and examination by the auditors of the Town
of Wilkesboro in order that they may see that the proper charge has been made
to the employee’s account.



(Ord. passed 1-7-1985)



   (B)   The personal use of a town owned vehicle for purely personal
use is strictly prohibited, and in the course of events that the employee is
required to answer emergency calls during the entire 24-hour period of a day,
there shall be no charge imposed on the use of the vehicle, but it shall be
the duty of the employee to whom the vehicle is issued to keep the same clean
and to take care of the vehicle. Employees’ failure to take care of the
vehicle in an adequate manner shall be sufficient cause to revoke the
issuance of the vehicle to the employee in the discretion of the Town
Manager. Should the issue of the vehicle be revoked by the Town Manager, the
employee shall have a right to appeal the same to the Town Board of
Commissioners, whose findings shall be final. No person who is not an
employee or agent of the Town of Wilkesboro can be transported in the vehicle
belonging to the town.



   (C)   Since the employee is required to have the vehicle with him or
her and answer calls, and where it is his or her duty to answer calls, such
as the restoring of electricity, cutting off (on) water, water line repairs,
sewer line repairs or street repairs, and the vehicle assigned to the
employee is used in connection with these or other emergency repairs or
emergency visits, there shall be no charge imposed on the use of the vehicle.
The use of the vehicle is not likely to be used more than a minimum amount in
going to and from the job to the residence.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to use any vehicle belonging to the Town
of Wilkesboro for personal use, other than to go to and from work. Any use
other than for authorized purposes shall be sufficient grounds to terminate
the use of the vehicle in the discretion of the Town Manager. Any use of the
vehicle assigned to an employee where the employee is on call at all hours of
the day and night shall be considered a minimal use so long as the vehicle is
not used for any other personal use than to go to and from his or her place
of abode to his or her work by the person who is on call at all hours of the
day and night.



   (E)   The assignment of any town owned vehicle to an employee who
has the option of driving the vehicle to and from home must be approved the
Town Board of Commissioners.



   (F)   The Chief of Police, the Town Manager, Water Superintendent,
Sewer Superintendent, Recreation Director, Street Superintendent, Water Meter
Repairman and Police Detective, and any other persons who are assigned a
vehicle for the specific duties, shall be used by them as going to and from
their place of abode to their job, shall be considered to be no more than a
minimal amount for personal use and exempt from the code.



(Ord. passed 6-18-1985)  Penalty, see § 10.99




SPECIFIC OFFICES




§ 30.20  MAYOR.



   The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the town
government. In addition to the powers and duties specified for the Mayor in
the Town Charter and the General Statutes of North Carolina, the Mayor shall
have other powers and perform other duties as may be specified for him or her
from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners
not in conflict with the charter or general laws or this code.



(Prior Code, § 2-34)



§ 30.21  TOWN CLERK.



   In addition to the powers and duties specified for the Town Clerk in
the Town Charter and the General Statutes of North Carolina, the Town Clerk
shall receive all communications addressed to or requiring action by the
Board of Commissioners and all claims against the town, and he or she shall
have other powers and perform other duties as may be specified for him or her
from time to time by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners
not in conflict with the charter or general laws or this code.



(Prior Code, § 2-35)



§ 30.22  TOWN ACCOUNTANT; TERM, QUALIFICATIONS, POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   At the first meeting of the Board of Commissioners following
each general election of Commissioners, the Board shall designate the Town
Clerk to be ex officio Town Accountant, or the Board shall appoint some other
person to be Town Accountant, to serve at the will of the Board; provided
that the experience, training and qualifications of any person on whom the
powers and duties of the Town Accountant are imposed and conferred by or
under this section shall be approved by the local government commission of
the state, which approval shall continue until revoked by the Commission. If
any person upon whom the powers and duties of the Town Accountant are imposed
and conferred is a Tax Collecting Officer of the town, it shall be the duty
of the Board of Commissioners to require all his or her books and accounts to
be audited at least annually by a certified public accountant or by a public
accountant registered under G.S. Chapter 93.



(Prior Code, § 2-36)



   (B)   The Town Accountant shall have the powers and perform the
duties vested in and imposed upon municipal accountants by the General
Statutes of North Carolina; and he or she shall have other powers and perform
other duties, not inconsistent with state law, the Town Charter, this code or
other ordinance as may be specified by the Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 2-37)



§ 30.23  TREASURER.



   (A)   The Treasurer shall give a receipt for all money received by
him or her and he or she shall deposit the money each day in a depository
authorized by the Board of Commissioners for that purpose; provided that the
Treasurer need not make daily deposits when he or she has less than $250 of
town money in his or her possession or custody. The Treasurer shall render to
the Board of Commissioners once each month a full statement of his or her
receipts and disbursements, and he or she shall, within 30 days following the
end of each fiscal year, render to the Board of Commissioners a complete
report of his or her financial transactions during the preceding fiscal year.
Prior to the payment by him or her of any claim or account the Treasurer
shall examine it to ascertain that it is due and that payment thereof has
been duly authorized. The Treasurer shall cooperate with the Tax Collector in
the collection of taxes, and he or she shall perform other duties as may be
imposed upon him or her by law, the Town Charter, this code or the Board of
Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 2-38)



§ 30.24  TAX COLLECTOR.



   The Tax Collector shall collect all real and personal property taxes
and all capitation or poll taxes due the town; and, where no other town
officer is designated by state law or this code or other ordinance to collect
license and business privilege taxes, the Tax Collector shall collect taxes
and issue licenses. The Tax Collector shall pay over to the Treasurer each
day all money collected by him or her for the town and render to the
Treasurer a statement showing the source of each sum so collected and the
purpose thereof. He or she shall issue a receipt to each person from whom he
or she makes collection, and shall keep accurate records of all collections
in accord with directive of the Town Accountant. The Tax Collector shall
perform other duties as may be imposed upon him or her by law, this code or
by the Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 2-39)



§ 30.25  TOWN ATTORNEY.



   The Town Attorney shall attend each meeting of the Board of
Commissioners; he or she shall prosecute and defend suits for and against the
town and for and against town officers acting in their official capacity; he
or she shall approve all official bonds as to form; he or she shall approve
all draft ordinances as to form, and, at the request of any commissioner, he
or she shall approve any draft resolution as to form; he or she shall draft
or approve all deeds, contracts and other instruments relating to the
business of the town; he or she shall advise the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners, and other town officers, as to the legality and legal
consequences of proposed courses of action; and, in general, the Town
Attorney shall be the legal counselor of the town.



(Prior Code, § 2-40)



Statutory reference:



   Duty of Tax Collector to collect license taxes and to issue licenses,
see G.S. § 105-33



CHAPTER 31:  BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS



Section



   31.01   Meetings



   31.02   Presiding officer



   31.03   When Mayor shall vote



   31.04   Conduct of meetings; order, appeals



   31.05   Order of business at regular meetings; when presentation of
resolution required



   31.06   Applications and petitions to Board



   31.07   Motions



   31.08   Previous question; when record vote required



   31.09   Members required to vote unless excused



   31.10   Points of order



   31.11   Certain matters to be acted upon only at regular meetings;
exceptions



   31.12   Reconsideration of decisions made and votes taken



   31.13   Ordinances and resolutions; requirements



   31.14   Voting at board elections



   31.15   Sergeant at arms



   31.16   Committees



   31.17   Rules



   31.18   Nonpartisan plurality



Cross-references:



   Town government, see Charter, § 2



§ 31.01  MEETINGS.



   (A)   There shall be a regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners
on the first Monday of each month, in the Town Hall, at an hour as the
Commissioners may fix by resolution; provided, that when the first Monday of
any month falls upon a holiday, the Board may, by resolution or motion, fix
another day for the meeting.



   (B)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Mayor or by
any 2 of the Commissioners; and the Mayor and each Commissioner, not joining
in the call, shall be notified of the meeting and the purposes thereof, and
no business shall be transacted at that meeting other than that stated in the
call.



(Prior Code, § 2-7)



§ 31.02  PRESIDING OFFICER.



   The Mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the Board of
Commissioners. In the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall
preside; and if both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore are absent, the
Commissioners shall designate one of their own number to preside.



(Prior Code, § 2-8)



§ 31.03  WHEN MAYOR SHALL VOTE.



   The Mayor shall have the right to vote only in case of a tie vote of
the Commissioners present upon any question, but shall not be allowed to vote
in any other case.



(Prior Code, § 2-9)



Statutory reference:



   Mayor Pro Tempore, see G.S. § 160A-70



   Meetings of governing body, see G.S. § 160A-71



   Presiding officer at meetings of Board of Commissioners, see G.S. §
160A-69



   Similar state law, see G.S. § 160A-69



§ 31.04  CONDUCT OF MEETINGS; ORDER; APPEALS.



   (A)   At the hour appointed for the meeting of the Board of
Commissioners, the presiding officer shall take the chair and direct a call
of the members by the Clerk, who shall take note of the absentees, and, upon
the appearance of a quorum the presiding officer shall call the Board to
order and proceed with the order of business; but if a quorum shall fail to
attend, the meeting shall stand adjourned to a time agreed upon by a majority
of the members present; provided that the members present may direct the
sergeant at arms to apprehend absentees and bring them to the meeting place
forthwith.



   (B)   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum at all
times. He or she shall decide all questions of order, subject to appeal to
the entire Board present. On every appeal from his or her decision, he or she
shall have the right in his or her chair to assign his or her reasons for his
or her decision, and any member of the Board may state the grounds for his or
her appeal, but no other debate shall be allowed on an appeal from the
presiding officer’s decision.



(Prior Code, § 2-10)



§ 31.05  ORDER OF BUSINESS AT REGULAR MEETINGS; WHEN PRESENTATION OF
RESOLUTION REQUIRED.



   (A)   At each regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners the
order of business shall be as follows:



      (1)   Reading the proceedings of the last regular meeting and
other special meetings, if any have been held;



      (2)   Correction of the minutes if necessary, their approval,
and when approved, the minutes shall be signed by the presiding officer and
the Clerk;



      (3)   Consideration of unfinished business appearing upon the
minutes from last or any other previous meeting;



      (4)   Reports from the regular standing committees, in their
regular order as named in their appointment;



      (5)   Reports from any special committees theretofore
appointed;



      (6)   Reading of petitions, memorials and other papers
addressed to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners; and



      (7)   Consideration of any new business brought before the
Board.



   (B)   Deviations from the foregoing order of business shall be
permitted only by unanimous consent of the Commissioners present.



(Prior Code, § 2-11)



   (C)   The reports of all committees requiring definite consideration
and action by the Board of Commissioners shall be in writing and shall be
received without motion for acceptance, and all reports recommending any
action or expression of opinion by the Board shall be accompanied by a
corresponding written resolution embodying the action or opinion required.



(Prior Code, § 2-12)



§ 31.06  APPLICATIONS AND PETITIONS TO BOARD.



   All applications and petitions to the Board of Commissioners shall be
subject to any motion which any member of the Board may think proper to make,
and all applications and petitions must be in writing and handed to the Clerk
of the Board, who shall present them to the Board when called for in the
regular order of business.



(Prior Code, § 2-13)



§ 31.07  MOTIONS.



   No motion shall be considered or put before the Board of Commissioners
until seconded, and when seconded the motion shall be stated distinctly by
the presiding officer before being debated, and upon request of the presiding
officer, or any member of the Board, the motion shall be reduced to writing
by the member offering it. It may be withdrawn at any time before decision,
commitment or amendment by unanimous consent of the Board, upon request of
the member offering it.



(Prior Code, § 2-14)



§ 31.08  PREVIOUS QUESTION; WHEN RECORD VOTE REQUIRED.



   The previous question, on any matter under consideration, may be put to
the Board of Commissioners when demanded by a majority of the Commissioners
present, when all debates on the matter shall cease and a vote on the
question shall be taken. The ayes and nays on any question voted upon shall
be taken when demanded by any member present; and the vote when the ayes and
nays are called for shall be recorded giving the vote of each member of the
Board, which vote shall be regularly recorded in the minutes.



(Prior Code, § 2-15)



§ 31.09  MEMBERS REQUIRED TO VOTE UNLESS EXCUSED.



   Every Commissioner, and the Mayor in the case of a tie vote, shall vote
when a question is put by the presiding officer, unless excused by the Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-16)



§ 31.10  POINTS OF ORDER.



   Any member of the Board of Commissioners may be called to order, in
which case the member so called to order shall immediately sit down. The
point of order shall then be stated at the request of the presiding officer,
by the member raising it and point of order so raised shall be decided by the
chair without debate and before proceeding to other business.



(Prior Code, § 2-17)



§ 31.11  CERTAIN MATTERS TO BE ACTED UPON ONLY AT REGULAR MEETINGS;
EXCEPTIONS.



   No proposition to appropriate money, to alter or repeal any ordinance
or to establish any new rule, shall be made or decided at any other than the
regular meeting; except by a vote of 3/4 of the Commissioners present, and at
no time except by a majority of the whole Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 2-18)



§ 31.12  RECONSIDERATION OF DECISIONS MADE AND VOTES TAKEN.



   No question decided by the Board of Commissioners shall be reversed at
any subsequent meeting, except by a vote of 2/3 of the Commissioners present.
A motion to reconsider a vote shall not be in order except at the same, or
any adjourned meeting to that at which the vote is taken, or upon notice by 1
voting with the majority on the question, that a motion to reconsider will be
made at the next regular meeting.



(Prior Code, § 2-19)



§ 31.13  ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All proposed ordinances and resolutions shall be submitted in
writing, signed by the proposer thereof.



(Prior Code, § 2-20)



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk of the Board of
Commissioners to turn over to the Mayor the original copies of all ordinances
and resolutions of a permanent character that may be adopted by the Board,
after having transcribed them on the town minute book along with the
proceedings of the meeting at which they were adopted, the copies to be
signed by the Mayor and returned to the Clerk to be filed and preserved by
him or her; and the Clerk of the Board of Commissioners shall prepare
ordinance and resolution books in which shall be copied ordinances and
resolutions.



   (C)   Ordinances and resolutions shall be set out on the left-hand
pages of the books in which they are entered, and the right-hand pages facing
the ordinances and resolutions so entered shall be left blank for the purpose
of noting therein all changes, amendments and repeals thereof. The books
shall be kept in the possession of the Clerk, and by him or her kept
annotated after each and every meeting of the Board at which there is a
change or repeal of any ordinance or resolution, or any new ordinance or
resolution adopted, so that they may be easily referred to and reveal the
current status and text of each ordinance and resolution at all times.



(Prior Code, § 2-21)



§ 31.14  VOTING AT BOARD ELECTIONS.



   All the elections by the Board of Commissioners shall be by ballot, if
required by any 2 Commissioners present, and a majority of the votes of all
Commissioners present at a meeting of the Board shall be necessary to an
election or appointment; provided that no election, appointment or motion
shall be valid or adopted unless a quorum be present and voting.



(Prior Code, § 2-23)



§ 31.15  SERGEANT AT ARMS.



   The Chief of Police shall maintain a roster of police officers to
attend each meeting of the Board of Commissioners in the capacity of sergeant
at arms, unless excused from attendance by the presiding officer. The
sergeant at arms shall maintain order at meetings and execute the orders of
the Board of Commissioners as given to him or her by the presiding officer.



(Prior Code, § 2-24)



§ 31.16  COMMITTEES.



   The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, provide for the creation
of standing committees and special committees, and prescribe the
jurisdiction, powers and duties of all committees.



(Prior Code, § 2-25)



§ 31.17  RULES.



   The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution not inconsistent with
state law, this code or other ordinance, adopt rules as it may deem desirable
for parliamentary procedure, the conduct of its meetings and the regulation
of its members and may impose penalties for the violation thereof by any
person subject thereto, including nonmembers present at or in the immediate
vicinity of any meeting of the Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-26)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Board to establish rules for its proceedings, see G.S. §
160A-171



§ 31.18  NONPARTISAN PLURALITY.



   Municipal elections shall be conducted as provided in G.S. §
163-292.  G.S. § 163-292 states as follows:



In conducting nonpartisan elections and using the plurality method, elections
shall be determined in accordance with the following rules:



When more than 1 person is seeking election to a single office, the candidate
who receives the highest number of votes shall be declared elected.



When more persons are seeking election to 2 or more offices (constituting a
group) than there are offices to be filled, those candidates receiving the
highest number of votes, equal in number to the number of offices to be
filled, shall be declared elected.



If 2 or more candidates receiving the highest number of votes each receive
the same number of votes, the Board of Elections shall determine the winner
by lot.



(Ord. passed 2-2-1998)



Editor’s note:



   This section amends the charter.



CHAPTER 32:  TOWN ORGANIZATIONS



Section




Planning Board




   32.001   Established; number, appointment and term of members;
vacancies



   32.002   Members to attend meetings



   32.003   Meetings; quorum; officers; rules; records



   32.004   Powers and duties; in general, zoning, subdivision
regulations and the like



   32.005   Basic studies and materials authorized



   32.006   Town officials and Board; authority of Board



   32.007   Comprehensive plan



   32.008   Public places, street plans and the like; recommendations



   32.009   Annual report of activities; budget request



   32.010   Acceptable contributions



   32.011   Advisory council and special committees authorized



   32.012   Right of appeal




Police Department




   32.025   Police Department; composition; chain of command



   32.026   Additional duties; Chief of Police



   32.027   Police Department; rules and regulations



   32.028   Auxiliary police unit; powers and regulations of members



   32.029   Worker’s compensation benefits



   32.030   Compensation and other benefits



   32.031   Immunity of town




Board of Adjustment




   32.045   Jurisdiction and decisions



   32.046   Appeals, hearing and notice



   32.047   Stay of proceeding



   32.048   Powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment




Tourism Development, Convention and Visitors Bureau Bylaws




   32.060   General provisions



   32.061   Membership



   32.062   Meetings of members



   32.063   Officers



   32.064   Duties of the officers



   32.065   Committees



   32.066   Finances



   32.067   Miscellaneous




Historic Preservation Commission




   32.080   General rules



   32.081   Officers and duties



   32.082   Meetings



   32.083   Removal of members



   32.084   Records



   32.085   Planning Director



   32.086   Designation of historic districts



   32.087   Designation of historic landmarks



   32.088   Procedures for obtaining a certificate of appropriateness



   32.089   Appeals



   32.090   Applications involving members



   32.091   Minor works



   32.092   Amendment




PLANNING BOARD




§ 32.001  ESTABLISHED; NUMBER, APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF MEMBERS; VACANCIES.



   The Planning Board is hereby established, which shall consist of 11
members (5 town members and 6 ETJ members) to be filled by appointment by the
Mayor with the approval of the Town Council on or before June 30 of each
year. All members, including ETJ, shall have equal voting rights on all
matters brought before the Wilkesboro Planning Board. Terms of office shall
be from 1 to 3 years staggered in a manner that provides for no more than 2
terms of inside members and 2 terms of ETJ members expiring at any one time.
Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expirations of term shall be
filled as they occur for the period of the unexpired term.



(Prior Code, § 2-41) (Am. Ord. 2014-04, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 32.002  MEMBERS TO ATTEND MEETINGS.



   Faithful attendance at meetings shall be a prerequisite for the
maintenance of membership on the Planning Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-42)



§ 32.003  MEETINGS; QUORUM; OFFICERS; RULES; RECORDS.



   The Planning Board shall meet each year on the first Tuesday in June
and elect its chairperson and create and fill offices as it may determine.
The term of the chairperson and other officers shall be 1 year, with
eligibility for reelection. The Board shall adopt rules for transaction of
its business and shall keep a record of its members’ attendance and of its
resolutions, discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be
a public record. The Board shall hold at least 1 meeting monthly, and all of
its meetings shall be open to the public. There shall be a quorum of 3
members for the purpose of taking any official action required by state law,
this code or other ordinance of the Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 2-43)



§ 32.004  POWERS AND DUTIES; IN GENERAL, ZONING, SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The Planning Board shall have the powers and discharge the
duties provided by law for Planning Boards established under the provisions
of the General Statutes of North Carolina. It shall be the duty of the
Planning Board, in general:



      (1)   To acquire and maintain in current form basic
information and materials as are necessary to an understanding of past trends
and present conditions appertaining to matters which must be considered in
planning the development of the area, and forces at work to cause changes in
these conditions;



      (2)   To prepare and from time to time amend and revise the
comprehensive and coordinated plan for the physical development of the area;



      (3)   To establish principles and policies for guiding action
in the development of the area;



      (4)   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Commissioners
ordinances promoting orderly development along the lines indicated in the
comprehensive plan;



      (5)   To determine whether specific proposed developments
conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan for the
growth and improvement of the area;



      (6)   To cooperate with and assist in the coordination of the
progress of any county planning boards in Wilkes County, and to furnish
technical assistance to the boards;



      (7)   To keep the Board of Commissioners and the general
public informed and advised as to these matters; and



      (8)   To perform any other duties which may be lawfully
assigned to it.



(Prior Code, § 2-44)



   (B)   The Planning Board shall have and exercise all the rights and
duties set forth in G.S. § 160A-387. With respect to zoning, the Planning
Board shall, among its other duties, specifically study the resources and
needs of the town and prepare maps and plans for the systematic future
development of the town. It shall provide in those plans for dividing the
town into districts and zones and shall prepare plans specifying the height,
area, manner of construction and land use in districts and zones. It shall
prepare and submit to the Board of Commissioners, for approval and adoption,
reports and recommendations as to regulation of the percentage of a lot that
may be occupied; the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; and the
location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry,
residence or other purposes; and it shall make studies and surveys of the
town with respect to the proper zoning thereof in as full and ample manner as
is required in the performance of its other duties as a Planning Board.



(Prior Code, § 2-45)



   (C)   The Planning Board shall propose and review from time to time
regulations for the control of land subdivision in the area and submit to the
Board of Commissioners its recommendations, if any, for the revision of
regulations. Regulations shall be adopted or amended. The Planning Board
shall review and make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners
concerning all proposed plats of land subdivision.



(Prior Code, § 2-46)



   (D)   The Planning Board may conduct public hearings as may be
required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment and
maintenance of the comprehensive plan. Before adopting any plan it shall hold
at least 1 public hearing thereon. The Planning Board shall have power to
promote public interest in and understanding of its recommendations, and to
that end it may have published and distributed copies of its recommendations,
and may employ other means of publicity and education as it may determine.
Members and employees of the Planning Board, when duly authorized by the
Board, may attend planning conferences, planning institutes or hearings upon
pending planning legislation, and may, by formal and affirmative vote, pay,
within the Board’s budget, the reasonable travel expenses incidental to
attendance.



(Prior Code, § 2-47)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal Planning Boards, see G.S. § 160A-361



§ 32.005  BASIC STUDIES AND MATERIALS AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   As background for its comprehensive plan and any ordinances it
may prepare, the Planning Board may gather maps and aerial photographs of
man-made and natural physical features of the area, statistics of past trends
and present conditions with respect to population, property values, the
economic base of the area, land use and other information as is important or
likely to be important in determining the amount, direction and kind of
development to be expected in the area and its various parts.



   (B)   In addition, the Planning Board may cause to be made or may
obtain special studies on the location, condition and adequacy of special
facilities which may include, but is not limited to: studies of housing,
commercial and industrial facilities; parks, playgrounds and recreational
facilities and public and private utilities and traffic, transportation and
parking facilities.



(Prior Code, § 2-48)



§ 32.006  TOWN OFFICIALS AND BOARD; AUTHORITY OF BOARD.



   All town officials shall, upon request, furnish to the Planning Board
available records or information as it may require in its work. The Board or
its agencies may, in the performance of its official duties and in compliance
with all applicable provisions of law, enter upon land and make examinations
or surveys and maintain necessary monuments thereon.



(Prior Code, § 2-49)



§ 32.007  COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.



   (A)   The comprehensive plan, with the accompanying maps, plats,
charts and descriptive matter, shall be the basis for the town’s program
for the development of the area and it shall show the Planning Board’s
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners for the development of the
area, including, among other things, the general location, character and
extent of streets; bridges, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds, squares,
parks, aviation fields and other public ways, grounds and open spaces; the
general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether
publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, lights and sanitation,
transportation, communications, power and other purposes; and the removal,
relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or
extension of any of the foregoing ways, buildings, grounds, open spaces,
property, utilities or terminals.



   (B)   The comprehensive plan and any ordinances or other measures to
effectuate it shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and
accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the town
and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs,
best promote health, safety, morals and the general welfare, as well as
efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other
things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and
other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the
healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good
civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds
and the adequate provision of public utilities, services and other public
requirements.



(Prior Code, § 2-50)



§ 32.008  PUBLIC PLACES, STREET PLANS AND THE LIKE; RECOMMENDATIONS.



   The Planning Board shall review with various county officials and
report its recommendations to the Board of Commissioners upon the extent,
location and design of all public structures and facilities, on the
acquisition and disposal of public properties, on the establishment of
building lines, mapped street lines and proposals to change existing street
plans. However, in the absence of a recommendation from the Planning Board,
the Board of Commissioners, if it deems wise, at the expiration of 30 days
from the date of which the question has been submitted in writing to the
Planning Board for review and recommendation, take final action.



(Prior Code, § 2-51)



§ 32.009  ANNUAL REPORT OF ACTIVITIES; BUDGET REQUEST.



   The Planning Board shall, in May of each year, submit to the Board of
Commissioners a written report of its activities, an analysis of its
expenditures to date for the current fiscal year, and, for review and
approval, its requested budget of funds needed for operation during the
ensuing fiscal year.



(Prior Code, § 2-52)



§ 32.010  ACCEPTABLE CONTRIBUTIONS.



   The Planning Board is authorized to receive contributions from private
agencies and organizations and from individuals, in addition to any sums
which may be appropriated for its purposes or projects, subject to any
specified condition which it deems acceptable, whether or not projects are
included in the approved budget. The Planning Board is authorized to appoint
committees and employees, and to authorize expenditures as it may see fit,
subject to limitations of funds provided for the Planning Board by the Board
of Commissioners in the annual budget.



(Prior Code, § 2-53)



§ 32.011  ADVISORY COUNCIL AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES AUTHORIZED.



   The Planning Board may seek the establishment of an unofficial advisory
council and may cooperate with this council to the end that its
investigations and plans may receive its consideration, but the Board may not
delegate to the advisory council any of its official prerogatives. The
Planning Board may set up special committees to assist it in the study of
specific questions and problems.



(Prior Code, § 2-54)



§ 32.012  RIGHT OF APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by any action of the Planning Board shall have the
right to appeal to the town Board of Commissioners, who may by unanimous
action reverse or modify action.



(Prior Code, § 2-55)




POLICE DEPARTMENT




§ 32.025  POLICE DEPARTMENT; COMPOSITION; CHAIN OF COMMAND.



   (A)   The Police Department shall consist of regular, auxiliary and
special members and quarters, vehicles, equipment and other property as may
from time to time be authorized by the Board of Commissioners.



   (B)   The organization of the Police Department shall be as provided
by regulations adopted pursuant to § 32.027.



   (C)   The Chief of Police, under the general supervision of the
Mayor, shall have direct control of the members and property of the Police
Department and shall be in command of the members. Members of the Police
Department shall assume command in order of rank as prescribed in
departmental rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 14-1)



   (D)   A Special Investigations Unit for the Town of Wilkesboro shall
exist as a new division of the Wilkesboro Police Department. The number of
members of the Special Investigations Unit shall be determined by the Mayor
and Town Board of the Town of Wilkesboro. The Chief of Police, under the
general supervision of the Mayor, shall have direct control of the members
and property of the Special Investigations Unit. Members of the Special
Investigations Unit shall assume command in the Unit as prescribed by the
rules and regulations of the Police Department, the Wilkesboro Town Code and
with the authorization of the Mayor and Town Board of Commissioners.



(Ord. passed 7-27-1989)



Statutory reference:



   Arrests, see G.S.§ 15-54



   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of town, see G.S. § 160A-286



   Policemen generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-281 et seq.



§ 32.026  ADDITIONAL DUTIES; CHIEF OF POLICE.



   In addition to his or her duties as commanding officer of the Police
Department, the Chief of Police shall perform all duties prescribed for him
or her by this code and other ordinances and by the General Statutes of North
Carolina.



(Prior Code, § 14-2)



§ 32.027  POLICE DEPARTMENT; RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Mayor, in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall prepare
rules and regulations for the government of the Police Department and the
personnel thereof. The rules and regulations, which may be amended from time
to time, shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners for approval. It
shall be unlawful for any member of the Police Department to violate any rule
or regulation which has been approved by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners and placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk; and a copy
of all approved rules and regulations shall also be placed on file at Police
Department headquarters.



(Prior Code, § 14-3)



§ 32.028  AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT; POWERS AND REGULATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   There is hereby created a law enforcement unit to be known and
designated as the Auxiliary Police Unit of the Town of Wilkesboro, which unit
shall consist of a number of members as the Board of Commissioners may from
time to time determine. The members of the unit shall be subordinate to the
members of the regular Police Department and shall take the oath of office as
prescribed by law. They shall be vested with all of the powers of arrest
vested in regular police officers under the laws of the state and ordinances
of the town. The members of the auxiliary police unit shall operate under
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to § 32.027, a copy of which will
be furnished each member of the unit.



(Prior Code, § 14-4)



§ 32.029  WORKER’S COMPENSATION BENEFITS.



   Duly appointed auxiliary police officers shall, while training and
while performing duties on behalf of the town incidental to their
appointment, be entitled to worker’s compensation benefits to the same
extent as regular town employees.



(Prior Code, § 14-5)



§ 32.030  COMPENSATION AND OTHER BENEFITS.



   Auxiliary police officers shall not be entitled to remuneration for
their services unless called into active duty for an extended period of time
by the Board of Commissioners, in which event they may receive compensation
for their services as shall be fixed by the Commissioners. Auxiliary police
officers shall not be entitled to any benefits or compensation other than
those provided in this section and § 32.029, but this shall not in any
manner affect the rights of any person to benefits provided by the State of
North Carolina or by Act of Congress for civilian defense workers or
auxiliary police officers.



(Prior Code, § 14-6)



§ 32.031  IMMUNITY OF TOWN.



   The town shall be entitled to the same immunities with respect to the
action of auxiliary police officers in the performance of their duties or
training or otherwise, to which it is entitled with respect to the actions of
regular police officers in the performance of their duties.



(Prior Code, § 14-7)



Statutory reference:



   Auxiliary police, see G.S. § 160A-282




BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT




§ 32.045  JURISDICTION AND DECISIONS.



   (A)   The 1 member appointed to the Board by the Wilkesboro Board of
Commissioners as the representative of the 1-mile extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the area outside the Town of Wilkesboro shall be a resident
of the area and citizen of Wilkes County. The 4 members appointed to the
Board by the Wilkesboro Board of Commissioners as representatives of the area
within the city limits of the Town of Wilkesboro shall be residents of the
area and citizens of Wilkes County.



   (B)   All members shall have equal rights, privileges and duties
with other members of the Board in all matters. The concurring vote of 4/5 of
members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements,
decision or determination of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Zoning
Administration Officer charged with enforcement of this section or to decide
in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under
the zoning ordinance or to effect any variation of that section.



(Ord. passed 6-3-1996)



§ 32.046  APPEALS, HEARING AND NOTICE.



   (A)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or
by an officer, department, board or bureau of the Town of Wilkesboro affected
by any decisions of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or Zoning Administration
Officer, or other town official based on this section. The appeal shall be
taken within 30 days of the decision by filing with the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and Zoning Administration Officer and with the Board a written notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. All papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted
to the Board.



   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall hold hearings at which specific
appeals shall be heard, notice of hearing being made public in at least 2 of
the following ways:



      (1)   Published in a newspaper of general circulation
throughout the community;



      (2)   Posting signs concerning the hearing in the neighborhood
which is affected;



      (3)   Sending written notices to all of the adjoining property
owners.



   (C)   In any of the 3 methods of notice each should contain the
time, date and place of the hearing, and the property which will be affected.



   (D)   There shall be a fee of $50 payable to the Town of Wilkesboro
to cover the costs of administration and public hearing advertisement for
each hearing which the Board hears. The fee will be payable when the appeal
is instigated.



   (E)   The Board shall vote according to the procedures set forth in
§ 32.045 when instituting action to overrule the decisions of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Zoning Administration Officer. Conditional use cases,
special exceptions and variance cases shall require 4/5 of the members of the
Board of Adjustment voting in favor of that action.



   (F)   Any appeals to the decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall
be taken to Wilkes County Superior Court within 30 days after the decision of
the Board is filed in the Town Hall or after a written copy thereof is
delivered to the appellant by personal service or registered mail, whichever
is later. The Board decisions should be filed as follows:



      (1)   One copy to the Town Manager/Zoning Administration
Officer;



      (2)   One copy to the Building Inspector/Zoning Enforcement
Officer;



      (3)   One copy to the town hall;



      (4)   One copy to the appellant; and



      (5)   One copy in the Board files.



(Ord. passed 6-3-1996)



§ 32.047  STAY OF PROCEEDING.



   An appeal to the Board of Adjustment stays all legal proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administration
Officer or Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board of Adjustment
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by
reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her
opinion, cause imminent peril of life and property or that because the
violation charged is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere
with enforcement of the ordinance. In that case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by a court of record upon application, on notice to
the Zoning Administration Officer and Zoning Enforcement Officer, and on due
cause shown.



(Ord. passed 6-3-1996)



§ 32.048  POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and
duties:



   (A)   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error
in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Zoning Administration Officer in the enforcement of
this chapter;



   (B)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
chapter upon which the Board of Adjustment is required to pass under this
chapter (e.g., group projects);



   (C)   To authorize upon appeal in specific cases variances from the
terms of the chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
chapter will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the chapter shall be observed,
public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done; and



   (D)   The existence of a nonconforming use of neighboring land,
buildings or structures in the same district or of permitted or nonconforming
uses in other districts shall not constitute a reason for the requested
variance. The variance may be granted in an individual case of unnecessary
hardship upon a finding by the Board of Adjustment that the following
conditions exist:



      (1)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions
pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its
size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or
structures in the same district.



      (2)   Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the
applicant any special privileges that are denied to other residents of the
district in which the property is located.



      (3)   A literal interpretation of the provisions of this
section would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other
residents of the district in which the property is located.



      (4)   The requested variance will be in harmony with the
purpose and intent of this section and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or to the general welfare.



      (5)   The special circumstances are not the result of actions
of the applicant.



      (6)   The variance requested is the minimum variance that will
make possible the legal use of the land, building or structures.



      (7)   The variance is not a request to permit a use of land,
building or structure which is not permitted by right or by special exception
in the district involved.



(Ord. passed 6-3-1996)




TOURISM DEVELOPMENT, CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU BYLAWS




§ 32.060  GENERAL PROVISIONS



   (A)   This Board shall be known as the Wilkesboro Tourism
Development, Convention and Visitors Bureau.



   (B)   The Wilkesboro Tourism Development, Convention and Visitors
Bureau is organized to promote tourism and conventions and increase
visitation to Wilkesboro.



   (C)   The Tourism Development Bureau was created and is appointed by
the Wilkesboro Town Board of Commissioners in accordance with local
legislation approved by the North Carolina General Assembly (Session Law
2001-439, Senate Bill 439).



(Ord. passed 3-4-2002)



Statutory reference:



   For provisions dealing with the Tourism Development Bureau, see G.S.
§§ 143B-434.1 et seq.



§ 32.061  MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   As authorized by the General Assembly, the Bureau shall be
made up of 5 members, at least 1/3 of the members must be individuals who are
affiliated with businesses that collect the tax in the town and at least 3/4
of the members must be individuals who are currently active in the promotion
of travel and tourism in the town.



   (B)   All appointments will be for a 1-year term. Any vacancy will
be filled for the remaining unexpired term. No member shall serve more than 4
consecutive, 1-year terms.



   (C)   The Bureau shall immediately notify the Town Board of any
vacancies that arise. The Board of Commissioners shall name a replacement to
fill out the vacant term within 60 days of notification.



   (D)   If any member misses 3 consecutive meetings, the TDB may
notify the Wilkesboro Board of Commissioners and request that the member be
replaced.



   (E)   Any officer can be removed from his or her elected office by
2/3 majority vote of the entire Board.



   (F)   Each member in good standing shall be entitled to 1 vote on
each matter submitted to the vote of the members. Assignment of voting
privileges is not permitted.



   (G)   The Wilkesboro Town Manager shall serve as a non-voting ex
officio member and the immediate past chairman shall serve as a non-voting ex
officio member.



   (H)   Members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed
for expenses in connection with the performance of their duties at the same
rate that Wilkesboro Town Government allows.



   (I)   The Bureau shall indemnify any person who was or is a party,
or is threatened to be made a party to any civil, criminal, administrative or
investigative (other than an action by or in the right of the Bureau) by
reason of the fact that he or she is, or was, serving at the request of the
Bureau as a member or agent of another corporation or other enterprise,
against expenses, including attorney’s fees, judgments, fines and amounts
paid in settlement by him or her in connection with that action, suit or
proceeding, if acting in good faith and in a manner believed to be in the
best interest of the Bureau, and with respect to any criminal action or
proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his or her action was unlawful.



   (J)   The Bureau shall determine all policies under which the Bureau
operates, in accordance with state law and legislation creating the Bureau.
The Bureau may contract with any person, firm, corporation or agency to
advise and assist it in the development of programs for the promotion of
travel, tourism and conventions and may do so as a Bureau upon majority vote
of membership present.



(Ord. passed 3-4-2002)



§ 32.062  MEETINGS OF MEMBERS.



   ( A)   The Bureau shall meet quarterly in July, October, January,
and April at a place, date, and time designated by the Chairman. Special
meetings may be called by the Chairman or a majority of the membership,
giving proper notice of time, location and purpose to each member and the
newsmedia.



   (B)   All meetings of the Bureau, whether regular or special, shall
be announced and open to the public, provided that executive sessions may be
held in accordance with the North Carolina General Statutes.



   (C)   At any meeting of the Bureau, the presence of 3 members shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. If a quorum is not
present, a majority of those members present may adjourn the meeting.



   (D)   The minutes of all meetings of the Bureau shall be kept and
mailed to the members prior to the next regular meeting.



(Ord. passed 3-4-2002; Am. Res. 2017-37, passed 10-2-2017)



§ 32.063  OFFICERS.



   There shall be elected from the members of the Bureau a Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson; terms shall be for 1 year. The Town Manager of Wilkesboro
or his or her designee shall serve as the Finance Officer/Treasurer and
Secretary.



(Ord. passed 3-4-2002)



§ 32.064  DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS.



   (A)   The Chairperson shall preside at all regular and special
meetings of the Bureau. He or she shall appoint committees, when necessary,
sign contracts and instruments of the Bureau as authorized by the Bureau, and
shall perform other duties as may be specified by these bylaws.



   (B)   The Vice-Chairperson shall perform duties as the Bureau or the
Chairperson may assign. In the absence of the Chairperson, the
Vice-Chairperson shall preside at the meetings of the Bureau and perform
other duties and responsibilities of the Chairperson.



   (C)   The Wilkesboro Town Manager’s designee shall perform this
duty and others as assigned by the Bureau.



   (D)   The Treasurer shall review and approve or disapprove
expenditures and orders for disbursement of funds. The books of the Bureau
shall have a certified audit at the end of each fiscal year by a CPA. The
Treasurer shall work with the Chairperson to carry the financial policies
adopted by the Bureau. The Treasurer shall report to the Bureau at each
regular meeting.



(Ord. passed 3-4-2002)



§ 32.065  COMMITTEES.



   (A)   There shall be 3 standing committees and other special
committees as needed. The committee shall consist of not more than 3 members
of the Bureau.



   (B)   The standing committees are appointed by the Chairperson and
will be:



      (1)   Marketing Committee: The Marketing Committee shall
prepare and submit to the Bureau for approval an annual program to advertise
and promote tourism and convention development.



      (2)   Budget and Finance Committee: The Budget and Finance
Committee shall monitor all financial affairs of the Bureau and shall submit
a proposed annual budget.



      (3)   Administrative Committee: The Administrative Committee
shall be chaired by the Board Chairperson to oversee personnel, contracts and
related matters.



(Ord. passed 3-4-2002)



§ 32.066  FINANCES.



   (A)   The fiscal year for the Bureau shall begin on July 1 and end
June 30 of the subsequent calendar year.



   (B)   All disbursement checks shall contain 2 signatures. The
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and the Treasurer shall have authority to sign
checks.



   (C)   All funds of the Bureau in excess of $100 shall be deposited
daily to the credit of the Bureau in banks or depositories as the Town of
Wilkesboro may select.



   (D)   The Bureau may accept on behalf of the Bureau any
contribution, gift, bequest or device for the purpose of the Bureau.



   (E)   All matters of fiscal control shall be in accordance with
those of the Town of Wilkesboro and the General Statutes of the State of
North Carolina.



(Ord. passed 3-4-2002)



§ 32.067  MISCELLANEOUS.



   (A)   Any funds remaining in the account of the Bureau, if the
Bureau is dissolved, shall at the end of the fiscal year revert to the Town
of Wilkesboro.



   (B)   No member or agent of the Bureau shall be involved either
directly or indirectly in any contract with the Bureau.



   (C)   These bylaws, or any part thereof, may be amended by a 2/3
affirmative vote of the members of the Bureau present and voting, provided a
quorum is present and upon approval of the Town Board of Wilkesboro.



(Ord. passed 3-4-2002)




HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION




§ 32.080  GENERAL RULES.



   The Historic Preservation Commission of the Town of Wilkesboro, North
Carolina, shall be governed by the terms of G.S. §§ 160A-400.1 et seq., and
by the terms of the Town of Wilkesboro Historic Preservation Ordinance
enacted by the Town of Wilkesboro Board of Commissioners on April 5, 2004,
and any amendments thereto.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.081  OFFICERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Commission shall organize and elect a Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson annually at the first meeting in the month of July. These
officers shall be eligible for reelection.



   (B)   The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings and public
hearings of the Commission, decide on all matters of order and procedures and
appoint any committees found necessary to investigate those matters before
the Commission or to perform any of its duties.



   (C)   The Vice-Chairperson shall assume the duties of the
Chairperson in his or her absence.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.082  MEETINGS.



   (A)   Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held on the third
Tuesday of each month at the Town Hall in Wilkesboro, North Carolina;
provided that if the Chairperson so directs, meetings may be held at any
other place in the town.



   (B)   Special meetings of the Commission may be called at any time
by the Chairperson, provided that at least 48-hours’ notice is given to
each member.



   (C)   A quorum shall consist of 4 members.



   (D)   All meetings shall be open to the public. The order of
business at regular meetings shall be as follows:



      (1)   Roll call;



      (2)   Recognition of visitors;



      (3)   New business;



      (4)   Unfinished business;



      (5)   Reports of committees;



      (6)   Reading of minutes of the previous meeting; and



      (7)   Adjournment.



   (E)   No change shall be made to the Rules of Procedure of the
Historic Preservation Commission without the affirmative vote of 4 members of
the Commission.



   (F)   Except as otherwise specified herein, the vote of the majority
of those members present shall be sufficient to decide matters before the
Commission provided that there are at least 3 affirmative votes. All members
attending the meeting shall vote unless excused by the Chairperson for just
cause.



   (G)   Whenever there is no business for the Commission, the
Chairperson may dispense with a regular meeting by giving notice to all
members no less than 24 hours prior to that time set for the meeting.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.083  REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.



   The Chairperson shall notify the Mayor of the Town of Wilkesboro of any
Commission member who is absent from 3 consecutive meetings unless those
absences are excused by the Commission for good and sufficient cause.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.084  RECORDS.



   (A)   The Planning Director shall maintain a file of all studies,
plans, reports and recommendations made by the Commission in the discharge of
its duties and responsibilities.



   (B)   All records of the Commission shall be public records.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.085  PLANNING DIRECTOR.



   (A)   The Planning Director shall be the staff of the Town of
Wilkesboro to keep the minutes of the Commission, notify members of the
regular and called meetings, record attendance, carry on routine
correspondence, maintain the files of the Commission and handle the finances
of the Commission.



   (B)   The Planning Director shall provide the minutes of the
previous meeting to members by mail 4 to 5 days prior to the next scheduled
meeting.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.086  DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   All requests shall first be presented to the Historic
Preservation Commission. The requests should include reference to the
historical, architectural or archaeological significance of the proposed
district. The Commission will conduct a preliminary investigation to
determine the eligibility of the proposed area.



   (B)   If the Commission determines that the proposed area is
ineligible to become an historic district, the Commission shall report that
determination to the entity that requested the designation. The report shall
be made within 30 days of the Commission’s consideration of the request.
The report may also include recommendations of if and how the request may be
amended in order to make the area eligible as an historic district.



   (C)   If the Commission determines that a proposed area is eligible
to become an historic district, it shall notify property owners within the
area through first class mail that establishment of an historic district will
be considered by the Commission at a specified date and time. The Commission
shall hold the public informational meetings and receive questions and
comments, after which they shall make refinements to any proposed boundaries.



   (D)   The Commission shall prepare and submit a report to the
Planning Board and the Town Board. The report shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:



      (1)   A boundary description of the area;



      (2)   A map at a scale of not less than 1 inch represents 200
feet, showing the boundaries of the proposed area; and



      (3)   A description of the significance of the area, including
its buildings, structures, features, sites or surroundings.



   (E)   Pursuant to review and comment by the Town Board, the report
shall be forwarded to the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources who
shall make an analysis of and recommendations concerning the report and
description of proposed boundaries to the Town Board. Failure of the
Department to submit its written analysis and recommendations to the Town
Board within 30 calendar days after a written request for the analysis has
been received by the Department of Cultural Resources shall relieve the town
of any responsibility for awaiting the analysis, and the Town Board may at
any time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its zoning
ordinance.



   (F)   Once all of the previous procedural steps have been met,
rezoning the proposed area to an historic district shall proceed in the same
manner as would otherwise be required for a change in the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.087  DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS.



   (A)   All requests shall first be presented to the Historic
Preservation Commission. The requests should include reference to the
historical, architectural or archaeological significance of the proposed
landmark. The Commission will conduct a preliminary investigation to
determine the eligibility of the landmark.



   (B)   If the Commission determines that the proposed landmark is
ineligible to become an historic landmark, the Commission shall report that
determination to the entity that requested the designation. The report shall
be made within 30 days of the Commission’s consideration of the request.
The report may also include recommendations of if and how the request may be
amended in order to improve it.



   (C)   If the Commission determines that the proposed landmark is
eligible to become an historic landmark, it shall notify property owners
within the area through first class mail that designation of an historic
landmark will be considered by the Commission at a specified date and time.
The Commission shall hold the public informational meetings and receive
questions and comments.



   (D)   The Commission shall prepare and submit a report to the
Planning Board and the Town Board. The report shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the current property owner;



      (2)   The location of the property proposed to be designated
historic, including the street address and tax map and parcel numbers;



      (3)   The date of construction and of any later alterations,
if any;



      (4)   An architectural or archaeological description of the
area of the site or structure proposed to be designated. If outbuildings or
other appurtenant features are proposed for designation, the report shall
contain a description of those features;



      (5)   An assessment and historical discussion of the site or
structure within its type, period and locality;



      (6)   Photographs that clearly depict the property proposed
for designation, including views of all facades, pertinent details and
siting; and



      (7)   A map clearly showing the location and boundaries of the
property, including any outbuildings and appurtenant features.



   (E)   Pursuant to review and comment by the Town Board, the report
shall be forwarded to the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources who
shall make an analysis of and recommendations concerning the report and
description of proposed boundaries to the Town Board. (If the Department does
not submit its written comments or recommendations in connection with any
proposed designation within 30 calendar days after a written request for the
analysis has been received, the Department shall relieve the town of any
responsibility for awaiting the analysis.)



   (F)   The Town Board and Historic Preservation Commission shall hold
a joint public hearing on the proposed ordinance. Notice of the hearings
shall be published at least once in a newspaper generally circulated within
the town. Written notice of the hearings shall also be mailed by the
Commission to all owners and occupants of properties. All notices shall be
published or mailed not less than 10 nor more than 25 days prior to the date
set for the public hearing.



   (G)   Upon adoption of the ordinance or any amendments thereto, the
owners and occupants of each designated historic property shall be given
written notification of the designation. One copy of the ordinance and each
amendment thereto shall be filed by the Historic Preservation Commission in
the office of the County Register of Deeds. Each historic property designated
as an historic landmark in the ordinance shall be indexed according to the
name of the owner of the property in the grantee and grantor indices in the
Register of Deeds office, and the Historic Preservation Commission shall pay
a reasonable fee for filing and indexing. A second copy of the ordinance and
of each amendment thereto shall be kept on file in the Town Clerk’s office
and shall be made available for public inspection at any reasonable time. A
third copy of the ordinance and each amendment thereto shall be given to the
Wilkes County Building Inspector.



   (H)   Upon adoption of the ordinance or any amendments thereto, it
shall be the duty of the Historic Preservation Commission to give notice
thereof to the Wilkes County Tax Assessor. The designation and any recorded
restrictions upon the property limiting its use for preservation purposes
shall be considered by the assessor in appraising it for tax purposes. The
fact that a building, structure, site, area or object has been designated an
historic landmark shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps maintained by
the county for a period as the designation remains in effect.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.088  PROCEDURES FOR OBTAINING A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
submitted to the Planning Director no later than 14 calendar days prior to
the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission.
Applications shall contain the names and addresses of the property owners
filing the application and those of the property owners within 100 feet on
all sides of the property that is the subject of the application. The
Planning Director is responsible for transmitting the application to the
Historic Preservation Commission.



   (B)   The planning staff will notify by mail the owners of any
property located within 100 feet on all sides of the property that is the
subject of the application. Prior to the issuance or denial of a certificate
of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission will give the
applicant and other affected property owners and/or residents the opportunity
to be heard.



   (C)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall act upon the
application within 60 calendar days after the filing. If the Commission fails
to act upon the application within this time it shall be deemed to constitute
approval and a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued.



   (D)   All actions of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be
set forth in writing. The Historic Preservation Commission’s final action
on an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be by the
passage of a motion to take 1 of the following actions:



      (1)   Approve the application for a certificate of
appropriateness as proposed, and provide in writing the findings on which the
decision is based;



      (2)   Approve the application for a certificate of
appropriateness subject to specific conditions and/or modifications,
providing these conditions of approval in writing; or



      (3)   Disapprove the application for a certificate of
appropriateness as proposed, and provide in writing the findings on which the
decision is based.



   (E)   (1)   The applicant shall have 180 days from the date the
certificate of appropriateness is approved and issued to procure a building
or demolition permit. Failure to procure the permit in this period will be a
failure to comply with the certificate of appropriateness and it shall be
void.



      (2)   If a building permit is not required, the work must be
completed within the 180-day period.



      (3)   If work is commenced, but discontinued for a period of
180 days or more, the certificate will be void.



   (F)   If the Historic Preservation Commission determines that a
certificate of appropriateness should not be issued, a new application
affecting the same property may be submitted only if substantial changes are
made in plans for the proposed work.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.089  APPEALS.



   Any aggrieved party may take an appeal from the actions of the Historic
Preservation Commission to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, whether the
application was approved or denied. The appeal shall be taken within 20
calendar days after the decision of the Commission and shall be in the nature
of certiorari.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.090  APPLICATIONS INVOLVING MEMBERS.



   No Commission member shall take part in the hearing, consideration or
determination of any case in which he or she is a party or has a financial
interest.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.091  MINOR WORKS.



   (A)   Minor works may be reviewed and approved by the Minor Works
Committee in accordance with the review criteria established in the
Commission’s Design Review Guidelines. The Minor Works Committee will
consist of 1 Commission member and the Planning Director.



   (B)   No denial of a certificate of appropriateness is allowed
without formal action by the Commission.



   (C)   In any event, the action of the Minor Works Committee will be
reported at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 32.092  AMENDMENT.



   These rules may, within the limits allowed by law, be amended at any
time by an affirmative vote of at least 4 members of the Commission. This
proposed amendment must have been presented to the Commission members in
writing at a regular or special meeting preceding the meeting at which the
vote is taken.



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 33:  FINANCES AND TAXATION



Section



   33.01   Presentation of accounts and the like to Board for action



   33.02   Payment from town treasury



   33.03   Claim against town as offset for penalty or taxes and the
like



   33.04   Listing of polls and property for taxation



   33.05   Insurance



   33.06   Access to public records and property



§ 33.01  PRESENTATION OF ACCOUNTS AND THE LIKE TO BOARD FOR ACTION.



   All accounts, complaints and requests for the action of the Board of
Commissioners shall be filed with the Town Clerk in writing; all claims
against the town shall be sworn to before the Town Clerk or another person
authorized to administer an oath before being considered by the Board of
Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 2-1)



Statutory reference:



   Municipal corporations generally, see G.S. Chapter 160A



§ 33.02  PAYMENT FROM TOWN TREASURY.



   (A)   No money shall be paid out of the town treasury unless by
order of the Board of Commissioners in meeting assembled, and then only upon
a warrant signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Town Clerk. All
warrants for the payment of money shall state upon their face the nature of
the claims for which warrants are drawn; provided that any committee ordering
expenditures by virtue of their duties shall audit and approve the claim for
expenditures before the claim shall be approved by the Board.



   (B)   The Clerk shall retain, in a book kept for that purpose, a
duplicate of every warrant issued, showing the purpose for which expended.



   (C)   All claims against the town shall be sworn to before a person
authorized to administer an oath before being considered by the Board of
Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 2-2)



§ 33.03  CLAIM AGAINST TOWN AS OFFSET FOR PENALTY OR TAXES AND THE LIKE.



   No claim against the town will be received as an offset for a penalty
or taxes or any other amount due the town, unless the claim has been audited
and approved by an order of the Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 2-3)



§ 33.04  LISTING OF POLLS AND PROPERTY FOR TAXATION.



   The Town Clerk shall, by public advertisement, give notice of the time
set and required for listing the polls and taxable property within the town,
and any person failing to list him or herself, if subject to poll tax, and
taxable property as he or she may possess within the time fixed in the
advertisement, shall be subject to the penalty prescribed by the laws of
North Carolina for failure to list poll and property tax; and the Town Clerk
shall each year, as early as practicable after the listing, make out the
lists of personal property and real estate, according to the valuation fixed
on the property by the Township Assessor and revised by the County Tax
Supervisor, the County Board of Equalization and Review and the State Board
of Assessment, and record them in the permanent town tax list book, and
prepare the tax lists for collection by the Tax Collector, so as to have tax
lists in the hands of the Tax Collector not later than the first of October
of each year, if practicable.



(Prior Code, § 2-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 33.05  INSURANCE.



   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, authorize the
Mayor, on behalf of the town to contract with 1 or more insurance companies
authorized to do business in this state to protect the town, and town
officers and employees while acting in line of duty against losses arising
from public liability, fire, theft, hail, windstorm and other causes, the
amount and terms of policies to be as prescribed by the Board of
Commissioners and agreed upon by the insurers.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver of the
governmental immunity of the town under the provisions of G.S. § 160A-485;
but the Board of Commissioners may, in the resolution mentioned in division
(A) of this section, waive immunity if, in the discretion of the Board, the
action appears to be in the best interests of the town.



(Prior Code, § 2-5)



§ 33.06  ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS AND PROPERTY.



   No person shall remove any record, document, book or other paper
belonging to the town, or any other town property, from the office or place
where it properly belongs, without authority from the custodian thereof, who
may require a receipt therefor, except on written order from the Board of
Commissioners or the Mayor or pursuant to a valid subpoena duces tecum. All
public records and accounts shall be available to the public for inspection
and use during all regular business hours in the offices where maintained.



(Prior Code, § 2-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 34:  PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section



   34.01   Social Security



   34.02   Life and hospital insurance



   34.03   Pension for firefighters



   34.04   Criminal history checks



§ 34.01  SOCIAL SECURITY.



   (A)   The Board of Commissioners hereby extends to all eligible
employees of the town and eligible groups and classes of employees the
benefits authorized by Title II of the Federal Social Security Act, as
amended, and as authorized by G.S. Art. 2, Ch. 135.



   (B)   The Board of Commissioners hereby ratifies anew the plan
heretofore submitted to and ratified by the state agency, as the plan may
have been amended from time to time, under the provisions of G.S. § 135-23,
and a true copy of the plan is and shall remain on file in the office of the
Town Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 13-1)



§ 34.02  LIFE AND HOSPITAL INSURANCE.



   The Town Treasurer is authorized to pay the premium on the group life
and hospital insurance carried by the town for its employees, and is
authorized to deduct premiums on the employees’ covered dependents from
their salaries and remit same to the insurance carrier if the employee wishes
to carry insurance coverage for his or her eligible dependents under the
town’s group policy.



(Prior Code, § 13-2)



§ 34.03  PENSION FOR FIREFIGHTERS.



   (A)   The Town Board of the Town of Wilkesboro hereby implements the
act by providing that payments under the act shall be made beginning with the
month of July, 1985, with payment under the act to be made for the month of
July, 1985; as soon after August 1, 1985 as the Administrative Department of
the Town of Wilkesboro can make payments to the persons certified to be
eligible for payment; and the Town Clerk is authorized to proceed with the
payments on and after August 1, 1985 for the month of July, 1985; for those
who are certified to be eligible for payment in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the Bill.



   (B)   There is established a Supplemental Pension Fund for the Fire
Department of the Town of Wilkesboro to be known as the Wilkesboro
Firefighter’s Supplemental Pension Fund, hereinafter referred to as
Supplemental Pension Fund, and to be administered by a Board composed of the
members of the trustees of the Firefighter’s Relief Fund of the Town of
Wilkesboro, established in accordance with G.S. §§ 58-84-1 through 58-88-30.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. § 118-7, all funds in
the Firefighter’s Relief Fund of the Town of Wilkesboro in excess of $5,000
shall be transferred to the Supplementary Pension Fund prior to January 1,
and prior to January 1 of each calendar year thereafter, so as to retain in
the Firefighter’s Relief Fund an amount of money not greater than $5,000;
provided, however, the Firefighter’s Relief Fund shall have restored the
sums from recurring annual receipts as are necessary to maintain a fund of
not less than $5,000; provided further, of the funds and subsequent recurring
increments transferred from the Firefighter’s Relief Fund of the Town of
Wilkesboro to the Supplemental Pension Fund, any or all of the same shall be
retrievable by and to the Firefighter’s Relief Fund of the Town of
Wilkesboro in order to defray and meet the legitimate claims accruing under
the provisions and coverage of the Firefighter’s Relief Fund of the Town of
Wilkesboro.



   (D)   Any person who is a member of the Wilkesboro Fire Department,
or a retired member of the Wilkesboro Fire Department, as shown by the
records of the Town of Wilkesboro at the time of ratification of this act, or
any person who becomes a member, or any firefighter of the Town of Wilkesboro
who has become totally and permanently disabled and who has served as a
firefighter of the Town of Wilkesboro for 5 or more years is eligible for
benefits from the Supplemental Pension Fund; provided that the person has
been retired as a member of the Wilkesboro Fire Department under the
provisions of the North Carolina Firefighter’s and Rescue Squad Workers’
Pension Fund as set out in Article 3, Chapter 118 of the General Statutes of
North Carolina and as participated in by the Town of Wilkesboro, or as a
voluntary member of the Fire Department of the Town of Wilkesboro, or has
left service because of the total and permanent disability described in this
section. This act does not modify or alter in any way the Worker’s
Compensation Laws of this state.



   (E)   Any member who has served 20 years as a firefighter in the
Wilkesboro Fire Department and has attained the age of 55 or who has served
for 5 or more years and has become totally and permanently disabled is
entitled to receive a monthly pension from the Supplemental Pension Fund. 
This monthly pension shall be in the amount of $75 per month. If, for any
reason, the fund shall be insufficient to pay in full any pension benefits or
other charges, then all benefits shall be reduced pro rata for as long as the
deficiency in amount exists. No claim shall accrue with respect to any amount
by which a benefit payment shall have been reduced.



   (F)   The Treasurer of the Board of Trustees of the Wilkesboro
Firefighter’s Relief Fund shall, from time to time, pay to the City Clerk
sufficient funds from the Supplemental Pension Fund to pay the beneficiaries
on the first day of each and every month any monies the beneficiaries are
entitled to under the provisions of this act.



   (G)   The Treasurer of the Firefighter’s Relief Fund of the Town
of Wilkesboro, as custodian of the Supplementary Pension Fund, shall be
required to give a bond with an indemnity company authorized to do business
in the State of North Carolina as surety in a sum equal to the maximum amount
estimated by the Board of Trustees as likely to be in his or her possession
as custodian at any time within the fiscal year for which the bond is given.
This bond is in lieu of the bond required by G.S. § 118-6. The condition of
the bond shall be that the custodian shall faithfully receive, keep, disburse
and account for, as provided in this act, all funds and property coming into
his or her hands as custodian, and the premiums on the bond shall, be paid by
the Town of Wilkesboro.



   (H)   The custodian of the Supplemental Pension Fund shall invest
all monies coming into his or her possession belonging to the Supplemental
Pension Fund, except so much as the Board of  Trustees from time to time
determine is reasonably necessary for the prompt payment of claims  and
expenses in securities  as the Board of Trustees shall select. These
securities shall be limited to those named in or authorized by either G.S. §
159-30 or G.S. § 159-31. Investments in certificates of deposit or time
deposits in any bank or trust company or savings and loan associations shall
not exceed the amount insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,
the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, unless these deposits or
investments in shares are secured in the manner provided by G.S. § 159-30 or
G.S. § 159-31.



   (I)   The Board of Trustees may accept any gift, grant, bequest or
devise or any real or personal property or other instrument of value for the
use of the Supplementary Pension Fund.



   (J)   All laws and clauses of laws in conflict with the provisions
of this chapter are repealed.



   (K)   None of the provisions of this chapter shall create a
liability for the Wilkesboro Firefighter’s Supplemental Pension Fund unless
sufficient current assets are available in the fund to pay fully for the
liability.



(Ord. passed 5-6-1986)



§ 34.04  CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS.



   In order to protect the citizens of the town and their properties, the
procedures herein are established to provide for fingerprinting and criminal
history checks on all final applicants for regular full and part-time
positions in the town government. Employment with the town may be denied for
those persons convicted of any crime against a person, or crimes against
property where intent is an element, or any drug or gambling related offense.



   (A)   The Town Manager, or designee, shall conduct an investigation
of any final candidate for a permanent full-time or part-time position with
the town government and it shall be a precondition of employment that an
applicant for such a position shall upon request, provide fingerprints and
all other necessary personal identification including a birth certificate,
social security number and drivers license, if available, so that the Town
Manager, or designee, may cause a thorough search to be made of local and
state criminal records to determine if the applicant had a history of
criminal convictions or the crimes enumerated above by the use of the
Division of Criminal Information Network (DCI).



   (B)   The Police Department shall provide the findings from the use
of the DCI to the Town Manager, or designee, provided that all necessary
agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations Division of Criminal
Information have been executed.



   (C)   An evaluation of any crime for purpose of employment will take
into account the nature and the circumstances of the offense and the time
frame of the offense as it relates to the essential job functions for the
position applied.



(Ord. passed 7-9-2007)



CHAPTER 35:  CIVIL EMERGENCIES



Section



   35.01   When state of emergency deemed to exist



   35.02   Proclamation by Mayor; restrictions authorized



   35.03   Limitations and exemptions authorized in proclamation



   35.04   Extension, amendment and repeal of proclamation



   35.05   Authority to request police/military; martial law



   35.06   Termination of restrictions and emergency



   35.07   Required compliance with proclamation



§ 35.01  WHEN STATE OF EMERGENCY DEEMED TO EXIST.



   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times of
great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar public
emergency, for any reason, the public safety authorities of the town are
unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or
property.



(Prior Code, § 6-1)



§ 35.02  PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR; RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED.



   (A)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the
town, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is
hereby authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to
all persons the existence of a state of emergency, and, in order to more
effectively protect the lives and property of people within the town, to
place in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized in
division (B) of this section.



   (B)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency the
Mayor may impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:



      (1)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one’s premises
of explosives, firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind, and
prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;



      (2)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine
or intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption
off one’s own premises;



      (3)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march,
vigil or participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or
upon any public property;



      (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha or any other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;



      (5)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street,
roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of
medical assistance, food or other commodity or service necessary to sustain
the well-being of themselves or their families or some member thereof;



      (6)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on
of any business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places
of business, places of entertainment and any other places of public assembly;
and/or



      (7)   Prohibit or regulate by what is commonly called a
curfew, persons being upon any or all streets, sidewalks, public places and
vacant lots within the town during periods of the day or night, or both day
and night, as he or she may specify.



(Prior Code, § 6-2)



Statutory reference:



   Riots and civil disorders, see G.S. §§ 14-281.1 to 14-288.11,
14-288.18



§ 35.03  LIMITATIONS AND EXEMPTIONS AUTHORIZED IN PROCLAMATION.



   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the
proclamation the application of all or any part of the restrictions to any
area specifically designated or described within the limits of the town and
to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of
the restrictions law enforcement officers; firefighters and other public
employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical
facilities; on-duty military personnel whether state or federal; on-duty
employees of public utilities, public transportation companies and newspaper,
magazine, radio broadcasting and television broadcasting corporations
operated for profit; and other classes of persons as may be essential to the
preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety,
health and welfare needs of the people within the town.



(Prior Code, § 6-3)



§ 35.04  EXTENSION, AMENDMENT AND REPEAL OF PROCLAMATION.



   Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed in any particular
during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the
issuance of a subsequent proclamation.



(Prior Code, § 6-4)



§ 35.05  AUTHORITY TO REQUEST POLICE/MILITARY; MARTIAL LAW.



   If, in the sound discretion of the Mayor, it shall appear that the
emergency is, or that the threatened emergency is likely to be, of
proportions that the means available to the town to maintain law and order
are insufficient for that purpose, the Mayor shall, promptly and by the most
expeditious means of communication, inform the Governor of the situation and
request that necessary police or military forces of the state be provided
promptly; and if, during an actual state of emergency, the Mayor shall find
that the civil courts having jurisdiction within the town are unable to
perform their lawful duties and that, by reason of widespread lawlessness,
writs and other processes cannot be served or executed in the town, the Mayor
shall inform the Governor of his or her findings and may recommend to him or
her that a state of martial law be proclaimed to exist within the town.



(Prior Code, § 6-5)



§ 35.06  TERMINATION OF RESTRICTIONS AND EMERGENCY.



   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of the state of emergency or all or
any part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 6-6)



§ 35.07  REQUIRED COMPLIANCE WITH PROCLAMATION.



   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed
by any proclamation authorized by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 6-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   UTILITIES GENERALLY; WATER AND SEWERS





         51.   GARBAGE; SOLID WASTE





         52.   ELECTRICITY





         53.   SEWERS




CHAPTER 50:  UTILITIES GENERALLY; WATER AND SEWERS



Section




General Regulations




   50.001   Prohibited acts



   50.002   Property owners; expense of opening obstructed sewer line



   50.003   Properties required to be connected to town sewer/water
mains



   50.004   Privies, privy vaults, cesspools and septic tanks



   50.005   Meters/measuring devices; installation, maintenance and
control




Tapping of Mains




   50.015   Applications for taps



   50.016   Sewer tap fees



   50.017   Water tap fees



   50.018   When and by whom taps to be made




Deposits, Charges and Billings




   50.030   Initial deposit; purpose, amount and when payable



   50.031   Deposit upon disconnection of service



   50.032   Duty of customer to notify town when service to be
disconnected



   50.033   Water rates; meters 



   50.034   Sewer rental charges; properties using/not using town water



   50.035   Sewer rental charges when water not discharged into town
sewers



   50.036   Properties not affected



   50.037   Water supplied by town; billing; payment; penalties



   50.038   Sewer rental charges; billing; payment; penalties



   50.039   Disconnection for late payment




Watershed




   50.050   Statement and purpose



   50.051   Definitions



   50.052   Radioactive materials and pollutants



   50.053   In case of declaration it be unconstitutional



   50.054   Violations




Water Tanks; Installation Standards for Antennas and the Like




   50.080   Contractor qualifications



   50.081   Health and safety



   50.082   General workmanship



   50.083   Welding and painting



   50.084   Electrical



   50.085   Equipment



   50.086   Inspections and approvals




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 50.001  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person without having
proper authority to touch, tamper or in any manner manipulate or turn the
cut-offs on the water mains, water meters or fire hydrants forming a part of
the water system of the town, nor shall any person without having proper
authority tamper with or harm in any manner whatsoever any water or sewer
line, water meter, sewer manhole, fire hydrant or any appurtenances thereto.
No person shall throw or deposit any material or substance in any water or
sewer line that will in any manner obstruct a line.



      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person without having
proper authority to, in any manner interfere with or injure any filter,
coagulating tank or clear water basin, or any standpipe or any other
materials, device or attachment used in connection therewith; or to climb
upon the top of any standpipe, coagulating tank, clear water basin; or throw
in or against standpipe, filter, coagulating tank or clear water basin,
rocks, sticks or other material of any kind whatsoever.



      (3)   Neither the exhaust, blowoff, drip line or sediment from
any boiler, nor the discharge of large volumes of hot water from any source,
shall be discharged into the town sewer system; pipes may first discharge
into a basin, properly trapped and vented, which, after being relieved of
sediment, pressure or high temperature, may discharge into a town sewer.
Water over 120°F shall not be admitted to the sewer.



   (B)   The governing authority shall have a right to prevent any
discharge into system and notify the user to halt any discharge which would
contaminate or be likely to contaminate the Publicly Owned Treatment Works or
POTW and prevent its continued discharge into the system; the governing
authority in charge of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works or POTW shall have
the right to impose civil or criminal penalties for non-compliance against
the user of the system, and assess against any offending party a penalty of
at least $1,000 per violation per day against industrial users that violate
pre-treatment standards and requirements. Each successive day of violation
shall be considered a separate offense. In addition the governing body in
charge of the POTW shall have a further right to bring an action in the
proper jurisdiction of the courts, state or federal, for injunctive relief
against the offending party or parties.



(Prior Code, § 16-1)  (Am. Ord. passed 4-3-1989)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.002  PROPERTY OWNERS; EXPENSE OF OPENING OBSTRUCTED SEWER LINE.



   Whenever it becomes necessary to open any sewer lines which have become
choked or obstructed by material being placed in them that will not dissolve,
and the fault of that is the property owner or the party using the property,
the property owner shall be liable to the town for damage and shall bear the
expense of opening the sewer.



(Prior Code, § 16-2)



§ 50.003  PROPERTIES REQUIRED TO BE CONNECTED TO TOWN SEWER/WATER MAINS.



   (A)   Each owner of a house or other structure within the town which
is used or intended for use as a place of human habitation, occupancy or
activity and which is situated on a lot which abuts a street or right of way
wherein there is a public sewer or water main within 200 feet of the property
line of the lot shall connect the house or other structure to the public
sewer and to the public water main; provided that no person shall be required
to cross the private property of another person to make any connection.



   (B)   When a public sewer or water main has been laid to within 200
feet of any property within the town upon which there is a house or other
structure which is used or intended for use as a place of human habitation,
occupancy or activity, it shall be the duty of the owner of the house or
other structure to have it connected to the public sewer or water main; and
any owner, having been notified by the Town Clerk to make the connection,
shall do so within 60 days from the service of the notice.



   (C)   Each day of violation or failure to comply with the provisions
of this section shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 16-3)



§ 50.004  PRIVIES, PRIVY VAULTS, CESSPOOLS AND SEPTIC TANKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, maintain or use
any privy, privy vault or cesspool; and septic tanks shall be lawful only on
properties not required to be connected to the town sanitary sewer system,
and then only when of a type approved by the state and county health
authorities, and installed in locations and in a manner as to meet the
requirements and approval of the state and county health authorities.



(Prior Code, § 16-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.005  METERS/MEASURING DEVICES; INSTALLATION, MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.



   All meters or other measuring devices installed or required to be used
under the provisions of this chapter shall be under the control of the
Director of Public Works. The owner of the property upon which measuring
device is installed shall be responsible for its maintenance and safekeeping,
and all repairs thereto shall be made at the owner's cost.



(Prior Code, § 16-5)




TAPPING OF MAINS




§ 50.015  APPLICATIONS FOR TAPS.



   All applications for water and sewer taps shall be made at the office
of the Town Clerk, who shall issue permits upon payment of the full amount of
fees as provided in this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 16-6)



§ 50.016  SEWER TAP FEES.



   The minimum amount to be charged and collected from property owners for
each sewer connection made by the town shall be an amount as may be from time
to time established by the Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 16-7)



§ 50.017  WATER TAP FEES.



   The amount to be charged and collected from property owners for water
taps shall be in accordance with the schedule that may from time to time be
established by the Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 16-8)



§ 50.018  WHEN AND BY WHOM TAPS TO BE MADE.



   After permits have been issued and the required amount of fees have
been paid, the Director of Public Works shall be notified that permits have
been issued, and it shall then be his or her duty to make taps or cause taps
to be made as soon as practicable after he or she has received notice from
the Town Clerk that the permits have been issued.



(Prior Code, § 16-9)




DEPOSITS, CHARGES AND BILLINGS




§ 50.030  INITIAL DEPOSIT; PURPOSE, AMOUNT AND WHEN PAYABLE.



   (A)   Prior to turning on the water supply from a town water main to
any premises connected therewith, the owner or occupant of the premises shall
deposit with the Town Treasurer a sum estimated to be the average of the
tenant’s expected water bill for a period of 2 months or for residential
premises, $10, or for business premises $25, whichever is greater in either
case. This deposit shall be chargeable for the person's water and sewer
service bills that may become delinquent, and for any repairs to town water
meters or town sewer and water installations for which he or she may be
responsible; and should the amount of the deposit at any time fall below the
minimum amount as above stated, the person shall, upon notice from the Town
Treasurer, deposit the amount as may be necessary to restore the deposit to
its required minimum balance.



(Prior Code, § 16-10)



   (B)   A connection fee of $10 and deposit of $30 are required. The
$30 deposit is refundable when a water customer moves if the customer has no
unpaid balance.



   (C)   Companies that wish to use town water must fill up at 1
central location, namely the water plant, once the necessary equipment is in
place. This will be by August 1, 1989.



(Meeting 7-10-1989)



§ 50.031  DEPOSIT UPON DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE.



   Upon the discontinuance of water service to any premises, the deposit
required by § 50.030, or so much thereof as may be in excess of any charges
against it as provided in § 50.030, shall be refunded to the depositor, his
or her heirs, personal representatives or assigns, upon giving receipt
therefor to the Town Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 16-11)



§ 50.032  DUTY OF CUSTOMER TO NOTIFY TOWN WHEN SERVICE TO BE DISCONNECTED.



   It shall be the duty of each person in whose name town water service is
billed to give notice, not less than 2 days, to the Town Clerk, when water
service is for any reason to be discontinued or is to be transferred to the
name of another person.



(Prior Code, § 16-12)



§ 50.033  WATER RATES; METERS.



   (A)   The water rates of the town, for water furnished to consumers,
shall be as provided by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners
from time to time, and a copy of each ordinance or resolution shall be placed
on file in the office of the Town Clerk; and the water rates in effect
immediately prior to the effective date of this code shall continue in effect
until altered by ordinance or resolution pursuant to this section.



   (B)   Water rates shall be applied to each individual meter, and
where more than 1 building is served from 1 meter, the minimum charge will
apply to each building; provided that any separate dwelling or place of
business constructed after July 1, 1952, shall be connected to the water
system of the town through a separate meter.



(Prior Code, § 16-13)



   (C)   The minimum charge shall apply to each tenant of a single
building or apartment, whether the same is fed from a central meter or an
individual meter.  The meter shall be installed at the owner’s expense,
should the owner or owners desire to have each apartment metered; however, if
no meter is installed by the owner, the owner shall be responsible for the
water bill for each apartment fed into the building.  The same shall be
charged to the owner of the building, the same as if each apartment is
metered.



(Am. Ord. passed 7-1-1987)



§ 50.034  SEWER RENTAL CHARGES; PROPERTIES USING/NOT USING TOWN WATER.



   (A)   There is hereby imposed a sewer rental charge, for the use of
the town sewers, upon the owners or tenants of the properties served thereby.
This charge shall be at a rate that may be established from time to time by
the Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 16-14)



   (B)   For a property which uses water, all or part of which is from
a source other than the town's water supply system, there shall be a sewer
rental charge, separate from and in addition to any sewer rental based on the
consumption of water from the town's water supply system. The separate and
additional sewer rental shall be measured by the quantity of water from the
source other than the town's water supply system, which is discharged into
the town's sewers from the property. The owner of each property shall
install, without cost to the town, a meter or meters to measure the quantity
of water received from other than the town’s water supply system and
discharged into the town’s sewers. No meter shall be installed or be used
for that purpose without the approval of the Director of Public Works; and
the owner of that property shall pay for the water so discharged into the
town’s sewers an amount as though all water came from the town’s water
supply system. If the owner of the property fails to install and maintain at
the owner's expense an approved meter or meters, the Director of Public Works
shall make an estimate of the amount of water from sources other than the
town’s water supply system which is discharged into the town’s sewers
from the property, using the consumption from similar operations, and if
none, a formula based upon the operations of the business of the occupant of
the premises as a standard and bill estimated water so discharged into the
town's sewer as though the same were metered.



(Prior Code, § 16-15)



§ 50.035  SEWER RENTAL CHARGES WHEN WATER NOT DISCHARGED INTO TOWN SEWERS.



   Whenever a property upon which the sewer rental charge is imposed uses
water from the town’s water supply system for an industrial or commercial
purpose so that the water so used is not discharged into the sewerage system
of the town, the quantity of water so used and not discharged into the
town’s sewers shall be excluded in determining the sewer rental of
property; provided, that the quantity of water so used and not discharged
into the town’s sewers is measured by a device approved by the Director of
Public Works and installed and maintained without cost to the town; and
provided further, that the water supply of property is metered and the owner
pays for the water at metered rates. The sewer rental based upon the
consumption of town water to be paid by the owner of the property shall be
computed at the percentage specified in § 50.034(A) and using a quantity of
water equal to the total quantity of water furnished property by the town,
less the quantity not discharged into the town’s sewers; provided, that
where, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, it is not practical to
install a measuring device to determine continuously the quantity of water
not discharged into the town’s sewers, the Director shall determine
periodically, in a way and by a method as he or she may prescribe, the
percentage of metered water discharged in the town sewers, and the quantity
of water used to determine the sewerage rental shall be the percentage so
determined of the quantity measured by the water meter or meters. Any dispute
as to the estimated amount shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works
after notice of the estimate, whose decision on the matter shall be final for
the current billing period.



(Prior Code, § 16-16)



§ 50.036  PROPERTIES NOT AFFECTED.



   No water rate is imposed by the town for any property not connected to
the town water system, nor is any sewer rental charge imposed by the town for
any property not connected to a town sewer.



(Prior Code, § 16-17)



§ 50.037  WATER SUPPLIED BY TOWN; BILLING; PAYMENT; PENALTIES.



   (A)   Customers of the town water supply system shall be billed
bi-monthly for water furnished during the 2-month period ending on the date
of the last meter reading preceding the date of the bill; and bills shall be
due and payable at the office of the Town Treasurer on or before the tenth
day next succeeding the date of the bill.



   (B)   When any bill is not paid within the time as provided therefor
in division (A) of this section, the town shall discontinue water service to
the premises to which the bill relates and it shall then be unlawful for any
person, other than a duly authorized agent or employee of the town, to turn
the water on until the bill has been paid in full and a turn-on fee of $10
has been paid to the Town Clerk.



(Prior Code, § 16-18)  (Am. Ord. passed 9-4-1984)



§ 50.038  SEWER RENTAL CHARGES; BILLING; PAYMENT; PENALTIES.



   All sewer rental charges shall be due and payable at the same time and
place that water rental bills are due and payable. Sewer rental charges shall
be included in the water bills, but stated separately, and shall be collected
at the same time and in the same manner as water bills, and, if not paid
within the time limit for the payment of water rental bills, in addition to
all other penalties provided by law, the town may cut off from that property
the use of water, and if water is obtained from sources of supply other than
the town water system, the discharge thereof into the town’s sewerage
system shall be illegal and the owner of that property shall be subject to
prosecution for a violation of this section.



(Prior Code, § 16-19)



§ 50.039  DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.



   (A)   It is the policy of the town to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills.  The town's form for application
for utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of
billing, clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:



      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date
set forth on the bill; and



      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a
second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not
paid within 10 days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and



      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or
her bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his or her
choosing and may present orally or in writing his or her complaint and
contentions to the town official in charge of utility billing.  This
official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service not be
discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of
the customer's complaint.



   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be
entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered.  In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the
hearing procedure provided herein, service will be discontinued at the time
specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at
least 30 days.



   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the town to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated
only after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a
turn-on charge in the sum of $20.




WATERSHED




§ 50.050  STATEMENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   This subchapter is hereby created in pursuance of authority
conferred in the  G.S. and particularly G.S. Article 6 of Ch. 153A, and for
the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, general welfare and the
protection of persons and property in the Town of Wilkesboro and for the
protection in the area of the watershed of the Town of Wilkesboro from the
harmful effects of pollution, contamination, radiation or the threat thereof.



   (B)   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the
Wilkesboro Watershed Control Ordinance.



(Ord. passed 11-5-1979)



§ 50.051  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD.  Town Board of Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro.



   GENERAL POLLUTION. Any type use of watershed as will endanger or
threaten to endanger the health, safety, general welfare, persons and
property of the users of water from the Town of Wilkesboro or may be
hereafter users of the water.



   NONIONIZING RADIATION.  Radiation in any portion of the
electromagnetic spectrum not defined as ionizing radiation, including but not
limited to sources like laser, maser or microwave devices.



   PERSON.  Any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association,
trust, estate, public or private institution, group, agency, political
subdivision of this state, any other state or political subdivision or agency
thereof and any legal successor, representative, agent or agency of the
foregoing.



   POLLUTION.  Any use of land which shall or may contaminate the
watershed, whether it be ionization radiation, gamma rays and x-rays, alpha
and beta particles, high speed electrons, protons, neutrons and other nuclear
particles or any other contamination which would endanger or be likely to
endanger or in any way contaminate the water system of the Town of
Wilkesboro, thereby endangering the public health, safety, general welfare
and protection of persons and property within the watershed of the Town of
Wilkesboro and its source of water.



   RADIATION MACHINE.  Any device designated to produce or which produces
radiation or nuclear particles when the associated control devices of the
machine are operated or any other device machines or use which would pollute
or tend to pollute water systems.



   RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL.  Any solid, liquid or gas which emits ionizing
radiation spontaneously.



   WATERSHED.  All territory that drains into the Yadkin River west of
Moravian Creek and the line running Northward from Moravian Creek and the
line running Northward from Moravian Creek to the dividing line where the
waters flow into the Yadkin River west of this line and extending westward
with the dividing ridge running Southward constituting all of the flow and
drainage into the Yadkin River to the dividing ridge between the tributaries
of the Yadkin, then Eastward with the dividing ridge of the tributaries of
the Yadkin River to a point east of Cub Creek and its tributaries and back to
the point of beginning.



(Ord. passed 11-5-1979)



§ 50.052  RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS AND POLLUTANTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, manufacture, produce,
process, store, bury, transport, transfer, receive, acquire, own or possess
radioactive materials or other pollutants in the Town of Wilkesboro or on its
watershed, except persons involved in the use of radiation machines or
radioactive materials for medical diagnosis or treatment.



(Ord. passed 11-5-1979)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 50.053  IN CASE OF DECLARATION IT BE UNCONSTITUTIONAL.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, the decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Town Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro hereby declares that it would have
passed this chapter and each section, division, sentence, clause or phrase
thereof, irrespective of the fact that any 1 or more sections, divisions,
sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared unconstitutional.



(Ord. passed 11-5-1979)



§ 50.054  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as
provided by G.S. § 14-4. Each day of violation shall be a separate and
distinct offense.



   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a civil penalty to be recovered by the Town of Wilkesboro in
the sum as referenced in the town’s schedule of fees, which is updated
annually, for each violation payable within 10 days after the person has been
cited for validation of this subchapter.



   (C)   This subchapter may be enforced by each and every remedy
enumerated in G.S. § 153A-123(d), (e), provisions being incorporated herein
by reference.



(Ord. passed 11-5-1979)




WATER TANKS; INSTALLATION STANDARDS FOR ANTENNAS AND THE LIKE




§ 50.080  CONTRACTOR QUALIFICATIONS.



   (A)   All licensee installations require the use of certified
electronics technicians, steeplejacks, electricians or licensed contractors
for an installation work. All installation work shall be in accordance with
the Town of Wilkesboro previously approved installation plan. Town of
Wilkesboro, at its sole discretion, shall have the right to supervise the
installation of any and all equipment. Certificates of insurance will be
required by the Town of Wilkesboro of any installer.



   (B)   All installers will have a certified welder per AWS D1.1
performing any welding.



   (C)   All installers will have a demonstrated familiarity with AWWA
D100 code requirements as it relates to the installation of appurtenances and
attachments.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 50.081  HEALTH AND SAFETY.



   (A)   Precautions shall be taken to prevent water contamination. Any
intrusion to the tank interior may be considered contamination. If
contamination occurs disinfect the tank (see ANSI/AWWA C652).



   (B)   Lockout and tagout procedures should be in place and followed.



   (C)   The contractor shall provide fall protection for their
personnel during installation or inspection of any equipment in accordance
with OSHA.



   (D)   Cables shall not be attached to any ladder structures, in
accordance with OSHA standards.



   (E)   Manholes and other access ports shall not be obstructed in any
way by cable routing or attachments, in accordance with OSHA standards.



   (F)   Balconies and platforms shall not be obstructed in any way by
cable routing or attachments, in accordance with OSHA standards.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 50.082  GENERAL WORKMANSHIP.



   (A)   Epoxy attachments shall not be used. Epoxy compounds can lose
strength at temperatures exceeding 140°F. Additionally, epoxy compounds can
subjected to extreme stresses from thermal expansion/contraction of the metal
structure due to changes in the ambient temperature and subsequently exhibit
shear failure.



   (B)   Stud welding shall not be used. A properly installed stud weld
will scorch the internal coating system in the same manner as ordinary stick
welding. In addition, the plate attachment to the studs is open to water
seepage and corrosion from trapped water and moisture. Proper coating
procedures cannot be used on tank surfaces that have plates or other
attachments bolted to them.



   (C)   Any penetrations larger than 3 inches in diameter that are to
be cut into the support structure require special expertise in design and
installation to minimize the possibility of structural damage to the
structure. Consideration should be given to reducing the tank water level
whenever openings are cut into the support structure. A professionally
engineered solution must be provided.



   (D)   Antenna cables should be arranged and located to allow
protective wrapping during abrasive blasting and recoating. Neatly arranged
cables shall be offset from the tank to allow maintenance contractors to
perform this work without removing the cable runs. Chaining or strapping to
tower legs or handrails is not allowed. Cable runs should be routed under
balconies or walkways to minimize access interference. Vertical coax routing
up a leg should be orientated towards the center of the tank on the inside
face of the leg where possible.



   (E)   The first carrier on the tank shall use hinged cluster
brackets with snap-in clips capable of supporting eighteen 1 and 5/8-inch
coax cables, and shall route the coax cables on the inside of the cluster
brackets.



   (F)   Cables and antenna shall be installed with a minimum of 6-inch
offsets. Any deviations must be expressly approved by the Town of Wilkesboro.



   (G)   Coax runs shall have a minimum of 4 feet clearance from tank
logos.



   (H)   Penetrations shall be designed in accordance with AWWA § 3.13.



   (I)   Penetrations through walkways and platforms shall be toe board
compliant in accordance with OSHA regulations.



   (J)   All installers shall comply with applicable local, state and
federal requirements. In the absence of any applicable government standards,
applicable BOCA and NEC codes, as well as EIA, TIA and AWWA, standards will
apply.



   (K)   All materials and workmanship are to be in compliance with the
latest AWWA codes and regulations.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 50.083  WELDING AND PAINTING.



   (A)   (1)   All welding shall be in accordance with AWWA D100 §
8, Welding and § 11, Inspection and Testing. This requires all welders to be
certified in accordance with AWS Dl.1.



      (2)   All welds to the tank surface shall be made with E7018
low hydrogen rod and shall be smooth and free of burs and undercuts.
Unacceptable welds shall be repaired as 6.1 requires to meet AWWA D100
requirements.



      (3)   Penetrations shall not intersect tank weld seams.
Penetrations should clear existing seams by 6 inches. If this clearance is
not possible, a review by a professional engineer shall be made of adjacent
weld seams that may be affected by local welding.



      (4)   Welding to the tank or access tube opposite the water
level is not permitted. The water level shall be drawn down to a level not
less than 2 feet below the point of welding.



      (5)   Galvanized components shall not be welded directly to
the tank surface. Galvanized surfaces mating to the tank structure must be
ground free of galvanizing prior to welding.



      (6)   Tubular columns on multi-leg supported tanks are
hermetically sealed and must not be breached or punctured under any
circumstance since moisture will accumulate inside the leg and eventually
cause serious structural damage.



   (B)   Welding may cause blistering of the interior paint opposite
the weld. Damaged interior paint surfaces shall be repaired in a manner that
is compatible with the existing paint system. Exterior paint damage shall be
repaired after completion of the antenna installation, and should be
compatible with existing paint system. It is recommended that a 1-year
anniversary inspection be made to evaluate the quality of the touch up and
repainting if required. AWWA D 102 should be consulted for proper paint
procedure.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 50.084  ELECTRICAL.



   (A)   All installation work shall be performed in a neat and
workperson-like manner. Any new installation shall not cause mechanical,
electrical or electronic interference to other RF equipment located on the
site.



   (B)   All transmission lines shall be attached to tower coax
supports using snap-in hangers. The use of stainless steel angle adapters
(Andrew 31768A or approved equal) is authorized. Cable ties are not permitted.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 50.085  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   All transmission lines shall be tagged at the top and bottom
of each run near the connector with an identification tag containing the
licensee’s name, FCC or IRAC call sign, and the frequency assigned. Brass
Tags with copper wire are preferred. Plastic tags with vinyl labels or
indelible ink marking are acceptable.



   (B)   All installed equipment shall be housed in suitable EIA
approved enclosures or equipment racks. All enclosure doors and covers shall
remain closed and locked at all times except during actual equipment
servicing.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 50.086  INSPECTIONS AND APPROVALS.



   (A)   Town of Wilkesboro shall be provided with as-built plans or
tank mapping for review.



   (B)   Town of Wilkesboro shall be provided with all drawings for
review and approval prior to start of construction.



   (C)   Town of Wilkesboro shall have the right to inspect the
structure at completion of the project.



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 51:  GARBAGE; SOLID WASTE



Section



   51.01   Definitions



   51.02   Supervision of collection; regulations



   51.03   Collection routes, schedules and placement of containers



   51.04   Container, storage and collection practices



   51.05   Physically disabled service



   51.06   Control of solid waste



   51.07   Town served nonresidential units



   51.08   Bulk containers/dumpsters



   51.09   Recyclables



   51.10   Ownership of materials



   51.11   Scavenging; private collection



   51.12   Unauthorized collection prohibited



   51.13   Removal from unimproved premises



   51.14   Illegal dumping



   51.15   Burning garbage and yard waste



   51.16   Dumping by nonresidents



   51.17   Containers required to reduce litter



   51.18   Dumping of building and demolition materials



   51.19   Transportation of loose materials and wastes



   51.20   Special collection; yard waste and bulk items



   51.21   Solid waste not to be collected by town



   51.22   Accumulation of solid wastes prohibited



   51.23   Distribution of handbills



 



   51.99   Penalties and remedies



§ 51.01  DEFINITIONS.



    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ASHES. Residue resulting from the burning of wood, coal or other
combustible material.



   BUILDING MATERIAL. Lumber, brick, stone, carpet, plumbing materials,
plaster, concrete, floor coverings, roofing material, gutters or other
materials or substances accumulated as a result of construction, repairs or
additions to existing structures or accessory structures or demolition of
those.



   BULK CONTAINER (DUMPSTER). A metal container with a minimum size of 400
gallons and a maximum size of 1,600 gallons, watertight, constructed with two
opening side and top doors so that it can be emptied mechanically by
specially equipped trucks.



   BULKY ITEMS. Items such as household furnishings, white goods,
mattresses, box springs, lawn equipment (i.e. mowers, wheelbarrows) and
similar household items.



   BUSINESS BUILDING. Any structure, whether public or private, that is
adapted for transaction of business, for rendering of professional services,
for amusement, for the display or sale or storage of goods, wares,
merchandise, article or equipment, including hotels, apartment houses,
rooming houses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theaters,
markets, restaurants, abattoirs (slaughterhouses), warehouses, sheds, barns
and other structures on premises used for or adapted to business purposes.



   BUSINESS TRASH. Any waste accumulation of paper, cardboard, packaging
materials, rags or accumulations of incidental garbage other than household
trash which is associated with the operation of stores, offices and
nonresidential units.



   COLLECTION. The act of removing solid waste from a point of generation
to an approved disposal site. Collection shall be at the curb for rollout (or
backyard in special circumstances), trash, yard waste and recyclable
collection.



   DESIGNATED COLLECTION AREA(S). That geographic location to which the
town is responsible for providing solid waste collection services. Collection
points shall be at the curb for the rollout, trash, yard waste and
recyclables collection.



   ESTABLISHMENTS. Single-family units, special residential units,
multifamily units, nonresidential units and town-owned nonresidential units.



   FOUL ODOR. Offensive odors emanating from, but not limited to, garbage.



   GARBAGE. The byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other matter
which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction and/or the generation
of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which during and/or after decay may
serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects and/or animals. All
refuse to result from the use and maintenance of the property, regardless of
the nature of the action thereon.



   HAZARDOUS WASTES. The following is an explanation of hazardous waste as
published in the North Carolina Hazardous Waste Law adopted for the Federal
Environment Protection Agency (EPA). For the purposes of this chapter, the
definition of hazardous waste has been condensed. The items defined are not
inclusive of all items specified by the EPA regulations. Hazardous waste is
defined as potentially dangerous byproducts of our highly industrialized
society that cannot be handled, treated or disposed of without special
precautions. It includes ignitable, corrosive, reactive and toxic wastes such
as acetone, gasoline and industrial alcohol, alkaline cleaners, acids,
cyanide and chlorine, arsenic, pesticide wastes, drugs, paint, caustics,
infected material, offal, fecal matter (human and animal), explosives and any
other material of similar nature.



   HOUSEHOLD TRASH. Any waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, rags,
bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, which is usually attendant to
housekeeping, excluding recyclables and garbage.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. All waste, including solids, semi-solids, sludge and
liquids created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing
enterprises.



   INSPECTOR. The person or persons designated by the Town Manager to
perform the duties and responsibilities assigned by this chapter to the
inspector.



   LITTER. Any discarded man-made materials including, but not limited to,
solid waste materials, industrial materials, household trash, business trash,
building materials, scrap materials and hazardous waste as terms are defined
in this chapter.



   MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any apartment, group of apartments or
condominiums used for dwelling places of 3 or more families.



   NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any retail, manufacturing, wholesale,
institutional, religious, nonprofit organization, governmental or another



   PERSON. Any person, owner, agent, corporation, partnership,
association, firm, receiver, guardian, trustee, executor, administrator,
fiduciary, occupant, lessee, tenant or representative or group of individuals
or entities of any kind.



   PHYSICAL DISABILITY. A medical condition verified by a registered
physician that makes an individual either physically unable to bring a
rollout container to the curbside for collection and/or that makes
undertaking that act clearly and seriously threatening to that person's
health.



   PORTABLE PACKING UNIT. A metal container not exceeding 4,500 pounds
gross weight with an 800 to 1,600 gallon capacity that contains a packing
mechanism and an internal or external power unit.



   PREMISES. Lots, sidewalks, rights-of-way, grass strips or curbs up to
the edge of the pavement of any public street.



   RECYCLABLES. Material designated as capable of being sorted, processed,
transported and sold to markets for the remanufacture of like or different
products. Items include newspapers and accompanying inserts, glass, food and
beverage containers, plastic soft drink and liquor bottles, aluminum cans,
bi-metal cans, steel or tin cans, yard waste and other items determined to be
recyclable by the Solid Waste Department.



   RECYCLABLES BIN. A 21-gallon plastic container furnished by the town or
town-designated private collector and distributed for use in the residential
recyclables collection program.



   REFUSE. Solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household
trash, yard waste and business trash as herein defined.



   REFUSE RECEPTACLE. A metal or plastic container resistant to rust,
corrosion or rapid deterioration.



   REGULAR COLLECTION. All collection services offered recurrently, at
least once per week, which includes the collection of vegetable and food
wastes in a manner safe to public health.



   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE.



      (1)   Garbage and trash, which may include glass jars,
bottles, steel cans, plastic soda and liquor bottles, newspaper and inserts,
plastic milk and water jugs and other solid waste including yard waste.



      (2)   RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE shall not include discarded
building materials, trees, brush and other material resulting from the
activities of building contractors or lawn services, larger quantities of
sod, dirt, and trash from land clearing or other material requiring special
handling.



   ROLL-OUT CART. A container having wheels and a hinged lid, issued by
the town or by a firm under contract with the town, for the disposal of
refuse and recycling as defined and prepared in accordance with this section.



   SCRAP METAL. Any item creating a littered condition including, but not
limited to, dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, building
material, automotive parts, tires or other similar items which are either in
a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked dismantled or inoperative
condition.



   SEPARATE COLLECTION. All collection of specifically defined materials
not associated with regular collection practices.



   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any dwelling occupied by 1 family.



   SOLID WASTE. Accumulations consisting of any combination of business
trash, garbage, household trash, bulky items, yard waste, recyclables and
scrap materials and shall be collected through curbside trash, rollout,
recyclables, yard waste, bulky items or business trash collection activities.



   SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any duplex, triplex, quadruplex or mobile
home park.



   TRASH. The byproduct of animal or vegetable food waste resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or other matter
which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction and/or the generation
of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which during and/or after decay may
serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects and/or animals. All
refuse to result from the use and maintenance of the property, regardless of
the nature of the activity thereon except garbage (Sometimes referred to as
GARBAGE).



   WASTE. All useless, unwanted or discarded materials resulting from
industrial, commercial, agricultural and residential activities (excluding
sewage).



   WHITE GOODS. Large electrical goods used domestically typically white
in color. Large white goods, such as refrigerators, microwaves, washers,
dryers or dishwashers will be accepted.



   YARD WASTE. Grass, weeds, leaves, tree trimmings, plants, shrubbery
pruning's and other similar materials which are generated in the maintenance
of yards and gardens, and which are separated from other solid waste
materials and placed in a designated recycling collection area. YARD WASTE
shall not include trees, tree limbs, brush and other material resulting from
commercial tree trimmers and/or commercial lawn care services. Items that are
over 6 feet long and 3 inches in diameter will not be accepted. Stumps will
not be collected.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.02  SUPERVISION OF COLLECTION; REGULATIONS.



    (A)   The Field Operations Supervisor, with the approval of the
Public Works Director, shall supervise the collection, removal, disposition
and processing and sale of all refuse of bulky items, yard waste, and
recyclables.



   (B)   The Public Works Director, with the approval of the Town
Manager, may prepare and publish rules for the effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail, neglect or refuse to comply with these rules and regulations.



   (C)   The Town Manager and Public Works Director shall have all
authority to vary the level of refuse collection service for experimental
purposes and on a temporary basis at the direction of the Town Council.
Service elements that may be altered include, but are not limited to, the
frequency of collection, container type and allowable volume per customer per
pickup.



   (D)   No owner or occupant of a residential premise shall prohibit
or prevent weekly solid waste collection services, including recyclables
collection, at the premises.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.03  COLLECTION ROUTES, SCHEDULES AND PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS.



    (A)   The Public Works Director shall establish collection routes
and schedules and may alter these routes and schedules from time to time. A
copy of the current routes and schedules shall be kept on file in Town Hall
and in the office of the Public Works Director.



   (B)   The Town Council may establish and revise from time to time a
policy relating to the number of times per week the town will collect solid
wastes from various classifications of premises and the maximum number of
solid waste receptacles that the town will service on any one premise.



   (C)   Normal refuse collection service will consist of one
collection per week of refuse, prepared in accordance with this chapter and
placed in one or more 96-gallon roll out carts or glass recycling containers



   (D)   96-gallon roll out carts and 21-gallon glass recycling
containers, and no other containers, for refuse and recycling, shall be set
out for collection only upon those days designated for the premises involved
in the schedule provided for in this chapter.



   (E)   Where the curbside collection is available, containers shall
be placed by the street within 10 feet of the curb line or where the rollout
is



   (F)   Rollout carts and glass recycling containers for refuse shall
be removed from the street or alley by 7:00 p.m. on the day of collection. 
The Town of Wilkesboro reserves the right to charge a fee for noncompliance
with this requirement as noted in the current schedule of fees. Section 51.99
of this chapter, entitled Penalties and Remedies may also be referenced.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.04  CONTAINER, STORAGE AND COLLECTION PRACTICES.



    (A)   Each residential customer will be provided with a 96-gallon
roll out cart by the town. Implementation will be done according to a
schedule prepared by the Public Works Director, recommended by the Town
Manager and approved by the Town Council.



   (B)   The Public Works Director may exempt customers from using the
96-gallon roll out carts if requiring use causes a hardship related to a
topographic site restriction or another similar type of hardship. 
Exemptions will be made on a case by case basis at the discretion of the
Public Works Director and may be changed or amended at any time.



   (C)   Customers using the rollout cart may not fill the cart in a
manner that the cart lid will not close tightly over the cart body or so full
that the mechanical lifters mounted on refuse packers or sanitation workers
cannot lift the cart.  If the customer cannot comply with this requirement
another rollout cart will be provided for them. The monthly fees will be
assessed at the rate in the current schedule of fees at the time the cart is
provided.



   (D)   Each 96-gallon rollout carts used in the residential garbage
collection program are the property of the town and the town provides general
maintenance for them at no cost to the resident. A replacement fee will be
charged for rollout carts that are damaged, defaced or removed from the
premises by the resident.  The fee will be assessed according to the current
schedule of fees. 



   (E)   Trash and recycle rollout carts shall be used for the disposal
of residential and approved commercial garbage only.



   (F)   Spilled materials or overflow caused by the property owner or
occupant shall be cleaned up immediately after spillage or overflow occurs by
the owner or occupant.



   (G)   Spilled solid waste materials caused by the town collection
crew of the town's authorized collection agent shall be cleaned up
immediately after spillage occurs by the crew.



   (H)   Rollout carts will be collected from the curbside provided
they are easily accessible to collection personnel without having to unlock
or open a door, unlock a gate or similar obstacle, or encounter a vicious
animal. Town collection personnel shall not provide service if required to
ascend or descend multiple steps to obtain access to rollout containers, or
if denied reasonable access by parked vehicles, equipment or other objects.
Additionally, the town waives liability for any property damage incurred
during the collection of improperly placed rollout carts.



   (I)   Garbage placed in rollout carts shall be wrapped, bagged or
enclosed in paper or plastic material. Any liquid waste, such as grease,
shall be sealed in its own separate container before being placed in the
rollout container.  Failure to comply with this rule may result in the
customer being charged as stated in the current schedule of fees for the
cleaning and/or replacement cost of their rollout cart.



   (J)   All potentially dangerous trash items and all waste material
of a hazardous nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, needles, and sharp
pieces of metal, shall be securely wrapped to prevent injury to the
collection crews. It is illegal to place fluorescent tubes in the landfill,
therefore, refuse of this description will not be picked up the public works.



   (K)   Trash of a hollow or bulky nature shall be flattened out or
broken up prior to depositing it in authorized containers.



   (M)   Request for additional rollout containers at the same property
address shall be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Approval of additional
container(s) shall be contingent upon an investigation by the town to
determine whether an actual need exists. Owner or occupant will be charged a
monthly fee for each cart as per the current schedule of fees.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.05  PHYSICALLY DISABLED SERVICE.



    (A)   The Public Works Director may exempt customers from putting
the roll-out cart(s) on the street if requiring placement causes a hardship
related to the customer's age, an infirmity, a topographic site restriction,
or another similar type of hardship. Exemptions will be recorded in writing
and kept in the office of the Public Works Director. All exempt customers
must comply with the requirements of § 51.04.



   (B)   In order to qualify for an exemption, every member of the
household shall be physically disabled as verified by a physician. Based on a
physician's note, the solid waste division will grant physically disabled
status.



   (C)   For physically disabled persons, rollout containers will be
collected from a location mutually agreed upon by the Public Works Director
and resident. The Public Works Director shall have final authority to
determine the most advantageous and safe location during disputed situations.



   (D)   The town reserves the right to verify the need to continue
physically disabled services to residents that have been approved to receive
those services. The town shall also reserve the right to continue or
discontinue service.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.06  CONTROL OF SOLID WASTE.



    (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying
property to cause or allow solid waste to be placed, deposited or to
accumulate on his or her property except in 96-gallon roll-out carts and
glass recycling bins as authorized by this chapter. All solid waste stored
shall be stored so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter on
the property and any spillage or overflow shall be cleaned up and
containerized immediately. Once properly stored, all solid waste that the
town will collect shall be immediately placed in an appropriate location for
removal by the town. All other waste not subject to town collection shall be
immediately removed from the property by the occupant and/or property owner.
Any unauthorized accumulation of litter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance in accordance with § 132.12 of the Town of Wilkesboro, North
Carolina Code of Ordinances and is prohibited.



   (B)   The person in possession of property shall maintain the
property, including sidewalks, grass strips, one half of ally, curbs or
right-of-way up to the edge of the pavement of any public street in a clean
and litter free manner.



   (C)   All commercial establishments shall, particularly with respect
to their loading and unloading areas, store their refuse in bulk containers
(dumpsters) so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and litter in and about the
establishments. Approved methods of containerization include town issued
rollout carts and bulk containers (dumpsters). The establishment shall
immediately clean up spillage and overflow when and as it occurs.



   (D)   Parking lots shall be maintained by the person in possession
in a clean, litter-free manner, with all trash generated therein
containerized and prevented from spreading to adjoining property. It shall be
the responsibility of the person in possession of the parking lot to collect
the refuse and trash deposited on the lot and place this material in
containers.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person undertaking any
construction, renovation or demolition activities to fail to provide on-site
receptacles for containerizing all debris and waste material produced by
those working on site which is capable of being windblown or scattered from
the site. Examples of appropriate receptacles shall include but not be
limited to dump trucks, trailers, bulk containers and containers made of
fencing material. All waste shall be containerized and secured so as to
prevent being windblown by the end of each day, and the site shall be kept in
a reasonably clean condition. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other
debris deposited on any public or private property as a result of the
construction or demolition shall be immediately removed by the contractor.
Construction sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times.



   (F)   Every owner and every occupant of any premises shall maintain
that area of the street right of way between the edge of the traveled road
curb line and the adjacent property line in a reasonably safe condition and
shall remove dangerous plantings, shrubbery, limbs, tall grass and weeds and
other noxious growth from the area of the street right of way.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.07  TOWN SERVED NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS.



    (A)   Approved service to the town served nonresidential/commercial
units shall be at least once a week. Collection shall be limited to two
96-gallon containers per tenant. A second container may be leased from the
town as noted in § 51.04 and according to the current schedule of fees.



   (B)   Until the time that collection practices are amended by the
Town Council, when refuse accumulates at stores, hotels, apartments,
duplexes, triplexes, quadruplexes, condominiums, theaters, office buildings,
schools, clubs, mobile home parks, commercial establishments, industrial
establishments or at any other place in quantities of 192 gallons or less,
the same will be collected by the solid waste division if refuse is placed in
the town approved 96-gallon roll-out carts and meeting the standards set
forth in other sections of the chapter.



   (C)   Where the refuse at any of the indicated establishments
exceeds 192 gallons, exclusive of special collections, the owner shall be
required to contract with a private company providing bulk container/dumpster
refuse service. The Public Works Director or designee will determine the type
of service to be provided. Unless refuse is placed in the 96-gallon container
as outlined in this chapter, the town will not collect it.



   (D)   Designated representatives of the solid waste division shall
have the authority to determine whether any unit is generating more than the
maximum capacity per collection and, if so, those units shall be required to
convert from rollout service to bulk container service with a private
contractor. Bulk containers must be shielded from view in such a way that
complies with the requirements of the Wilkesboro Zoning Ordinance and the
Planning Department must approve the shielding.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.08  BULK CONTAINERS/DUMPSTERS.



   (A)   (1)   The property owner of any apartments, group of
apartments, condominium, mobile home park, or residential structure,
containing 6 or more units shall provide at least one bulk container/dumpster
for the purpose of refuse collection. The Town of Wilkesboro will not provide
curbside service to these units.



      (2)   Institutional and businesses required to have bulk
container/dumpster if they exceed more than two 96-gallon roll-out containers
for refuse.



   (B)   The Public Works Director or designee shall have the authority
to assist in determining the quantity, size, and location of bulk containers
and to determine whether those bulk containers are serviceable. In making
this determination, the Public Works Director and the Business Administrator
shall consider the needs of the occupants of the premises, the welfare of the
occupants and neighbors and the town's need to facilitate collection and
minimize the cost of service.



   (C)   The owner of the premises shall provide at least one or more
bulk containers so that the following criteria relating to capacity are
satisfied:



      (1)   Approximately 100 gallons of storage capacity shall be
provided for each dwelling unit or fraction thereof; and



      (2)   The owner or occupant shall provide the smallest number
of bulk containers capable of satisfying the requirements stated in division
(C)(1) of this section.



      (3)   The containers shall at all times be kept clean, neat,
painted, in a good state of repair and easily accessible to collection
personnel. No bulk containers shall be placed in front of a residence, in
front of the building setback line closest to the street or in a public
right-of-way. Container lids shall be kept closed at all times. All doors and
lid springs will be in working condition. Businesses or occupants leasing the
containers shall be responsible for notifying their service contractor of any
damaged conditions. Cleaning up spilled materials shall be the responsibility
of the property owner or occupant and shall occur immediately after any
spillage or overflow occurs.



      (4)   All containers shall have an all-weather driveway
surface from the public street to the bulk container; access driveway surface
may be paved, but must, at a minimum, be well graded and graveled.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.09  RECYCLABLES.



   (A)   In compliance with North Carolina G.S. § 130A-309.04, and in
recognition of the Town of Wilkesboro's commitment to extend the life of the
Wilkes County Landfill and set a standard of environmental conscientiousness
by which all Wilkesboro residents may follow, the Town of Wilkesboro does
hereby set for itself a goal of 40% reduction in the present solid waste
stream now being landfilled by initiating a mandatory recycling program. The
mandatory program and policy shall consist of commercial and residential
collections implemented in a manner to promote the most cost-effective method
of compliance with local goals and state mandates.



   (B)   (1)   All residential and commercial establishments are
required to participate in the mandatory recycling program. Residential and
commercial establishments participating in the mandatory recycling program
shall endeavor to recycle all newspapers and all inserts that come with the
newspaper, cardboard boxes, pasteboard boxes, cereal boxes and metal cans and
aluminum pans by collapsing and/or breaking down boxes and placing boxes/cans
in a 96-gallon roll-out cart, labeled RECYCLABLES. No wax boxes or
plastic-coated boxes are to be recycled and participants should not place wax
boxes or plastic-coated boxes in recycling containers.



      (2)   All residential and commercial establishments in the
mandatory recycling program shall also endeavor to recycle all glass
containers regardless of color. The following glass items cannot be recycled:
light bulbs, plate glass, glass cookware, mirrors, ceramics, or any glass
that is not a container. Paper labels do not need to be removed. All bottle
caps and lids must be removed. Glass recyclables must be placed in a
separate, 21-gallon, recyclables bin marked GLASS RECYCLABLES.



      (3)   All residential and commercial establishments in the
mandatory recycling program shall also endeavor to recycle all #1 and #2
plastic containers. This includes plastic bottles and milk jugs. The
following items are not recyclable: plastic wrap and hard plastics other than
types 1 and 2. Procedure to recycle plastic: rinse out bottles and jugs,
remove the lids, and place in the recycling container. Lids that are left on
recyclable containers present a hazard to our town employees during the
compacting process. For the most up-to-date recyclables, please refer to
www.wilkesboronc.org



      (4)   The Town of Wilkesboro will collect recyclable materials
from residential and approved commercial establishments on a schedule to be
determined by the Public Works Director and the Town Manager for the Town of
Wilkesboro.



   (C)   The following regulations shall govern all persons who utilize
the town's recyclables collection program:



      (1)   Recycling bins are to be used for recyclable items only.



      (2)   All recyclables, except yard waste, shall be placed in a
town-authorized receptacle bin.  Additional 21-gallon bins can be purchased
by citizens if needed according to the current schedule of fees.



      (3)   Curbside recyclables collection service will be provided
on a day designated by the Public Works Director or designee for curbside
collection service. The recyclables rollout cart and glass container shall be
placed at curbside separate from other items. Any material not placed inside
of the appropriate receptacle shall not be picked up by the town.



      (4)   It shall be unlawful to place the recyclables bin at
curbside for collection prior to 7:00 p.m. the evening before the approved
collection date and to fail to remove the container by 7:00 p.m. on the day
of collection.



   (D)   The purchase of a 21-gallon glass recycling container is made
at the Town of Wilkesboro at the Town Hall for in an amount as set out in the
current town schedule of fees and for participation in the mandatory
recycling program as authorized by the Town of Wilkesboro as set forth herein.



(Ord. passed 7-16-1991; Am. Ord. passed 9-1-1992; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed
9-10-2018)   Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.10  OWNERSHIP OF MATERIALS.



   Recyclable materials and yard waste which are properly placed by an
owner or occupant of a property at curbside for collection are deemed to be
abandoned by those person(s) and become the property of the town or its
authorized agent.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.11  SCAVENGING; PRIVATE COLLECTION.



    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to scavenge, sort,
pick through or remove refuse, trash, yard wastes or recyclables stored or
set out for collection, or for any person other than the town or its
contractors to collect recyclables in the town where those materials have
been prepared and set out for collection by the town in accordance with this
chapter.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.12  UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION PROHIBITED.



    It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the town to
collect, pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any solid waste
including recyclables and yard waste.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.13  REMOVAL FROM UNIMPROVED PREMISES.



    Refuse shall not be removed from an unimproved property, except when
refuse meets the conditions set forth in this chapter, such as creating a
health and safety hazard, and then not in excess quantities and only when the
property owner can be identified. All applicable fees apply in accordance
with this chapter.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.14  ILLEGAL DUMPING.



    (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, discard, throw,
drop or deposit, or cause to be placed, discarded, thrown, dropped or
deposited any solid waste on:



      (1)   Any public street, sidewalk or alley within the town or
on any property owned or operated by the town or any other public property
except in properly designated receptacles;



      (2)   Any property not owned by a person without the written
consent of the owner, occupant or lessee thereof; or



      (3)   In any stream or body of water.



   (B)   When litter is thrown from a vehicle, the driver will be held
responsible, regardless of who throws the litter. In accordance with G.S. §
14-399, the police have full enforcement power over this section. 



   (C)   This section shall not prohibit the dumping or placing of fill
on private or public property without the owner's permission of clean sand,
dirt, broken concrete, broken pavement, and natural land debris,
uncontaminated by other materials or other material deemed suitable by the
Public Works Director and that would not create a nuisance or health hazard.
The Town of Wilkesboro shall deem the consent of the Town Manager permission
for all town-owned property.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.15  BURNING GARBAGE AND YARD WASTE.



    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or set fire to garbage for
the purpose of disposal, and garbage shall be disposed of only as authorized
by this chapter.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.16  DUMPING BY NONRESIDENTS.



    (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring construction
debris, business trash, garbage, household refuse, household trash,
industrial waste, litter, refuse, solid waste, yard waste or any other kind
of trash or rubbish into the Town of Wilkesboro from a point outside the town
for the purpose of materials to become subject to pick up by the Town of
Wilkesboro.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit the
use of his or her receptacles or any other portion of his or her property by
any other person for the disposal of any construction debris, business trash,
garbage, hazardous refuse, household trash, industrial waste, litter, refuse,
solid waste, yard waste or any other kind of trash or rubbish brought in to
the Town of Wilkesboro from a point outside the town for the purpose of
disposing of materials to become subject to pick up by the town.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.17  CONTAINERS REQUIRED TO REDUCE LITTER.



    (A)   Whenever the Public Works Director determines that solid
wastes are commonly or routinely deposited by the customers, employees,
licensees or invitees of the premises onto the parking areas or other open
spaces of the premises or adjacent properties or streets, the Public Works
Director may require that the person in possession of the premises provides a
refuse containers on the premises. In locations specified by the Public Works
Director to be necessary to minimize the litter problem to the extent
reasonably possible and practicable under circumstances. This section is
specifically intended to apply, but shall not be limited, to those
establishments commonly known as fast food restaurants, strip shopping
centers, and convenience stores.



   (B)   The presumptions established by this section are that to
satisfy the standard set forth in division (A) above. There shall be 1 refuse
receptacle for every 20 parking spaces or fraction thereof, with a minimum of
2 receptacles per parking lot. This is required for businesses
establishments. However, this is only a presumptive standard to guide the
discretion of the Public Works Director, and the Director may find in any
case that more or fewer receptacles are necessary to satisfy the standard set
forth in division (A) above.



   (C)   Whenever premises served by bulk containers (dumpsters) are
required under division (A) above, other refuse receptacles for the use of
employees must be located on the premises for the use of employees,
customers, licensees or invitees. Whenever other refuse receptacles are
furnished voluntarily, the person in possession of the premises shall collect
or make arrangements for a private contractor to collect the solid waste
deposited in refuse receptacles and place the solid waste in bulk containers
serviced by the private contractor.



   (D)   No person on the parking area or other open spaces of any
premises may place, discard, throw, drop or deposit, or cause to be placed,
thrown, dropped or deposited any solid wastes on premises except in properly
designated receptacles. This shall be considered littering and will be
enforced by G.S. § 14-399.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.18  DUMPING OF BUILDING AND DEMOLITION MATERIALS.



    It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate a disposal site for the
burial of material resulting from building, construction, renovation or
demolition. Provided, however, this section shall not prohibit dumping or
depositing clean fill material as set forth in § 51.14.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.19  TRANSPORTATION OF LOOSE MATERIALS AND WASTES.



    (A)   No person may transport or cause to be transported any solid
waste on the public streets of the town unless the solid wastes are secured
so as not to escape from the transporting vehicle. In addition, any garbage
so transported shall be carried in closed containers that prevent the escape
of noxious odors or liquids.



   (B)   No person may transport or cause to be transported on the
public street of the town any loose, solid or liquid materials capable of
being easily blown, dropped, scattered or otherwise deposited on the streets
or adjacent areas unless materials are properly covered, secured and
contained to prevent escape from the transporting vehicle. This division
shall not apply to the transportation of poultry or livestock or silage or
other grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock as stated in G.S. §
14.399(b).



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any refuse collector to haul refuse
over the streets of the town unless he or she uses a watertight vehicle
provided with a tight cover and so operates it as to prevent offensive odors
escaping therefrom and refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.20  SPECIAL COLLECTION; YARD WASTE AND BULK ITEMS.



   (A)   Yard waste.



      (1)   Yard waste collection shall be provided only to
single-family and special residential units served by the town. Yard waste
collection shall not be provided to commercial cut limbs.



      (2)   There may be occasions when the amount of yard waste in
a designated area exceeds processing capacity. When this occurs, the yard
waste will be picked up at the earliest convenience or next scheduled pickup,
whichever is sooner according to the availability of manpower and equipment.
Yard waste shall be separated from curbside trash and shall not be placed
together to constitute a single, separate collection in order for the town to
carry out its other collection program. Collection forces shall collect an
amount of yard waste that is customarily and reasonably associated with the
residential unit(s) served so long as it is properly prepared or
containerized and in compliance with these regulations.



      (3)   Yard waste, such as grass trimmings, twigs, hedge
trimmings, plant trimmings, hay, straw, pine straw and pine cones, shall be
collected at curbside provided that they are placed in neat piles.



      (4)   Loose leaves shall be piled loosely adjacent to and
behind the curb or in front of a ditch (not in street, gutter or roadside
ditch) for collection by special vacuum equipment. Loose piles of leaves will
not be collected unless they are free of trash, such as broken glass, rocks,
twigs, cans or other debris that might damage collection equipment. During
the seasons when the leaves most commonly fall, the specialized leaf
collection equipment will collect leaf refuse on a residential basis. During
the fall collection period, no appoints for leaf collection can be made.
During the fall the town crews start the collection at one end of town and
collect throughout town until the whole town is collected. At which point,
the route begins again. Refer to § 51.20(I) for penalties. 



      (5)   All tree trimmings and limbs or portions thereof will be
collected when the trimmings and limbs are cut from the stump or body of the
tree and placed at the edge of the lot adjoining the street or alley. They
must be cut in lengths not to exceed 6 feet and not be over 3 inches in
diameter and shall not exceed the measurements hereinabove specified of 6
feet in length or 3 inches in diameter and shall be placed on the edge of the
lot with the larger ends placed in the same direction and neatly piled
substantially perpendicular to the curb. It will be considered excessive
collection if the collection of limbs shall require more than 1 load with a
truck or more than 1 hour with the chipper, extra loads or extra chipping
will be performed at the rate set in the current schedule of fees, which will
be invoiced by the Billing Department Town Hall according to the current
schedule of fees. Town collection forces or its authorized agent will not
collect tree stumps.



      (6)   The Town of Wilkesboro does not allow bagged yard waste
of any kind.



      (7)   No materials, such as trees, shrubbery or underbrush
resulting from land being cleared or building materials occurring from a
construction.



      (8)   No commercially cut limbs or debris will be accepted
curbside. No commercially cut limbs shall be placed for collection by the
town but materials shall be disposed of by the contractor, builder or owner.
In the event that the contractor or builder fails to remove material, the
removal thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property.



         (a)   If property is within the town limits, a
contractor may haul their yard waste to the town compost site and disposed of
for free.



         (b)   When excess compost/mulch is available, citizens
will be allowed to pick up compost/mulch at the compost site. Citizens must
provide their own vehicle for collection of compost/mulch.



      (9)   The solid waste division may decline to collect any yard
waste that is not prepared or placed for collection in accordance with these
regulations or exceeds the maximum amount.  Damage to equipment due to
improper preparation of material will result in a separate fine as determined
by the schedule of fees. 



   (B)   Curbside bulk item collection.



      (1)   (a)   Residential and approved businesses that are
paying for solid waste on their monthly utility bill are eligible for bulk
item collection by the Town of Wilkesboro.



         (b)   Residents are allowed one free bulk item pick-up
per year. Additional bulk item pick-ups will be performed for a fee. Fees are
assessed on the current schedule of fees. Business bulk item pick-up will be
assessed on a case-by-case basis as per the Public Works Director.



      (2)   Residents shall notify the Public Works Department of
bulk items to be collected by the Town of Wilkesboro. Per notification, a
truck will be delivered and, at the discretion of the Public Works Director,
loaded by the resident. Each resident must complete and sign a Town of
Wilkesboro Truck Policy Statement. Charges for collection will be invoiced by
the Billing Department of Town Hall.



      (3)   The town will collect and dispose of the following
properly prepared items on a scheduled basis based on request for services
from the town's regular residential customers:



         (a)   Bulky items, such as discarded furniture and
appliances not practical to containerize and appliances (white goods) will be
picked up. The town will collect normal household discarded furniture and
appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, carpets, box springs and similar
items. The cost for bulk item disposal will be indicated in the current
schedule of fees.



         (b)   Items not collected by the town include, but are
not limited to furnaces, central air conditioning units, roofing materials,
tires, hazardous materials, lead acid batteries (such as vehicle or equipment
batteries), or similar items. These items require special handling that local
governments are not equipped to perform.



         (c)   Bulk items from a regular residential customer
that became the property of a landlord will be removed by the town as a part
of the bulk collection procedure detailed above with any fees incurred
becoming the responsibility of the landlord.



      (4)   Special service collection for bulky items and/or scrap
materials shall only be provided to single-family and special residential
units. This service is not available for:



         (a)   Appliance and equipment changes that are related
to the operation of a business or leasing of a property. Those
business-related activities are the responsibility of the rental agent and/or
owner of the property;



         (b)   Items from businesses operated from a residential
unit;



         (c)   Items that are the consequence of a fire at a
business or residential structure. The Public Works Director shall have the
authority to provide special services collection when, as a result of a fire,
there is only a single bulky item or what would otherwise be a normal
collection amount as opposed to clearing the premises of burned or scrap
material items; or



         (d)   Oxygen tanks and other medical equipment; propane
tanks; large oil tanks used for household purposes; parts of campers, boats,
camper shells, trailers; automotive parts, including but not limited to:
motors, doors, tires, fenders, car or seats from residentially used premises
and the like.



      (5)   The Public Works Director shall have the authority to
determine whether bulky items or scrap material are subject to town
collection and shall have the discretion to determine whether a request for
service is consistent with the eligibility standards as described above.
Special collection service requirements are as follows:



         (a)   Bulky item or scrap materials shall not be
collected if it is too large to be placed on the solid waste service's
division collection vehicle.



         (b)   Any appliance accepted for collection must be
empty of its contents.



         (c)   Large furniture items shall be dismantled prior to
collection so that a reasonable person can expect 2 individuals to easily
load them onto or off of the special collection vehicle. The only exception
to this policy is for pianos, which do not have to be dismantled for
collection.



         (d)   Gasoline must be removed from all lawn mowers
prior to collection.



         (e)   Tires must be removed from all bicycles prior to
collection.



         (f)   All glass in windows, doors, mirrors and other
items with large expanses of glass must have the glass taped with an X mark
so that it will not shatter in the collection process.



         (g)   Any bulky item or scrap material collected shall
be of the weight or size that a person would reasonably expect 2 individuals
to easily pick each item up for disposal.



      (6)   The Public Works Director shall have the authority to
require items to be prepared for ease of collection and to ensure the safety
of the employees performing the collection task. An item not prepared
properly may be refused for collection at the Public Works Director's
discretion.



      (7)   It shall be unlawful to place trash refuse out for
collection along with a scheduled bulk item pickup.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.21  SOLID WASTE NOT TO BE COLLECTED BY TOWN.



    (A)   The town will not collect the following types of solid
wastes, and no person may place any of the following in any container or
receptacle intended for collection by the town:



      (1)   All hazardous refuse and industrial waste shall be
stored in suitable leak-proof containers sufficient to ensure that no refuse
or waste leaks or spills onto any public or private property. Customer will
be held responsible for any leaks, spills, or damage caused by improperly
sealed containers. It shall be the responsibility of the person in possession
of the premises where hazardous refuse or industrial waste is generated to
see that it is disposed of properly;



      (2)   The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from
homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have occurred shall be
performed under the supervision and direction of the County Health Department;



      (3)   Building materials shall be removed by the owner of the
property or by the contractor. No new certificate of compliance or occupancy
shall be issued until the owner or contractor has removed the material. The
town may pick up small amounts not associated with repairs, alterations,
construction, and demolition;



      (4)   Human and animal tissues or waste from operation,
autopsy or obstetrical procedures or any other material of similar nature;



      (5)   A material of any nature, including ashes, that contains
any hot or live coals or fire;



      (6)   No person may dispose of or discard any hypodermic
syringes, needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections
in the waste stream of the town before first breaking, disassembling,
destroying or otherwise rendering the instrument or device inoperable and
incapable of reuse and without further safeguarding the disposal thereof by
placing in either a milk jug, coffee can with a lid or similar containers.
Medical or other biohazard materials shall be removed and disposed of under
the supervision and direction of the County Health Department.



   (B)   (1)   The following materials will not continue to be
collected by town personnel along with other garbage and refuse routinely
collected by the Town of Wilkesboro through the town's sanitation service:



      (2)   Wax or plastic coated, or otherwise contaminated
corrugated sheets and boxes which will not be accepted by any recycling
agency.



(Ord. passed 6-7-1993; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.22  ACCUMULATION OF SOLID WASTES PROHIBITED.



    (A)   No person may cause, suffer or permit refuse to accumulate or
remain on premises under their control except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The remaining divisions of this section are not
intended to limit the generality of the foregoing.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the general contractor to
see that all construction and demolition contractors keep the site in a
reasonable clean and litter-free condition as possible for a construction or
demolition site. All loose debris, paper, building material waste, yard
waste, scrap building materials and other trash produced by those working on
the site shall be containerized or disposed of in any other reasonable manner
by the contractor. Construction materials or other debris deposited on any
public or private property as a result of construction or demolition shall be
immediately removed by the contractor. The burning of refuse is prohibited in
the Town of Wilkesboro.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 51.23  DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS.



    No person, firm, corporation or organization shall deposit in, paste
on or attach to any motor vehicle or public property any handbills,
advertisements, cards, circulars, leaflets, folders, banners, letters or
pamphlets or cause that material to be deposited in, pasted on or attached to
any motor vehicle or property without the consent of the owner of the vehicle
or property, with exception to utility bill distributed from the Town of
Wilkesboro. This is in accordance with G.S. § 14-399(k).



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)   Penalty, see §
51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.



    (A)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
also subject the offender to a civil penalty of $50. If a person fails to pay
this civil penalty within 10 days after being cited for a violation, the town
may seek to recover the penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of
debt.



   (C)   A second offense at the same location shall warrant a civil
penalty of $75.



   (D)   A third offense at the same location shall warrant a civil
penalty of $100.



   (E)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter through the
appropriate equitable action. The Public Works Director or designee shall
have authority to issue notices of violation and/or civil citations to any
person if there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has violated
any of the provisions of this chapter. A code enforcement designee may seek
enforcement through § 132.12 of the Code of Ordinances.



   (F)   Any notice of violation or citation shall be delivered
personally to the violator or shall be sent by registered or certified mail
to the last known address of the violator.



   (G)   Each day that a violation continues after the offender has
been notified of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.



   (H)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or
combination of the foregoing remedies.



(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2018-13, passed 9-10-2018)



Statutory reference:



   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175



CHAPTER 52:  ELECTRICITY



Section



   52.01   Definitions



   52.02   Ratification of existing permits



   52.03   Tax; levy and period for which tax is due



   52.04   Report and payment of tax; refunds



   52.05   Penalties and remedies



   52.06   Administration; confidentiality of records



   52.07   Ordinance as cumulative



   52.08   Service upon electric power companies



§ 52.01  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   REVENUE ACT.  G.S. Subchapter I of Chapter 105.



   SECRETARY OF REVENUE.  The SECRETARY OF REVENUE of the State of North
Carolina.



   STATE FRANCHISE TAX.  The franchise or privilege tax imposed on an
electric power company engaged in the business of furnishing electricity,
electric lights, current or power as provided in G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3
entitled Franchise Tax.



   STATE FRANCHISE TAX ACT.  G.S. Article 3 of Chapter 105, being G.S.
Chapter 105, Article 3.



   TAXPAYER(S).  Any electric power company liable for the taxes imposed
by this chapter.



   TAX COLLECTOR.  The department of the town government or the official
agency of the state designated by law and authorized by law to administer the
collection of the tax herein levied.



   TOWN.  The Town of Wilkesboro.



   TOWN FRANCHISE TAX.  The franchise enacted by this chapter.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the definitions
of words, terms and phrases as set forth and/or applied in G.S. Article 3,
Chapter 105 are hereby adopted by reference and made a part hereof. Reference
to any provision or provisions in the General Statutes shall include the same
as may be from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or
superceded.



(Ord. passed 6-3-2002)



§ 52.02  RATIFICATION OF EXISTING PERMITS.



   All valid and subsisting permits to do business issued by the Secretary
of Revenue pursuant to the Revenue Act, being G.S. §§ 105-1 et seq., are
for the purposes this chapter, hereby ratified, confirmed and adopted in lieu
of any requirement for an additional town permit for the same purpose.



(Ord. passed 6-3-2002)



§ 52.03  TAX; LEVY AND PERIOD FOR WHICH TAX IS DUE.



   (A)   A franchise tax is hereby levied and imposed for the period(s)
designated in § 52.03 of this chapter upon the electric power companies
engaged in the business of furnishing electricity, electric lights, current
or power within the corporate limits of the town. The tax shall be 3.09% of
the companies’ taxable gross receipts from the business of furnishing
electricity, electric lights, current or power within the corporate limits of
the town. It is intended that taxable gross receipts hereunder shall be the
same as those taxable under the State Franchise Tax Act, being G.S. Chapter
105, Article 3.



   (B)   When a distribution to the town as required under the State
Franchise Tax Act, being G.S. Chapter 105, Article 3, shall not be made, the
Town Franchise Tax shall be levied for the periods herein described. A period
for which the tax shall be due shall begin on the first day of the first
calendar month following the month during which a distribution under the
State Franchise Tax Act was due, but not made, to the town and shall continue
from month to month until the time as a distribution as required under the
State Franchise Tax Act shall be made. The town shall notify taxpayers within
a reasonable time after a required distribution is or is not made by the
Secretary of Revenue.



(Ord. passed 6-3-2002)



§ 52.04  REPORT AND PAYMENT OF TAX; REFUNDS.



   (A)   The tax shall be paid to the Tax Collector at the time and in
the form and manner provided for the payment of sales and use taxes pursuant
to and in accordance with G.S. § 105-164.16 as the same applies to a
taxpayer who is consistently liable for more than $100 but less than $10,000
a month. As applicable to sales and use taxes, a taxpayer must file a return
and pay the taxes due on a monthly basis. The tax shall be due and payable
when a return is required to be filed.



   (B)   Upon the resumption of distributions by the Secretary of
Revenue as required under the State Franchise Tax Act, being G.S. Chapter
105, Article 3, a refund may be due to a taxpayer as specified in this
section. A refund in the amount indicated herein below shall be due to a
taxpayer within 30 days after presentation to the town by the taxpayer and
allocable to the calendar quarter for which the most recent distribution was
made. The amount of a refund shall equal the portion of the percentage
distribution amount designated by the Secretary of Revenue.



(Ord. passed 6-3-2002)



§ 52.05  PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.



   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to the
State Franchise Tax Act as contained in G.S. Article 9, Subchapter 1, Chapter
105, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized to be levied
and collected under this chapter, to the extent that the same are not
inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The governing body of the town may
exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in collecting the
State Franchise Tax.



(Ord. passed 6-3-2002)



§ 52.06  ADMINISTRATION; CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.



   (A)   In addition to the provisions herein and to the extent that
the same are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, the levy
and collection of taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the
same manner as the State Franchise Tax Act as contained in G.S. Article 9,
Subchapter 1, Chapter 105.



   (B)   The confidential and privileged nature of the records and
files concerning the administration of the Town Franchise Tax is
legislatively recognized and declared, and to protect the same the provision
of G.S. Chapter 105 are adopted by reference and made fully effective and
applicable to administration of the tax levied herein as if set forth in full.



(Ord. passed 6-3-2002)



§ 52.07  ORDINANCE AS CUMULATIVE.



   The provisions hereof shall be cumulative, and in addition to any and
all other taxing provisions of town ordinances.



(Ord. passed 6-3-2002)



§ 52.08  SERVICE UPON ELECTRIC POWER COMPANIES.



   The town shall serve a copy of this chapter upon registered agent for
any electric power companies affected hereby.



(Ord. passed 6-3-2002)



CHAPTER 53: SEWERS



Section



   53.01   Purpose and policy



   53.02   Definitions and abbreviations



   53.03   General requirements



   53.04   Fees



   53.05   Wastewater discharge permit application and issuance



   53.06   Reporting requirements



   53.07   Compliance and monitoring



   53.08   Confidential information



   53.09   Enforcement



   53.10   Annual publication of significant noncompliance



   53.11   Adjudicatory hearings



   53.12   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations



§ 53.01  PURPOSE AND POLICY.



   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the Town
of Wilkesboro, hereafter referred to as the Town of Wilkesboro, and enables
the town to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the
Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part 403).



   (A)   The objectives of this chapter are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the
operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater
discharges into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the
system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the state or otherwise be
incompatible with the system;



      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater
and sludges from the municipal system;



      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected
by sewage, sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as
protecting the general public;



      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and



      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES
or non-discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and
any other federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is
subject.



   (B)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and
indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the
issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of
general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and
enforcement activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.



   (C)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal
wastewater system, as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. The
town shall designate an administrator of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works
or POTW and pretreatment program hereafter referred to as the POTW Director.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to
or imposed upon the POTW Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to
other town personnel.



   (D)   By discharging wastewater into the town wastewater system,
industrial users located outside the town limits agree to comply with the
terms and conditions established in this chapter, as well as any permits,
enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.02  DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.



   (A)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
hereinafter designated:



      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.



      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Division of Water Quality
of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources or his
designee.



      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.



         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation,
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:



            1.   The president, secretary, or a vice-president
of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the
corporation, or



            2.   The manager of 1 or more manufacturing,
production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter
1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.



         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole
proprietorship, an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or
the proprietor, respectively.



         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or
local government facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee.



         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (a) - (c)
of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the
authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or
position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the
discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental
mailers for the company and the written authorization is submitted to the
town.



         (e)   If the designation of an authorized representative
is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of this chapter must be submitted to POTW
Director prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized
representative.



      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for 5 days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g. mg/l).



      BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of
a user to the POTW.



      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.



      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards or Pretreatment Standard.



      CONTROL AUTHORITY. Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW
organization's Pretreatment Program approval has not been withdrawn.



      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.



      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
1-time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period
of time not to exceed 15 minutes.



      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, including but
not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.



      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or the
introduction from any nondomestic source regulated under Sections 307(b),
(c), or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding
tank waste discharged into the system).



      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person which is a source of indirect
discharge.



      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW
collection system, treatment processes, operations, or its sludge process,
use, or disposal, which causes or contributes to a violation of any
requirement of the POTWs NPDES, collection system, or non-discharge permit or
prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with specified
applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The term
includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with Section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA)(42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more
stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the
method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.



      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.



      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears
in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.



      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in § 53.03(A) of this chapter and are developed
under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5.



      NEW SOURCE.



         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation
from which there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such
source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307(c), provided that:



            1.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located;



            2.   The building, structure, facility, or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or



            3.   The production or wastewater generating
processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are
substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of
activity as the existing source, should be considered.



         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source
is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or
installation meeting the criteria of divisions (a)2. or 3. above but
otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production
equipment.



         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a
new source has commenced if the owner or operator has:



            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a
continuous on-site construction program:



               a.   Any placement, assembly, or
installation of facilities or equipment



               b.    Significant site preparation work
including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures
or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation
of new source facilities or equipment; or



            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation
for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts
which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts
for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this definition.



      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for coding which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.



      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES). A
permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), or
pursuant to G.S. §  143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.



      NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the state pursuant to
G.S. § 143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface
waters of the state or for a wastewater treatment works which does not
discharge directly to surface waters of the state.



      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from
other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation, of the NPDES, collection system, or non-discharge
permit.



      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local government entities.



      PH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter
of solution.



      POLLUTANT. Any "waste" as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color,
metals, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor).



      POTW DIRECTOR. The chief administrative officer of the Control
Authority or his/her delegate.



      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater.



      PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollutants into a POTW collection system and/or treatment
plant. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical, or
biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited
by 40 CFR Part 403.6(d).



      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the
town in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority
as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.



      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.



      PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any prohibited discharge standard,
categorical standard or local limit which applies to an industrial user.



      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM. A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C.
§1292) which is owned in this instance by the town. This definition includes
any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling,
and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
It also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant.For the purposes of this chapter, POTW
shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, or
in any other way, users of the POTW of the town.



      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the user's treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.



      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU. An industrial user that
discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that:



         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or
more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewaters);



         (b)   Contributes process wastewater which makes up 5%
or more of the NPDES or Non-discharge permitted flow limit or 5% or more of
the maximum allowable headworks loading of the POTW treatment plant for any
POTW pollutant of concern; or



         (c)   Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards
under 40 CFR Part 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471; or



         (d)   Is designated as such by the Control Authority on
the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely
affecting the POTW's operation, or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or
requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's effluent
limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or for
contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream standard, or for
limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options.



         (e)   Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an Industrial User meeting
the criteria in divisions (a) and (b) above has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any Pretreatment
Standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW's
effluent limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or
for contributing to violations of the POTW's receiving stream standard, or
for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options, and thus is not a
Significant Industrial User.



         (f)   Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting
the criteria in division (c) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part
403.3(v)(2) and thus is a Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User.



         (g)   Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H
.0907(b), the Control Authority may determine that an Industrial User meeting
the criteria in division (c) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part
403.12(e)(3) and thus is a Middle Tier Significant Industrial User. Sampling
and inspection requirements may be cut in half as per 40 CFR Parts 403.8
(f)(2)(v)(C) and 403.12 (e)(3).



      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or SNC. The status of noncompliance of
a Significant Industrial User when 1 or more of the following criteria are
met. Additionally, any Industrial User which meets the criteria in
subparagraph (b)(35), Parts (C), (D), or (H) shall also be SNC.



         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a 6-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1);



         (b)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations,
defined here as those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for
the same pollutant parameter during a 6-month period equal or exceed the
product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) multiplied by the
applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS. fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all
other pollutants (except flow and pH);



         (c)   Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term
average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the Control
Authority and/or POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with
other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the
health of POTW personnel or the general public);



         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that
has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the
environment or has resulted in either the Control Authority's or the POTW's,
if different from the Control Authority, exercise of its emergency authority
under 40 CFR Part 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(B) and § 53.09(A)(5) of this SUO to halt
or prevent such a discharge;



         (e)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones,
contained in a pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting
construction, completing construction, and attaining final compliance by 90
days or more after the schedule date.



         (f)   Failure to provide reports for compliance
schedule, self-monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports, and periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the
due date.



         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.



         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations that
the Control Authority and/or POTW determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.



      SLUG LOAD or DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or
pass-through, or in any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local
limits, or Industrial User Permit conditions. This can include but is not
limited to spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a
non-routine, episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other
discharges that can cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards
in § 53.03(A) of this chapter.



      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.



      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting there from.



      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.



      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional
and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because
of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does net
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.



      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile
sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether
treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the
POTW.



      WASTEWATER PERMIT. As set forth in § 53.05(B) of this chapter.



      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds,
tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, and all other bodies or
accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public
or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the
state or any portion thereof.



   (B)   This section is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and vice-versa.



   (C)   Shall is mandatory: may is permissive or discretionary.



   (D)   The use of the singular shall be construed to include the
plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context
of its use.



   (E)   The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall
have the designated meanings:



      (1)   BOD. Biochemical Oxygen Demand



      (2)   CFR. Code of Federal Regulations



      (3)   COD. Chemical Oxygen Demand



      (4)   EPA. Environmental Protection Agency



      (5)   GPD. Gallons per day



      (6)   l. Liter



      (7)   mg. Milligrams



      (8)   mg/l. Milligrams per liter



      (9)   N.C.G.S. North Carolina General Statutes



      (10)   NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System



      (11)   O&M. Operation and Maintenance



      (12)   POTW. Publicly-Owned Treatment Works



      (13)   RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act



      (14)   SIC. Standard Industrial Classification



      (15)   SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act



      (16)   TSS. Total Suspended Solids



      (17)   TKN. Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen



      (18)   U.S.C. United States Code.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.03  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which causes interference or pass through. These general
prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a
significant industrial user or subject to any national, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.



   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:



      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in
the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40
CFR 261.21.



      (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case
solids greater than ½" in any dimension.



      (3)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products
of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass
through.



      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than
10.0 or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage to the POTW or equipment.



      (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including
oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) in sufficient quantity, (flow or
concentration) either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to
cause interference with the POTW.



      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F
(66°C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment
plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F
(40°C).



      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic
gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute
worker health and safety problems.



      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the POTW Director in accordance with § 53.03(L).



      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or
other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.



      (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or
any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation
process. In no case, shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW
to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits
issued under Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean
Air Act the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the
sludge management method being used.



      (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be
removed by the treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color
to the treatment plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public
health or secondary recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to
adversely affect the palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the
receiving waters for any designated uses.



      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.



      (13)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial
wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the POTW Director.



      (14)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l unless authorized by the POTW Director.



      (15)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the
pretreatment of industrial wastes.



      (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized
by the POTW Director in a wastewater discharge permit.



      (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or
other chelating agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere
with the municipal wastewater system.



      (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous
waste according to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as
may be specifically authorized by the POTW Director.



      (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to
violate State Water Quality Standards for toxic substances as described in
15A NCAC 2B .0200.



      (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other
sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.



      (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.



      (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active
agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the
municipal wastewater system.



      (23)   At no time, shall 2 successive readings on an explosion
hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in
the system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower
explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.



   (C)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited
by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they
could be discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains
located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the
industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the system.



   (D)   When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is
contributing to the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such
amounts which may cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or
pass through, the POTW Director shall:



      (1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the
contribution on the POTW in accordance with § 53.09(A)



      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with § 53.05 for
such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.



   (E)   National categorical pretreatment standards.



      (1)   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are
required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein.



      (2)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed
only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in
wastewater, the POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass
limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).



      (3)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the
POTW Director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream
formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



      (4)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical
pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.



      (5)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.



      (6)   A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7.



   (F)   Local limits.



      (1)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user
discharging wastewater containing in excess of the following average
discharge limits.



   BOD      300         mg/l



   TSS      300         mg/l



   NH3      25         mg/l



   Arsenic      0.000*      mg/l



   Cadmium   0.04      mg/l



   Chromium   0.4          mg/l(total chromium)



   Copper      0.1         mg/l



   Cyanide      0.000*      mg/l



   Lead      0.1         mg/l



   Mercury      0.000*      mg/l



   Nickel      0.01      mg/l



   Silver      0.000*      mg/l



   Zinc      0.5         mg/l



*no limits, will be monitored only



      (2)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to
develop user-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTWs
maximum allowable headworks loading are not exceeded for particular
pollutants of concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants
of concern shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may
impose mass based limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based
limits.



   (G)   State requirements. State requirements and limitations on
discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this chapter.



   (H)   Right of revision. The town reserves the right to establish
limitations and requirements which are more stringent than those required by
either state or federal regulation if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in § 53.01 or the general and specific prohibitions in
§ 53.03(A), as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4.



   (I)   Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water
or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete
substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, unless
expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the town or state.



   (J)   Pretreatment of wastewater.



      (1)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits
issued under § 53.05(B) and shall achieve compliance with all National
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set
out in § 53.03(A) within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the
state, or the POTW Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be
approved by the POTW Director before construction of the facility. The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from
the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of this chapter. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation
shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director prior to the user's
initiation of the changes.



      (2)   Additional pretreatment measures.



         (a)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may
require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate
that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate
and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from
industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to
protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.



         (b)   The POTW Director may require any person
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at
their expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for
flow equalization.



         (c)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be
provided when, in the opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for
the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and
oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the POTW Director and shall be so located to be easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned,
and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense.



         (d)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable
substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible
gas detection meter.



   (K)   Accidental discharge/slug control plans.



      (1)   The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each
significant industrial user needs a plan or other action to control and
prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges as defined in § 53.02. All
SIUs must be evaluated within 1 year of being designated an SIU. The POTW
Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement
such a plan or other specific action. Alternatively, the POTW Director may
develop such a plan for any user.



      (2)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of
any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load. Also see § 53.06(E) and (F).



      (3)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address,
at a minimum, the following:



         (a)   Description of discharge practices, including
non-routine batch discharges;



         (b)   Description of stored chemicals;



         (c)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW
Director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by § 53.06(F); and



         (d)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any
accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures
for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.



   (L)   Hauled wastewater.



      (1)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only
at locations designated by the POTW Director, and at such times as are
established by the POTW Director. Such waste shall not violate § 53.03 or
any other requirements established by the town. The POTW Director may require
septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.



      (2)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial
waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require
generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
The POTW Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste.
The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements
of this chapter.



      (3)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at
locations designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without
prior consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of
each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW
Director may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis
of any load prior to discharge.



      (4)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking
form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and
address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification,
names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of
waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.04  FEES.



   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the
recovery of costs from users of the wastewater disposal system of the town
for the implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and
fees by the POTW Director and approved by the Town Board. A copy of these
charges and fees will be made available from the POTW Director.



   (B)   User charges. A user charge shall be levied on all users
including, but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental
entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the
POTW.



      (1)   The user charge shall reflect, at least, the cost of
debt service, operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.



      (2)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on
volume of flow.



      (3)   The Manager of the town shall review annually the sewage
contributions of users, the total costs of debt service, operation and
maintenance of the POTW and will make recommendations to the Council or Board
serving the town for adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as
necessary.



      (4)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable
to the users shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the
volume of flow of the users.



   (C)   Surcharges. The amount of the surcharges will be based upon
the volume of flow and the character and concentration of the constituents of
the wastewater.



   (D)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:



      (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of
meter readings maintained by the town; or



      (2)   If required by the town or at the individual
discharger's option, other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual
volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be
accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be installed in
accordance with plans approved by the town. The metering system shall be
installed and maintained at the user's expense according to arrangements that
may be made with the town.



      (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her water
supply from sources other than the town, the user shall install and maintain
at his or her own expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the
town.



   (E)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the
wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the town. Samples shall be collected in such a
manner as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed
using procedures set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.



   (F)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his/her duly
appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.



   (G)   (1)   Pretreatment program administration charges.



      (2)   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the town may
include charges and fees for:



         (a)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating
the Pretreatment Program;



         (b)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance
procedures;



         (c)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental
and/or slug load discharge procedures and construction plans and
specifications;



         (d)   Permitting;



         (e)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry
out the requirements of the Pretreatment Program.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.05  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful for any person to
connect or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of
the town.



      (1)   When requested by the POTW Director, a user must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30
days of the request.



      (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information.



   (B)   Wastewater permits. All significant industrial users shall
obtain a significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of
discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the
POTW Director to be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant
industrial user permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW
Director's determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant
industrial user criteria may at the discretion of the POTW Director be
required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for non-significant
industrial users.



      (1)   Significant industrial user determination. All persons
proposing to discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the
volume or characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater
shall request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user
determination. If the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed
discharge fits the significant industrial user criteria he will require that
a significant industrial user permit application be filed.



      (2)   Significant industrial user permit application. Users
required to obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and
file with the town, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW
Director, and accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in
the schedule of charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply
for a significant industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of
the POTW Director's determination in § 53.05(B)(1) above. The application
shall include at a minimum:



         (a)   Name of industrial user;



         (b)   Address (and location if different from address)
of industrial user;



         (c)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s)
or expected classification and industrial user category;



         (d)   Wastewater flow;



         (e)   Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants
contained in the discharge;



         (f)   Major products manufactured or services supplied;



         (g)   Description of existing on-site pretreatment
facilities and practices;



         (h)   Locations of discharge points;



         (i)   Raw materials used or stored at the site;



         (j)   Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user;



         (k)   Number of employees;



         (l)   Operation and production schedules; and



         (m)   Description of current and projected waste
reduction activities in accordance with G.S. § 143-215.1(g);



      (3)   In support of the application, the user shall submit, in
units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:



         (a)   Analytical data on wastewater constituents and
characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in § 53.03, any
of the priority pollutants (Section 307(a) of the Act) which the applicant
knows or suspects are present in the discharge as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory, and any other pollutant of concern to the POTW;
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained in
40 CFR, Part 136, as amended and as required in §§ 53.06(J) and 53.06(K);



         (b)   Time and duration of the indirect discharge;



         (c)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow
rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;



         (d)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing
plans and details to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections,
direction of flow and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation;



         (e)   Description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be
accidentally or intentionally discharged;



         (f)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any town, state, or federal
pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards;



         (g)   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which
the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in
this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions apply to this
schedule:



            (i)   The schedule shall contain progress
increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No
increment in the schedule shall exceed 9 months.



            (ii)   No later than 14 days following each date
in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a
progress report to the POTW Director including, at a minimum, whether or not
it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than 9 months elapse between such progress
reports to the POTW Director.



         (h)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production;



         (i)   Type and amount of raw materials processed
(average and maximum per day);



         (j)   If subject to a categorical standard, a baseline
monitoring report in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H
.0908(a), as outlined in § 53.06(A).



         (k)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW
Director to be necessary to evaluate the permit application.



      (4)   Application signatories and certification. All
wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by
the current authorized representative of the user on file with the control
authority and/or municipality as defined in § 53.02 and contain the
following certification statement:



   "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who
manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations."



      (5)   Application review and evaluation. The POTW Director
will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional
information.



         (a)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept
applications for the town and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff
for review and evaluation.



         (b)   Within 30 days of receipt the POTW Director shall
acknowledge and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall
return the application to the applicant with a statement of what additional
information is required.



      (6)   Tentative determination and draft permit.



         (a)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the
application and an on-site inspection of the significant industrial user,
including any pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation
and tentative determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user
permit.



         (b)   If the staff’s tentative determination in
division (B)(6)(a) above is to issue the permit, the following additional
determinations shall be made in writing:



            (i)   Proposed discharge limitations for those
pollutants proposed to be limited;



            (ii)   A proposed schedule of compliance,
including interim dates and requirements, for meeting the proposed
limitations; and



            (iii)   A brief description of any other proposed
special conditions which will have significant impact upon the discharge
described in the application.



         (c)   The staff shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to in divisions (B)(6)(a) and (B)(6)(b) above and the general permit
conditions of the town into a significant industrial user permit.



      (7)   Permit supporting documentation.  The Control Authority
staff shall prepare the following documents for all significant industrial
user permits.



         (a)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit
information for all Significant Industrial Users, including but not limited
to permit limits, permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of
total permitted flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable
loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the
Division. The AT shall be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as
permits are modified where the permitted limits or other AT information is
revised.



         (b)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment
limitations, including the following:



            (i)    Documentation of categorical determination,
including documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical
pretreatment standards; and



            (ii)    Documentation of the rationale of any
parameters for which monitoring has been waived under 40 CFR Part
403.12(e)(2).



      (8)   Final action on significant industrial user permit
applications.



         (a)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all
applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.



         (b)   The POTW Director is authorized to:



            (i)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing such conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of
this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1;



            (ii)   Issue a significant industrial user permit
containing time schedules for achieving compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements;



            (iii)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60
days notice and pursuant to § 53.05(B)(10);



            (iv)   Revoke any permit pursuant to section §
53.09(A) of this chapter;



            (v)   Suspend a permit pursuant to § 53.09(A);



            (vi)   Deny a permit application when in the
opinion of the POTW Director such discharge may cause or contribute to
pass-through or interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where
necessary to effectuate the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.



      (9)   Permit modification.



         (a)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the
same procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed
below. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance.



            (i)   Changes in the ownership of the discharge
when no other change in the permit is indicated;



            (ii)   A single modification of any compliance
schedule not in excess of 4 months; and



            (iii)    Modification of compliance schedules
(construction schedules) in permits for new sources where the new source will
not begin to discharge until control facilities are operational.



         (b)   Within 9 months of the promulgation of a national
categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users
subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such
standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit as required by §
53.05(B)(4), the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within
180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard.



         (c)   A request for a modification by the permittee
shall constitute a waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. §
143-215.1(b) for modifications.



      (10)   Permit conditions.



         (a)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to
grant a permit with such conditions attached as he believes necessary to
achieve the purpose of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits
shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:



            (i)   A statement of duration (in  no case more
than 5 years);



            (ii)   A statement of non-transferability;



            (iii)   Applicable effluent limits based on
categorical standards or local limits or both;



            (iv)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting,
notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall
include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location,
sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state and local law;



            (v)    Requirements for notifying the POTW in the
event of an accidental discharge or slug load as defined in § 53.02;



            (vi)    Requirements to implement a plan or other
controls for prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined
in  § 53.02, if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for the
user; and



            (vii)    Requirements for immediately notifying
the POTW of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills
and other accidental discharges, or slug load as defined in § 53.02. Also
see § 53.06(E) - (F);



            (viii)   A statement of applicable civil and/or
criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements
and any applicable compliance schedule.



         (b)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not
limited to the following:



            (i)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.



            (ii)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and/or
monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of
identified wastewater pollutants or properties.



            (iii)    Requirements for the installation of
pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices,
etc., designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of
pollutants into the treatment works.



            (iv)    Development and implementation of waste
minimalization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the
municipal wastewater system.



            (v)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges
and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the system.



            (vi)    Requirements for installation and
maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment.



            (vii)    Specifications for monitoring programs
which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types,
and standards for tests, and reporting schedules.



            (viii)    Requirements for immediate reporting of
any instance of noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting
within 30 days where self-monitoring indicates a violation(s).



            (ix)   Compliance schedules for meeting
pretreatment standards and requirements.



            (x)    Requirements for submission of periodic
self-monitoring or special notification reports.



            (xi)    Requirements for maintaining and retaining
plans and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified in section
§ 53.06(M) and affording the POTW Director, or his/her representatives,
access thereto.



            (xii)    Requirements for prior notification and
approval by the POTW Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutant
or of any significant change in the volume or character of the wastewater
prior to introduction in the system.



            (xiii)    Requirements for the prior notification
and approval by the POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or
pretreatment process used by the permittee.



            (xiv)   A statement that compliance with the
permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those
which become effective during the terms of the permit.



            (xv)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by
the POTW Director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and
federal laws, rules, and regulations.



      (11)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a
specified time period, not to exceed 5 years. A permit may be issued for a
period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.



      (12)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall
not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation.



      (13)   Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall
apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in
accordance with section § 53.05 a minimum of 180 days prior to the
expiration of the existing permit.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.06  REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Baseline monitoring reports.



      (1)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a
categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (2) below. At least 90 days prior to
commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become
categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the
information listed in division (2) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants to be discharged.



      (2)   Users described above shall submit the information set
forth below:



         (a)   Identifying information. The name and address of
the facility, including the name of the operator and owner.



         (b)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental
control permits held by or for the facility.



         (c)   Description of operations. A brief description of
the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial
classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This
description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points
of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.



         (d)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured
average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from
regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of
the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).



         (e)   Measurement of pollutants.



               (i)   The categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.



               (ii)   The results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
standard or by the POTW Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge
from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term
average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The
sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in § 53.06(J).



               (iii)    Sampling must be performed in
accordance with procedures set out in § 53.06(J) and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and
(g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4).



         (f)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
current authorized representative as defined in § 53.02 and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being
met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and
maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.



         (g)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment
and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set
out in § 53.06(B).



         (h)   Signature and certification. All baseline
monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
53.05(B)(4).



   (B)   Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by § 53.06(A)(2)(g):



      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but
are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);



      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed 9 months;



      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW
Director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule; and



      (4)   In no event shall more than 9 months elapse between such
progress reports to the POTW Director.



   (C)   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard,
deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the POTW Director a report containing the information described in §
53.06(A)(2)(d) - (f). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production
rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production
(or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with § 53.05(B).



   (D)   Periodic compliance reports.



      (1)   Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in
lieu of requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis.



      (2)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency
determined by the POTW Director but in no case less than once every 6 months,
submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable
flows for the reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in
accordance with procedures set out in § 53.06(J) and (K). All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
53.05(B).



      (3)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this
section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW
Director, using the procedures prescribed in § 53.06(J) and (K), the results
of this monitoring shall be included in the report.



   (E)   Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the POTW
Director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or
system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at
least 30 days before the change. The permittee shall not begin the changes
until receiving written approval from the control authority and/or
municipality. See § 53.06(F)(4) for other reporting requirements.



      (1)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under
§ 53.05(B).



      (2)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge
permit under § 53.05(B) or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under section § 53.05(B) in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.



      (3)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes
include, but are not limited to, flow or pollutant increases of 20% or
greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants; increases
or decreases to production; increases in discharge of previously reported
pollutants;  discharge of pollutants not previously reported to the control
authority and/or municipality; new or changed product lines; new or changed
manufacturing processes and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers.



   (F)   Reports of potential problems.



      (1)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited
to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 53.02, that
may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately
telephone and notify the POTW Director of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.



      (2)   Within 5 days following such discharge, the user shall,
unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may
be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.



      (3)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the
event of a discharge described in § 53.06(F)(1). Employers shall ensure that
all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.



      (4)   All SlUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of
any changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other
accidental discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a
non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in § 53.02.



   (G)   Reports from unpermitted users.



      (1)   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge
permit shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW
Director may require.



      (2)   All users classified as Non-Significant Categorical
Industrial Users under § 53.02 shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW
Director as the POTW Director may require. At a minimum, this shall include
the Annual Certification of continuing to meet the Non-Significant
Categorical Industrial User criteria as required under 40 CFR 403.12(q).



   (H)   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.



      (1)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation,
the user must notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days
after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director, the
user is not required to resample:



         (a)   If the POTW Director monitors at the user's
facility at least once a month; or



         (b)   If the POTW Director samples between the user's
initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling.



      (2)   If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and
analysis in lieu of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user
indicates a violation, the POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain
the results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violations, unless 1 of the following occurs:



         (a)   The POTW Director monitors at the user's facility
at least once a month; or



         (b)   The POTW Director samples the user between their
initial sampling and when the POTW receives the results of this initial
sampling; or



         (c)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform
sampling and submit the results to the POTW Director within the 30-day
deadline of the POTW becoming aware of the violation.



   (I)   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. The town
prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without notification to and
approval by the POTW Director.



      (1)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director,
and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the
hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste
number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user
discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the
POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the
extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the
wastestream. discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the
mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place
no later than 180 days before the discharge commences. The user shall not
begin the discharge until receiving written approval from the town. Any
notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each
hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed conditions must
be submitted under § 53.06(E). The notification requirement in this section
does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of § 53.06(A),
(C) and (D).



      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division
(I)(1) above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15
kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes
as specific in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15
kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any
quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and
261.33(e), requires a 1-time notification. Subsequent months during which the
user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification.



      (3)   In the case of any new regulation under Section 3001 of
RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
90 days of the effective date of such regulations.



      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section,
the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to
be economically practical.



      (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any
substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.



   (J)   Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including
sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or report shall be performed by a laboratory certified by the
state to perform the wastewater analyses in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard or unless otherwise performed in accordance
with procedures approved by EPA or town. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA and
the town.



   (K)   Grab and composite sample collection.



      (1)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the
user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and low measurement facilities shall
be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.



      (2)   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other
pollutants as required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of
grabs necessary to be representative of the user's discharge. See 40 CFR
403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and
90-Day Compliance Reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may allow
collection of multiple grabs during a 24-hour period which are composited
prior to analysis as allowed under 40 CFR 136.



      (3)   Composite samples. All wastewater composite samples
shall be collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour
that there is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be
collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques, unless
time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the
POTW Director. When authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the
samples must be representative and the decision to allow the alternative
sampling must be documented.



   (L)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted
on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid,
into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date
of receipt of the report shall govern.



   (M)   Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of
this chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities
required by this chapter and any additional records of information obtained
pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time
of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates
analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least 3 years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the POTW Director.



   (N)   Electronic reporting. The POTW Director may develop procedures
for receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this
chapter. Such procedures shall comply with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures
shall be enforceable under § 53.09.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.07  COMPLIANCE MONITORING.



   (A)   (1)   Monitoring facilities. The town requires the user to
provide and operate at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow
inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or
internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be
situated on the user's premises, but the town may, when such a location would
be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.



      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling
manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the
user.



      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the town and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the town.



   (B)   Inspection and sampling. The town will inspect the facilities
of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and
all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises
where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the town, approval
authority and EPA or their representative ready access at all reasonable
times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying or in the performance of any of their duties.
The town, approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling,
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user
has security measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the town, approval authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities. Denial of the town, approval authority's, or EPA's
access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.



   (C)   Search warrants. If the town, approval authority, or EPA has
been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part
thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may
be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or
sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the town
designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the town, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a
search warrant from the court having jurisdiction within the town.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.08  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data provided by an industrial user to the
POTW Director pursuant to this chapter identifying the nature and frequency
of a discharge, shall be available to the public without restriction. All
other information which may be so submitted by an industrial user to the POTW
Director in connection with any required reports shall also be available to
the public unless the industrial user or other interested person specifically
identifies the information as confidential upon submission and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the disclosure of
such information or a particular part hereof to the general public would
divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets.



   (B)   Information provided by an industrial user to the POTW
Director that is determined to be entitled to confidential treatment shall be
made available upon written request to the Division of Water Quality or any
state agency for uses related to the Pretreatment Program, the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, collection system
permit, stormwater permit, and/or non-discharge permit, and for uses related
to judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing
the report.



   (C)   Information and data received by the division or other state
agency under § 53.08(B)  above shall be subject to the processes set forth
in G.S. § 143-215.3C.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.09  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Administrative remedies.



      (1)   Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW Director
finds that any industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter,
wastewater permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained
therein or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve
upon such a person a written notice stating the nature of the violation.
Within 30 days from the date of this notice, an explanation for the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the
town by the user. Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation.



      (2)   Consent orders. The POTW Director is hereby empowered to
enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with the person responsible for
the noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by
the discharger to correct the noncompliance within a time period also
specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect
as an administrative order issued pursuant to § 53.09(A)(4).



      (3)   Show cause hearing.



         (a)   The POTW Director may order any industrial user
who causes or is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this
chapter or is in noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the
POTW Director determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request
that the user show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered
or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least 10 days before the
hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.



         (b)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence
presented at the hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement
action is appropriate.



         (c)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a
prerequisite to the assessment of a civil penalty under § 53.09(B) nor is
any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this section subject
to an administrative appeal under § 53.11.



      (4)   Administrative orders. When the POTW Director finds that
an industrial user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits
or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW
Director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and
direct those persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:



         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;



         (b)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time
schedule set forth in the order;



         (c)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in
the event of a continuing or threatened violation;



         (d)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated
within a specified time period.



      (5)   Emergency suspensions.



         (a)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary
in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may
present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or the environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to
violate any condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit.



         (b)   Any user notified of a suspension of the
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately
stop or eliminate the contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of
the notice of suspension to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or
the user's waste discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure to
comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take
such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment
to any individual. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit
and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the
noncompliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date
of the above-described hearing.



      (6)   Termination of permit or permission to discharge. The
POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or permission to
discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following
reasons:



         (a)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge;



         (b)   Failure to report significant changes in
operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics;



         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's
premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or



         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit or
permission to discharge, conditions of this chapter, or any applicable state
and federal regulations.



      (7)   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause under § 53.09(A)  why the proposed action should
not be taken.



   (B)   (1)   Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have failed
to comply with any provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder, may assessed a civil penalty of up
to $25,000 per day per violation.



      (2)   Penalties between $10,000 and $25,000 per day per
violation may be assessed against a violator only if:



         (a)   For any class of violation, only if a civil
penalty has been imposed against the violator within the 5 years preceding
the violation; or



         (b)   In the case of failure to file, submit, or make
available, as the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by
this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was intentional and a
civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within the 5 years
preceding the violation.



      (3)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW
Director shall consider the following:



         (a)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural
resources, to the public health, or to public or private property resulting
from the violation;



         (b)   The duration and gravity of the violation;



         (c)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or
quality or on air quality;



         (d)   The cost of rectifying the damage;



         (e)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;



         (f)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or
intentionally;



         (g)   The prior record of the violator in complying or
failing to comply with the pretreatment program;



         (h)   The costs of enforcement to the town.



         (i)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance
with this section shall be as provided in § 53.11.



   (C)   Other available remedies. Remedies, in addition to those
previously mentioned in this chapter, and are available to the POTW Director
who may use any single 1 or combination against a noncompliant user.
Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to:



      (1)   Criminal violations. The District Attorney for the
applicable Judicial District may, at the request of the town, prosecute
noncompliant users who violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B.



(Note: Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any
term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail
to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. §
143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or
requirement of a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to
apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. §
143-2l5.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a
pretreatment permit issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply
for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in
imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (G.S. § 143-215.6B(h)),
and to falsify information required under G.S. Article 21, Chapter 143 (G.S.
§ 143-215.6B(i))).



      (2)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the
POTW Director, through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and
permanent injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question.



      (3)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is
in violation of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued
hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated ability to comply.



      (4)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or
effluent limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued
hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or
abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the appropriate chapter of the
town governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the POTW for any costs
incurred in removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.



   (D)   Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this
chapter are not exclusive. The POTW Director may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of
pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the town’s
enforcement response plan. However, the POTW Director may take other action
against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director
is empowered to take more than 1 enforcement action against any noncompliant
user.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.10  ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.



   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of those industrial users which
were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable
noncompliance, in 15A NCAC 2H .0903(b)(34), with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.11  ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS.



   Judicial review.  An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted
subject to conditions he/she deems unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a
civil penalty under § 53.09(B), or 1 issued an administrative order under §
53.09(A) may seek judicial review of the order or decision by filing a
written request for review by the Superior Count of Wilkes County within 30
days after receipt of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or
decision, but not thereafter, along with a copy to the town. Within 30 days
after receipt of the copy of the petition of judicial review, the Council or
Board serving the town shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or
a certified copy of the official record of their decision.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



§ 53.12  AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Upset.



      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if
the requirements of § 53.12(A)(2) below, are met.



      (2)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous
operating logs, or other relevant evidence that:



         (a)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;



         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a
prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures; and



         (c)   The user has submitted the following information
to the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
5 days):



            (i)   A description of the indirect discharge and
cause of noncompliance;



            (ii)   The period of noncompliance, including
exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue; and



            (iii)   Steps being taken and/or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (3)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.



      (4)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.



      (5)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until
the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided.
This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the
primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.



   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards defense.



      (1)   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an
enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general
prohibitions in § 53.03(A)(1) or the specific prohibitions in §
53.03(B)(2), (3), and (5) - (7) and (9) - (23) if it can prove that it did
not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction
with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference
and that either:



      (2)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and
the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the
pass through or interference; or



      (3)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when
the town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case
of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.



   (C)   Bypass.



      (1)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These
bypasses are not subject to the provision of divisions (2) and (3) of this
section.



      (2)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least 10 days before the
date of the bypass, if possible.



      (3)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall also be provided within 5 days of this time the user becomes aware of
the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written
report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24
hours.



      (4)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:



         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage;



         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or
preventive maintenance; and



         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under
division (C)(2) of this section.



      (5)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass,
after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that
it will meet the 3 conditions listed in division (C)(4) of this section.



(Ord. passed 12-3-2012)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL RULES





         71.   TRAFFIC RULES





         72.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES





         73.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING





         74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES





         75.   PARKING SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70:  GENERAL RULES



Section




General Regulations




   70.01   Definitions



   70.02   Pushcarts; bicycle and animal riders/drivers



   70.03   State license on vehicles



   70.04   Required obedience to police officers



   70.05   Authority of police officers



   70.06   Drivers of publicly owned vehicles



   70.07   Authorized emergency vehicles excepted



   70.08   Compliance with chapter required



   70.09   Display of state license; town license



   70.10   License year; tax not prorated for less than year




Miscellaneous Regulations




   70.25   Equipment; use thereof



   70.26   Conveyance of fish and seafood products



   70.27   Transportation of saw dust and wood shavings



   70.28   Washing vehicles on streets prohibited



   70.29   Vehicle cargo to be loaded so as to prevent noise



   70.30   Persons on motorcycles and bicycles



   70.31   Persons on roller skates and the like



   70.32   Clinging to motor vehicles



   70.33   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle prohibited



   70.34   Entering or mounting vehicle without consent of owner or
driver



   70.35   Loafing in vehicles without permission




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 70.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE.  A vehicle of the Fire Department or
Police Department or an ambulance.



   BLOCK.  A portion of any street located between 2 intersections
adjacent to each other.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to a street when 75% or
more of frontage thereon for a distance of 300 feet or more is occupied by
buildings in use for business.



   CROSSWALK.  That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation of the lateral lines of sidewalks at street intersections. Also,
any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface, whether or not at a street
intersection and, if not at a street intersection, when sign posted so as to
face vehicular traffic from both directions of approach, a warning of the
term stop for pedestrian in crosswalks.



   DRIVER.  Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle. 



   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral
curb lines or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of 2 or more highways
which join one another at an angle whether or not 1 highway crosses the other.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except those
operated on fixed rails.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNAL.  Any official traffic-control device, whether
manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.



   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.  All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of
the governing body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic or parking.



   PARK.  The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.



   PEDESTRIAN.  Any person afoot.



   POLICE OFFICER.  Every officer of the Police Department or any person
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.  Every road or driveway not open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.



   PUBLIC CONVEYANCE.  Any vehicle other than a taxicab or railroad train
for transporting for fare.



   RAILROAD.  A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
street cars, operated upon stationary rails.



   RAILROAD TRAIN.  A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except street cars.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to a street not
comprising a business district, where 75% or more of the frontage on the
street for a distance of 300 feet or more is mainly occupied by dwellings or
by dwellings and buildings in use for business.



   RIGHT OF WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.



   ROADWAY.  The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel.



   SAFETY ZONE.  The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked
or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a SAFETY ZONE.



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STANDING.  Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.



   STOP.  When required, means complete cessation of movement.



   STOP or STOPPING.  When prohibited, means any STOPPING of a vehicle
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the direction of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  The entire width between property lines of every
way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public, as a matter of right, for purpose of vehicular traffic.



   TRAFFIC.  Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars
and other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for
purposes of travel.



   VEHICLE.  Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



(Prior Code, § 11-2)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate traffic, see G.S. §§ 20-169, 160A-300



   Motor vehicles and traffic, see G.S. Chapter 20



   State law definitions, see G.S. Chapter 20



§ 70.02  PUSHCARTS; BICYCLE AND ANIMAL RIDERS/DRIVERS.



   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal
upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any
vehicle, except those provisions thereof which, by their very nature, can
have no application.



(Prior Code, § 11-3)



§ 70.03  STATE LICENSE ON VEHICLES.



   Each person operating an automobile or motor vehicle upon the streets
of the town shall have a current license plate of some state properly
displayed on the automobile or motor vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 11-4)



§ 70.04  REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.



   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
or direction given by a police officer.



(Prior Code, § 11-5)



§ 70.05  AUTHORITY OF POLICE OFFICERS.



   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to
expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic
as conditions may require, notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-6)



§ 70.06  DRIVERS OF PUBLICLY OWNED VEHICLES.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by, or used in the service of, the United States government, this
state, county or town, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any
of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise may be permitted
therein, or by state statute.



(Prior Code, § 11-7)



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see G.S. § 20-168



§ 70.07  AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation,
parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles
as defined in this section, except as follows: A driver when operating a
vehicle in any emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer
may:



      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this
chapter;



      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal, or stop sign, but
only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;



      (3)   Exceed the speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property; and



      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or
turning in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life
or property.



   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the
driver of any vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard
of the safety of others.



(Prior Code, § 11-8)



§ 70.08  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited or fail to
do any act required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-9)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.09  DISPLAY OF STATE LICENSE; TOWN LICENSE.



   Each person operating a motor vehicle upon the streets of the town
shall have properly displayed on the vehicle a current license plate of the
state in which the vehicle is registered; and if that vehicle is subject by
this chapter to the annual vehicle license tax of this town, it shall also
have properly displayed thereon a town license plate or sticker of the design
as the town may prescribe.



(Prior Code, § 11-11)



§ 70.10  LICENSE YEAR; TAX NOT PRORATED FOR LESS THAN YEAR.



   The annual license tax imposed by this chapter shall be for each
calendar year beginning with January first and terminating at midnight on the
next succeeding December 31; and the license tax imposed by this subchapter
shall not be prorated for any period less than 1 whole year.



(Prior Code, § 11-12)  (Ord. passed 12-30-1980)




MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS




§ 70.25  EQUIPMENT; USE THEREOF.



   (A)   All vehicles and bicycles using the streets and public places
of the town shall be provided with a lawful horn or warning device which
produces a sound sufficiently loud to serve as an adequate warning of danger,
and it shall be unlawful for any person operating any vehicle or bicycle to
make, or cause to be made, any unnecessary noise with any horn or other
warning device, or to use it except as a warning of danger.



(Prior Code, § 11-81)



   (B)   All vehicles and bicycles operated on the streets of the town,
between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise, shall be provided
with at least 2 lighted lamps, showing white lights visible for a reasonable
distance in the direction towards which the vehicle is going, and 1 red light
attached to the rear of the vehicle, visible for a reasonable distance in the
rear thereof; provided, that 2 wheeled vehicles and bicycles need have but 1
front lamp and bicycles may have a red reflector at the rear in lieu of a
rear lamp.



(Prior Code, § 11-82)



   (C)   No person operating, or causing to be operated, a
self-propelled vehicle shall permit the pipes, muffler, exhaust or other
device to emit sounds of exhaust, and the muffler cut-out on all vehicles
shall be in good repair and shall be closed while on any of the streets or
public places of the town.



(Prior Code, § 11-83)



   (D)   No tire on a vehicle moved on a street shall have on its
periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat or spike or any other protuberance
of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the
traction surface of the tire, except that it shall be permissible to use farm
machinery with tires having protuberances which will not injure the street
and except, also, that it shall be permissible to use tire chains of
reasonable proportions upon any vehicle when required for safety because of
snow, ice or other conditions tending to cause a vehicle to slide or skid. It
shall be permissible to use upon any vehicle for increased safety, regular
and snow tires with studs which project beyond the tread of the traction
surface of the tire not more than 1/16 of an inch when compressed; provided,
that the Town Manager may, in his or her discretion, issue special permits
authorizing the operation upon a town-maintained street of traction engines
or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugation upon the
periphery of movable tracks, or farm tractors of other farm machinery.



(Prior Code, § 11-84) 



Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Section is merely declaratory of state law, see G.S. § 160A-303



   Size, weight, construction and equipment of vehicles, see G.S. §§
20-115 et seq.



§ 70.26  CONVEYANCE OF FISH AND SEAFOOD PRODUCTS.



   It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to
drive over any street or to park on any street or in any filling station or
parking lot within the town any vehicle containing wet-packed or mechanically
refrigerated fish or other seafood products unless the vehicle is so
constructed or equipped as to prevent leakage or seepage of water therefrom
and unless the same is free from noxious odors.



(Prior Code, § 11-85)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.27  TRANSPORTATION OF SAW DUST AND WOOD SHAVINGS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any loose sawdust or
wood shavings on any vehicle upon the streets of the town without first
securely covering the loose sawdust or wood shavings with a tarpaulin or
other like covering, so that the sawdust or wood shavings will not blow or
fall upon the streets of the town.



(Prior Code, § 11-86)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.28  WASHING VEHICLES ON STREETS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to wash or clean any vehicle upon
the streets within the town.



(Prior Code, § 11-87)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.29  VEHICLE CARGO TO BE LOADED SO AS TO PREVENT NOISE.



   Persons loading cargo on vehicles shall take all necessary precautions
to prevent noise from arising from the cargo while in motion; and no person
shall drive a vehicle on the streets of the town while its cargo is producing
noise which could have been prevented by proper precautions taken during the
course of loading.



(Prior Code, § 11-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.30  PERSONS ON MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES.



   (A)   The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street,
shall not carry any person upon the handlebar, frame or tank of that vehicle,
nor shall any person so ride upon that vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street
without having his or her hands upon the handlebars, nor shall any person
ride a bicycle or motorcycle upon any sidewalk or walkway within the town.



(Prior Code, § 11-89)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.31  PERSONS ON ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE.



   No person upon roller skates, or riding in, or by means of, any
coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, unless it
be while crossing a street at a crosswalk or intersection, except upon
streets set aside as play streets.



(Prior Code, § 11-90)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.32  CLINGING TO MOTOR VEHICLES.



   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller
skates or any toy vehicle, shall not attach the same, or him or herself, to
any public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.



(Prior Code, § 11-91)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.33  BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall board or alight from any public conveyance or other
vehicle while that conveyance or vehicle is in motion.



(Prior Code, § 11-92)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.34  ENTERING OR MOUNTING VEHICLE WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER OR DRIVER.



   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.



(Prior Code, § 11-93)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 70.35  LOAFING IN VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to load or sit in or upon the
vehicle of any other person while that vehicle shall be standing at any place
within the town, unless that person has permission from the owner or person
in charge thereof to do so.



(Prior Code, § 11-94)



CHAPTER 71:  TRAFFIC RULES



Section



   71.01   Procedure upon approach of emergency vehicle



   71.02   When U-turns prohibited without “No U-turn” signs



   71.03   Driving through funeral processions



   71.04   Limitation on backing movements



   71.05   Emerging from alley or private driveway



   71.06   Driving upon sidewalks



   71.07   Moving vehicles from parked positions



   71.08   Driving within marked lanes



   71.09   Driving over fire hose



   71.10   Speed restrictions



§ 71.01  PROCEDURE UPON APPROACH OF EMERGENCY VEHICLE.



   Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving audible
signal, the driver of any other vehicle shall immediately drive to a position
as near as possible, to and parallel with the right-hand edge of the roadway,
clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain stopped until the
authorized emergency vehicle shall have passed, except as he or she may be
directed otherwise by a police officer; but upon a 1-way street, drivers may
stop at either the left-hand or right-hand edge of the roadway.



(Prior Code, § 11-29)



§ 71.02  WHEN U TURNS PROHIBITED WITHOUT “NO U-TURN” SIGNS.



   No driver of a vehicle shall make a complete U turn at any intersection
controlled by a traffic light or stop sign.



(Prior Code, § 11-30)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.03  DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.



   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except
authorized emergency vehicles when responding to calls.



(Prior Code, § 11-31)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.04  LIMITATION ON BACKING MOVEMENTS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into any intersection or over
a crosswalk, and shall not in any event, or at any place, back a vehicle
unless the movement can be made in safety, and he or she shall have given
ample warning to those who may be behind them by hand and horn or other
signal.



(Prior Code, § 11-32)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.05  EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.



   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building
shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into
the sidewalk areas extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the
roadway he or she shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on
that roadway.



(Prior Code, § 11-33)



Statutory reference:



   Operation of vehicles and rules of the road, see G.S. §§ 20-138.1 to
20-171



§ 71.06  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS.



   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except
at a permanent or temporary driveway.



(Prior Code, § 11-34)



§ 71.07  MOVING VEHICLES FROM PARKED POSITIONS.



   Cars parked shall move out in the direction headed, or if they are
parked at an angle with the curb they shall back out on that angle until they
have cleared the other cars and shall then proceed in the direction they are
most nearly headed in.



(Prior Code, § 11-35)



§ 71.08  DRIVING WITHIN MARKED LANES.



   All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with
lanes for traffic shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.



(Prior Code, § 11-36)



§ 71.09  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.



   No vehicle shall be driven over any hose of the Fire Department when
laid on any street or driveway to be used at any fire, without the consent of
the Fire Department official in command.



(Prior Code, § 11-37)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 71.10  SPEED RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a highway or on any parking
lot, drive, driveway, road, roadway, street or alley upon the grounds and
premises of any public or private hospital, college, university, benevolent
institution, school, orphanage, church or any of the institutions maintained
and supported by the town or by the county or state, or upon the grounds and
premises of any service station, drive-in theater, supermarket, store,
restaurant or office building, or any other business or municipal
establishment, providing parking space for customers, patrons or the public
at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing.



(Prior Code, § 11-38)



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by official traffic-control signs
where in place along the streets, it shall be unlawful to drive a vehicle in
excess of the following speeds:



      (1)   Twenty miles per hour in any business district;



      (2)   Thirty-five miles per hour in any residential district;



      (3)   Forty-five miles per hour in places other than those
named in divisions (A)(1) and (2) above for:



         (a)   All vehicles other than passenger cars, regular
passenger vehicles, pickup trucks of less than 1-ton capacity and school
busses loaded with children; and



         (b)   All vehicles of whatever kind which are engaged in
towing, drawing or pushing another vehicle; provided that this division shall
not apply to vehicles engaged in towing, drawing or pushing trailers with a
gross weight of not more than 3,000 pounds.



      (4)   Fifty-five miles per hour in places other than those
named in divisions (B)(1) and (2) for passenger cars, regular passenger
carrying vehicles and pick-up trucks of less than 1-ton capacity.



(Prior Code, § 11-39)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Similar state law, see G.S. § 20-141, subsec.(a)



   Speed restrictions and authority of town to impose certain speed
limits, see G.S. §§ 20-141, 20-158, 20-169



CHAPTER 72:  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



Section



   72.01   Obedience to official devices; general



   72.02   General placement, change and removal of devices



   72.03   Devices in place on effective date of code



   72.04   Requirement as to signs



   72.05   Traffic-control signal legend



   72.06   Flashing signals



   72.07   Pedestrian-control signals



   72.08   Stop signs; specific duties imposed



   72.09   Yield signs; specific duties imposed



   72.10   Devices governing turning movements; specific duties imposed



   72.11   One-way street signs; specific duties imposed



   72.12   Zones of quiet signs; specific duties imposed



   72.13   Play street signs; specific duties imposed



   72.14   School zone signs; specific duties imposed



   72.15   Crosswalks; specific duties imposed



§ 72.01  OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL DEVICES; GENERAL.



   The driver of any vehicle and any pedestrian shall obey the
instructions of any applicable official traffic-control device placed in
accordance with the provisions of state law, this chapter and other
ordinances of the town, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted by this chapter to the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 11-13)



Statutory reference:



   Applicability of traffic-control devices to pedestrians, see G.S. §
20-172



   Erection of yield signs, see G.S. § 20-158.1



   Required obedience to railroad warning signals, see G.S. § 20-142.1



   Types of traffic-control devices and installation thereof, see G.S. §
20-169



   Unauthorized erection of signs and other offenses, see G.S. §§
136-32, 136-33



§ 72.02  GENERAL PLACEMENT, CHANGE AND REMOVAL OF DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   Traffic-control devices of the town shall be placed,
erected, installed, changed or removed only upon order of the Board of
Commissioners pursuant to action taken by the Board and entered upon its
minutes, and that action shall be by ordinance when so required by law.



      (2)   Unless otherwise provided by the Board of Commissioners
in any instance, the orders of the Board shall be executed under the
direction of the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 11-14)



   (B)   Traffic-control devices of the town within the purview of
divisions (A)(1) and (2) shall include, but shall not be limited to, those
indicating stop and yield intersections; speed restrictions; limited or
prohibited turning movements; 1-way streets; prohibited and restricted
parking areas; truck routes and other restrictions as to vehicle types
permitted to be driven upon the streets; school zones; safety zones; zones of
quiet; play streets; bus stops; taxicab stands; loading zones and business
and residence districts.



(Prior Code, § 11-15)



§ 72.03  DEVICES IN PLACE ON EFFECTIVE DATE OF CODE.



   All traffic-control devices heretofore installed by authority of the
Board of Commissioners and which are in place on the effective date of this
code shall continue to be official until the time as they may be removed by
authority of the Board of Commissioners; and until they are so removed it
shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any instruction or
directive indicated by any official traffic-control device.



(Prior Code, § 11-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.04  REQUIREMENT AS TO SIGNS.



   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does
not state that signs are required, the section shall be effective without
signs being placed to give notice thereof.



(Prior Code, § 11-17)



§ 72.05  TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.



   Whenever traffic is controlled by official traffic-control signals
exhibiting the words “go,”  “caution” or “stop,” or exhibiting
different colored lights successively 1 at a time, the following colors only
shall be used, and words and lights shall indicate as follows:



   (A)   Green alone, or “go.”



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight
through or turn right or left unless a sign at that place prohibits either
turn. But vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to other vehicles
and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time the signal is
exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.



   (B)   Yellow alone, or “caution,” when shown following the green
or “go” signal.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if the stop cannot be
made in safety a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal are thereby advised that
there is insufficient time to cross a roadway, and any pedestrian then
starting to cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles.



   (C)   Red alone, or “stop.”



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before
entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at another point as may
be indicated by a clearly visible line, and shall remain standing until green
or “go” is shown alone.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.



   (D)   Green straight-through arrow (alone).



      (1)   Vehicles facing this signal may proceed straight
through, but shall not turn right or left. Vehicles shall yield the right of
way to other vehicles and to pedestrians legally within the intersection at
the time the signal is exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway within the appropriate marked or unmarked crosswalk unless directed
otherwise by a pedestrian signal.



   (E)   Green turn arrow (alone).



      (1)   Vehicles facing this signal may proceed through the
intersection making only the turn so indicated by the arrow over the
respective lane. Vehicles shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time the signal is
exhibited.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal shall not enter the
roadway unless they can do so safely and without interfering with any
vehicular traffic.



   (F)   Green turn arrow (with steady red).



      (1)   Vehicles facing the signal shall comply with the steady
red, except that vehicles may cautiously enter the intersection to make the
movement indicated by the green turn arrow. Vehicles shall yield the right of
way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully
using the intersection.



      (2)   No pedestrian facing the signal shall enter the roadway
unless he or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic.



(Prior Code, § 11-18)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Board of Commissioners to install, change and remove
traffic-control devices, see G.S. §§ 20-141, 20-158, 20-169, 136-32



§ 72.06  FLASHING SIGNALS.



   Whenever official flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall
require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows:



   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by
rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection, or at a limit line when marked, and
the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.



   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is
illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past the signal only with caution.



(Prior Code, § 11-19)



§ 72.07  PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.



   Whenever official pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words
“walk” or “don't walk” are in place, signals shall indicate as
follows:



   (A)   Walk. Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by
drivers of all vehicles.



   (B)   Don’t walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway
in the direction of the signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his or her crossing on the “walk” signal shall proceed to a
sidewalk or safety zone while the “don't walk” signal is showing.



(Prior Code, § 11-20)



§ 72.08  STOP SIGNS; SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED.



   Every driver of a vehicle on approaching a street intersection where an
official stop sign has been erected shall come to a full stop, clear of the
lines marking the outside of the pedestrian aisle or intersection, and shall
remain at a full stop until a time as the driver can enter the intersection
without interfering with the progress of vehicles or pedestrians approaching
from the driver’s right or left.



(Prior Code, § 11-21)



§ 72.09  YIELD SIGNS; SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED.



   Every driver of a vehicle on approaching a street intersection where an
official yield or yield right of way sign has been erected shall approach the
intersection with caution and shall yield the right of way to any vehicle
approaching on the intersected street.



(Prior Code, § 11-22)



§ 72.10  DEVICES GOVERNING TURNING MOVEMENTS; SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED.



   Whenever official signs are placed, erected or installed indicating
that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the directions of that sign; and when official markers, buttons or
other traffic-control devices are placed within an intersection indicating
the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing, or turning thereat, no
driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of those traffic-control
devices.



(Prior Code, § 11-23)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.11  ONE-WAY STREET SIGNS; SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED.



   Whenever official 1-way street signs with arrows indicating the
direction in which traffic shall move are placed upon any street, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon the street in any direction
other than that indicated by the arrows, except as may reasonably be
necessary to enter or leave a street or to occupy or leave a parking space
thereon and except as may be necessary in case of emergency.



(Prior Code, § 11-24)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.12  ZONES OF QUIET SIGNS; SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED.



   Whenever official signs are placed, erected or installed indicating a
zone of quiet, no person driving a motor vehicle within any quiet zone shall
sound the horn or other warning device of a vehicle, except in an emergency,
nor shall he or she permit any radio or other sound-emitting device in the
vehicle to be heard at a distance beyond the edge of the roadway; and no
person in the vehicle shall make any unnecessary noise.



(Prior Code, § 11-25)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.13  PLAY STREET SIGNS; SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED.



   Whenever official signs are placed, erected or installed indicating any
street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon
that street, or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles having business,
or whose residences are within the closed area; and then any driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon the street or any portion thereof.



(Prior Code, § 11-26)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 72.14  SCHOOL ZONE SIGNS; SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED.



   Whenever official signs are placed, erected or installed indicating any
street or parts thereof as school zones, all drivers of motor vehicles using
those streets or parts thereof shall exercise the greatest care in driving
thereon for the protection of children.



(Prior Code, § 11-27)



§ 72.15  CROSSWALKS; SPECIFIC DUTIES IMPOSED.



   Vehicles approaching a crosswalk shall yield the right of way to any
pedestrian therein and shall take all precautionary action necessary to avoid
collision with any pedestrian; and at any crosswalk which is posted with a
sign of the term “stop for pedestrian in crosswalk” any vehicle
approaching the crosswalk shall be brought to a stop when a pedestrian is in
the crosswalk.



(Prior Code, § 11-28)



CHAPTER 73:  STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING



Section




General Regulations




   73.01   Stopping of vehicles in streets restricted



   73.02   Special limitation as to vehicles with trailers



   73.03   Standing vehicles not to obstruct passage of other vehicles



   73.04   Double parking



   73.05   Where parking prohibited; yellow curbs



   73.06   Parking restricted as sign-posted



   73.07   Parking within 1 block of scene of fire prohibited



   73.08   Parallel parking required



   73.09   Angle parking of vehicles exceeding 17 feet in length



   73.10   Parking backed-up to curb restricted



   73.11   Parking left side to curb in business districts



   73.12   Parking within marked parking spaces required



   73.13   Parking for certain purposes prohibited



   73.14   Parking prohibited in certain places



   73.15   Loading zones



   73.16   Moving of vehicles into prohibited parking spaces



   73.17   Special provisions for physically handicapped war veterans




Metered Parking




   73.30   Definitions



   73.31   Prior established zones, meters and the like



   73.32   Establishment of additional zones, time limitations and the
like



   73.33   Placement and specifications of meters



   73.34   Marking of parking spaces; requirement of vehicles



   73.35   Parallel parking; front of vehicle to be near meter



   73.36   Overtime parking unlawful



   73.37   Tampering and the like with meters prohibited



   73.38   Slugs and the like not to be deposited in meters



   73.39   Purpose of parking meter revenue



 



   73.99   Penalties




GENERAL REGULATIONS




§ 73.01  STOPPING OF VEHICLES IN STREETS RESTRICTED.



   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking
as prescribed in this chapter, unless the stop is made necessary by the
approach of an authorized emergency vehicle, by the approach of a funeral or
other procession or vehicle which is given the right of way by the stopping
of a school bus or a public conveyance, by the lowering of railway gates, by
the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of some other vehicle or a
pedestrian or by some emergency; and in any case covered by these exceptions
vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway, pedestrian aisle,
safety zone, crossing or street intersection, if it can be avoided.



(Prior Code, § 11-40)



Statutory references:



   Authority of town to regulate vehicle parking, see G.S. §§ 20-169,
160A-301



   Parking generally, see G.S. §§ 20-161 to 20-163



   Prima facie rule of evidence for enforcing parking regulations, see
G.S. § 20-162. 1



   Similar state law, see G.S. § 20-141, subset (b)



§ 73.02  SPECIAL LIMITATION AS TO VEHICLES WITH TRAILERS.



   (A)   No vehicle whose overall measurement is more than 22 feet in
length shall park on the public streets of the town for a greater period of
time than 1 hour during the day or night.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a vehicle and trailer,
whether the trailer be detached or not, shall determine the overall length of
the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 11-41)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.03  STANDING VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.



   No vehicles shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere
with the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.



(Prior Code, § 11-42)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.04  DOUBLE PARKING.



   No person shall double park or stop a vehicle next to and alongside any
vehicle parked at the curb so as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.



(Prior Code, § 11-43)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.05  WHERE PARKING PROHIBITED; YELLOW CURBS.



   (A)   When official signs are placed, erected or installed, giving
notice thereof, or the curbing has been painted yellow in lieu of the signs,
no person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets so
sign-posted or painted yellow.



(Prior Code, § 11-44)



   (B)   All signs placed, erected or installed, or the curbing which
has been painted yellow in lieu of signs as of September 6, 1994 shall be
deemed to be in accordance with official authorization of the Town Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro whether or not the minutes of the
Board Meetings of the Town Board of Commissioners indicate authorization for
the placement, erection or installation of signs or the planning of curbs in
lieu of signs.



(Ord. passed 9-6-1994)



§ 73.06  PARKING RESTRICTED AS SIGN-POSTED.



   When official signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice
thereof, no person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets so
sign-posted at any time during which parking is prohibited by signs or for a
greater length of time than is permitted by the signs.



(Prior Code, § 11-45)



§ 73.07  PARKING WITHIN 1 BLOCK OF SCENE OF FIRE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle within 1 block of any fire
occurring within the town during the time when the Fire Department shall be
engaged fighting fire or when the fire truck or other apparatus is going to
answer a call to a fire; and any vehicle so parked shall be removed
immediately upon any alarm of fire being given, from any territory within 1
block of the fire, and shall not be driven and parked within 1 block of the
fire while firefighters are engaged in the work of extinguishing the fire.



   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle within 1 block of any fire at
any time immediately preceding, during or immediately after the fire is being
fought by the Fire Department or members thereof when told to desist from
parking a vehicle by any police officer or Chief of the Fire Department or
other town firefighter.



(Prior Code, § 11-46)



§ 73.08  PARALLEL PARKING REQUIRED.



   Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter, and where the street is
not sign-posted or marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall
park parallel to the curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.



(Prior Code, § 11-47)



§ 73.09  ANGLE PARKING OF VEHICLES EXCEEDING 17 FEET IN LENGTH.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, the length of
which is in excess of 17 feet, over all on any of the streets of the town
where the plan for parking is marked at an angle to the curb; provided, that
this section shall not apply to passenger buses.



(Prior Code, § 11-48)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.10  PARKING BACKED-UP TO CURB RESTRICTED.



   No person shall park a vehicle backed up to curb, except when actually
loading or unloading, and then only at places where parking is not
prohibited. If the vehicle be horse-drawn, the horse or horses shall stand
parallel to the curb and face the direction of the traffic.



(Prior Code, § 11-49)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.11  PARKING LEFT SIDE TO CURB IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS.



   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb in any business
district, except that on 1-way streets vehicles shall stop headed in the
direction of traffic.



(Prior Code, § 11-50)



§ 73.12  PARKING WITHIN MARKED PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.



   On any street which is marked off with official lines indicating the
parking spaces, vehicles shall be parked between the lines.



(Prior Code, § 11-51)



§ 73.13  PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale;



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing a vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;



   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the vehicle; or



   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van, when the towing unit
has been disconnected, or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or
freight from 1 vehicle to another.



(Prior Code, § 11-52)



§ 73.14  PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.



   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, attended or unattended,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device in any of
the following places:



   (A)   On the sidewalk;



   (B)   Within an intersection or in front of a private driveway;



   (C)   On a crosswalk;



   (D)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or other
official traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or roadway;



   (E)   No vehicle shall park on either side of any street approaching
a grade crossing within 50 feet of the closest rail; provided, that where
existing permanent structures are located along the street and closer than 50
feet, parking may be permitted in front of those structures, unless otherwise
prohibited, if the parking does not interfere with the view in either
direction of an approaching locomotive or train;



   (F)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction,
when stopping or standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



   (G)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure;



   (H)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanatorium or any public building, or a fire hydrant or
fire station;



   (I)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked
at the edge or curb of a street;



   (J)   Within 25 feet from the intersection of curb lines, or if
none, then within 15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an
intersection of highways or streets; or



   (K)   Within a traffic lane or upon the traveled portion of a
roadway.



(Prior Code, § 11-53)



§ 73.15  LOADING ZONES.



   (A)   Commercial vehicles may park in designated loading zones for
the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise for a period of time not
exceeding 15 minutes.



   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle in a loading zone for the
purpose of taking orders or buying or selling merchandise of any kind.



(Prior Code, § 11-54)



§ 73.16  MOVING OF VEHICLES INTO PROHIBITED PARKING SPACES.



   No person shall move a vehicle whether his or her own or belonging to
another, into any prohibited area, or sufficiently away from the curb to make
the distance unlawful.



(Prior Code, § 11-55)



§ 73.17  SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED WAR VETERANS.



   (A)   Time limitations with respect to the parking of vehicles shall
not be applicable to the motor vehicles belonging to former members of the
armed forces of the United States who shall be known as physically
incapacitated war veterans.



   (B)   Those vehicles being authorized for disabled veterans under
federal legislation as specially constructed vehicles for physical handicaps
suffered by war veterans as a result of their services to their country in
the time of war; provided:



      (1)   The privilege shall not extend to motor vehicles unless
operated by handicapped veterans, or which do not have placed on the
windshields thereof a certificate of designation signed by the Chief of
Police, or when a veteran does not have in his or her possession a card
issued by the Chief of Police certifying that the veteran meets the
requirements of this section; and



      (2)   The privilege shall not extend to parking in No Parking
or Loading or Unloading zones.



(Prior Code, § 11-56)



Statutory reference:



   Parking near fire hydrant, fire station or private driveway, see G.S.
§ 20-162




METERED PARKING




§ 73.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   OPERATOR.  Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner
thereof or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner.



   STREET. 



      (1)   Any public way, road, highway, STREET, avenue,
boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the town and shall mean the entire width of the right of way between
abutting property lines.



      (2)   The term STREET shall include any place in the town
which is used for metered parking.



   VEHICLE.  Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported upon a highway, except a device which is operated upon
stationary rails or tracks.



(Prior Code, § 11-60)



§ 73.31  PRIOR ESTABLISHED ZONES, METERS AND THE LIKE.



   All parking meter zones established by authority of the Board of
Commissioners, and all parking meters and instructions thereon, parking
spaces and signs relating to metered parking, which were installed or marked
and in place by authority of the Board of Commissioners as of the effective
date of this code, are hereby confirmed and continued in full force and
effect until a time as they may be altered or discontinued by authority of
the Board of Commissioners pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 11-61)



Statutory references:



   Authority of town to provide for metered parking, see G.S. § 160A-301



   Authority of town to provide for the removal of vehicles left upon a
street in violation of an ordinance prohibiting parking, see G.S. § 160A-303



§ 73.32  ESTABLISHMENT OF ADDITIONAL ZONES, TIME LIMITATIONS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish parking
meter zones from time to time hereafter as traffic conditions require, in
streets that are selected by resolution of the Board of Commissioners for the
location of the zones.



   (B)   Within those parking meter zones the Chief of Police shall
cause parking meters to be installed and shall cause parking meter spaces to
be designated as hereinafter provided, and shall fix the time limitations for
legal parking in those zones, and the hours during the day and night when the
parking meters must be used and when the time limitations shall be effective,
in compliance with the provisions of this section; and shall indicate the
time limitations by designating them on the parking meters or by appropriate
signs posted in proximity to meters within the zones.



(Prior Code, § 11-62)



§ 73.33  PLACEMENT AND SPECIFICATIONS OF METERS.



   Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established as
provided in § 73.32 shall be placed upon the curb immediately adjacent to
the individual parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall
be placed or set in a manner as to show or display by a signal that the
parking space adjacent to the meter is or is not legally in use. Each parking
meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time
established by the town and, when operated, shall indicate on or by its dial
and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking, and on expiration of
the period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.



(Prior Code, § 11-63)



§ 73.34  MARKING OF PARKING SPACES; REQUIREMENT OF VEHICLES.



   The Chief of Police shall have lines or markings painted or placed upon
the curb or upon the street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
designating the parking space for which the meter is to be used, and each
vehicle parking adjacent to any parking meter shall park within the lines or
markings so established. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter
to park any vehicle across any line or marking or to park a vehicle in a
position that it shall not be entirely within the area so designated by the
lines or markings.



(Prior Code, § 11-64)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.35  PARALLEL PARKING; FRONT OF VEHICLE TO BE NEAR METER.



   When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in that parking space shall be
parked with the foremost part of the vehicle nearest to the meter.



(Prior Code, § 11-65)



§ 73.36  OVERTIME PARKING UNLAWFUL.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this chapter
for any person to cause, allow or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her
name or operated by him or her to be parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking meter zone as herein described.



(Prior Code, § 11-67)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.37  TAMPERING AND THE LIKE WITH METERS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section
for any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or wilfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 11-68)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.38  SLUGS AND THE LIKE NOT TO BE DEPOSITED IN METERS.



   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section
to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or
metallic substance, or any other substitute for the coins in lieu of the
coins of the United States.



(Prior Code, § 11-69)  Penalty, see § 73.99



§ 73.39  PURPOSE OF PARKING METER REVENUE.



   The specified coin or coins required to be deposited in parking meters
as provided herein are levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper
regulation and control of traffic upon the public streets, and also the cost
of supervision and regulating the parking of vehicles in the parking meter
zones created, and to cover the cost of purchasing, acquiring, installing,
operating, maintaining, supervising, regulating and controlling of the
parking meters described herein.



(Prior Code, § 11-72)



§ 73.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any police officer of the town, upon finding any vehicle
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, if the owner or
operator is not present, may have the vehicle moved from the street and
placed in storage at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 11-58)



   (B)   Any person parking on property of another without his or her
permission shall be considered a trespasser and the owner of the premises may
have the vehicle towed away and the cost thereof shall be a lien on the
vehicle.



(Prior Code, § 11-59)



   (C)   It shall be the duty of any officer of the Town of Wilkesboro
who has issued a parking ticket or unlawful parking of a vehicle in a no
parking zone or for illegal parking, who has not paid the ticket in a
specified time (30 days) in accordance with the orders of the ordinances to
issue a warrant charging a violation of the parking chapter; and have the
person guilty of violations cited to court. This for failure to abide by the
ordinances of the Town of Wilkesboro.



(Ord. passed 6-3-1985)



   (D)   (1)   Any police officer of the town, upon finding any
vehicle parked in violation of this section shall attach thereto, or give to
the owner or operator thereof, a citation stating the nature of the offense,
and the owner or operator of the vehicle shall within 48 hours after receipt
of violation take the citation to Police Headquarters in the Town of
Wilkesboro and pay to the Chief of Police or his or her designated assistant
a penalty as referenced in the town’s schedule of fees for each offense.
Upon failure of the owner or operator of any vehicle parked in violation of
this section to take the citation ticket to the Police Headquarters in the
Town of Wilkesboro and pay the penalty as aforesaid a civil suit shall be
instituted by the town against the owner or operator for the purpose of
enforcing and collecting the civil penalties imposed by this section. The
civil penalty as reference in the town’s schedule of fees shall not be
applicable to parking violations involving a designated parking space for
handicapped persons. In accordance with G.S. § 20-37.6, a parking violation
which occurs in a designated parking space for handicapped persons shall
carry a penalty as reference in the town’s schedule of fees and the amount
of the penalty shall be plainly set forth on the sign designating the parking
space for handicapped persons. In accordance with G.S. § 20-37.6(f)(4)
parking violations which occur in designated parking spaces for handicapped
persons shall be enforced by the town, whether on public or private property,
in the same manner as is used to enforce other parking laws and ordinances by
the Town of Wilkesboro.



      (2)   Any police officer of the town, upon finding any vehicle
parked in violation of G.S. § 20-37.6 shall attach thereto, or give to the
owner or operator thereof a citation stating the nature of the offense, and
the owner or operator of the vehicle shall within 48 hours after receipt of
the violation take the citation to Police Headquarters in the Town of
Wilkesboro and pay to the Chief of Police or his or her designated assistant
the penalty as authorized by this section. Upon failure of the owner or
operator of any vehicle parked in violation of G.S. § 20-37.6 to take the
citation ticket to the Police Headquarters in the Town of Wilkesboro and pay
the penalty as aforesaid a civil suit shall be instituted by the town against
the owner or operator for the purposes of enforcing and collecting the civil
penalties imposed by G.S. § 20-37.6 and by this section.



(Ord. passed 9-6-1994)



CHAPTER 74:  TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Schedule




   I.   Speed limits





   II.   Traffic-control devices





   III.   Trucks restricted




SCHEDULE I.  SPEED LIMITS.



 


Street

 

Location

 

Speed Limit

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Any residential section
 
Except on streets as are a part of the State Highway System
 

25 mph

 

–

 

9-5-1977



Bridge Street
 
From South Street to the southern corporate limit, approximately 0.45 mile
south of West Street
 

35 mph

 

–

 

10-7-1974



Highway 268
 
Beginning at Airport Road, running eastward to Collegiate Drive
 

45 mph

 

–

 

12-3-1984



NC 268
 
From the western corporate limit of Wilkesboro, eastward to a point 0.27 mile
west of SR 1198
 

45 mph

 

3

 

12-3-1984



North Collegiate Drive
 

-

 

20 mph

 

-

 

8-6-12



Oak Hill Drive
 

–

 

15 mph

 

–

 

7-6-1998



South Street
 
From West Street to Woodland Boulevard
 

20 mph

 

2012-3

 

12-3-2012



US 421 Bypass-NC 16
 
From a point 0.25 mile south of SR 1727, northward to a point 0.35 mile north
of SR 1322
 

45 mph

 

4

 

1-4-1988





 



SCHEDULE II.  TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



 


Device

 

Street

 

Side(s)

 

Intersection

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Stop sign
 
Cedar Lane
 
East side
 
Cedar Lane and Laurel Road
 

–

 

11-1-1993



Stop sign
 
Cedar Lane
 
East side
 
Cedar Lane and Holly Circle
 

–

 

11-1-1993



Stop sign
 
Cedar Lane
 
East side
 
Cedar Lane and Dogwood Drive
 

–

 

11-1-1993



Stop sign
 
Cedar Lane
 
West side
 
Cedar Lane and Westwood Lane
 

–

 

11-1-1993



Stop sign
 
Cedar Lane
 
West side
 
Cedar Lane and Laurel Road
 

–

 

11-1-1993



Stop sign
 
Cedar Lane
 
West side
 
Cedar Lane and Holly Circle
 

–

 

11-1-1993



Stop sign
 
Cedar Lane
 
West side
 
Cedar Lane and Dogwood Drive
 

–

 

11-1-1993



Stop sign
 
College Street
 
North side
 
East side of Pine Street and College Street
 

–

 

2-6-1995



Stop sign
 
College Street
 
North side
 
East side of Spruce Street and College Street
 

–

 

2-6-1995



Stop sign
 
College Street
 
South side
 
West side of Pine Street and College Street
 

–

 

2-6-1995



Stop sign
 
College Street
 
South side
 
West side of Spruce Street and College Street
 

–

 

2-6-1995



Stop sign
 
College Street
 
East side
 
Intersection with Spring Street
 

2012-2

 

8-6-2012



Stop sign
 
private drive
 
West side
 
Entering the intersection of College Street and Spring Street
 

2012-2

 

8-6-2012



Stop sign
 
Westwood Lane
 
East side
 
Westwood Lane and Cedar Lane
 

–

 

11-1-1993



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
North Brook Street and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
East side of Cherry Street and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
East side of Pine Street and Woodland Boulevard
 
–
 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
East Cowles Street and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
West side of North Brook Street and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
West side of Cherry Street and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
West side of Pine Street and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
South side of Cowles Street and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 
Woodland Boulevard
 

North side

 
private drive on North side of Woodland Boulevard and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

9-3-1991



Stop sign
 

–

 

–

 
Johnson Street and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

8-7-1995



Speed limit sign
 

–

 

–

 
Along the right-of-way of South Street and Henderson Drive
 

2012-3

 

12-3-2012





 



SCHEDULE III.  TRUCKS RESTRICTED



 


Street

 

Beginning Intersection

 

To the intersection of

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Dogwood Drive
 
Westwood Lane and Old Highway 16 and 18
 
Dogwood Drive and School Street
 

–

 

8-13-1982



Holly Circle
 
Westwood Lane and Old Highway 16 and 18
 
Holly Circle and School Street
 

–

 

8-13-1982



Laurel Road
 
Westwood Lane and Old Highway 16 and 18
 
Laurel Road and School Street
 

–

 

8-13-1982



West Main Street
 
West Main and North Cherry Street
 
West Main and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 

8-13-1982



Westwood Lane
 
Westwood Lane and Old Highway 16 and 18
 
Westwood Lane and School Street
 

–

 

8-13-1982



Woodland Boulevard
 
Woodland Boulevard and West Main Street
 

–

 
–
 

8-13-1982



Woodland Boulevard
 
Woodland Boulevard and Link Street
 
Woodland Boulevard and Curtis Road
 

–

 

8-13-1982





 



CHAPTER 75:  PARKING SCHEDULES



Schedule



   I.   Restricted Parking



I.  RESTRICTED PARKING



 


Street

 

Side

 

Intersection

 

Restriction

 

Ord. No.

 

Date Passed





Corner of West Main and Woodland Boulevard
 

–

 
Eastward to the entrance of the United States Post Office on the south side
of the street
 
Parked no more than 15 minutes
 

–

 

11-6-1978



Wilkesboro Boulevard
 
East side
 
North of the intersection of Jefferson Street to the Yadkin River Bridge
 
No parking unless loading or unloading passengers
 

–

 

12-1-1980



Wilkesboro Avenue or Highway 268 West
 
North side
 
From intersection of North Collegiate Drive extending westward 1,100 feet
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

2-2-1976



Intersection of South Collegiate Drive and West Main Street or Highway 268
 

–

 
Along the south side of the street extending 1,300 feet
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

2-2-1976



South Street
 
North side
 
Beginning at intersection with West Street running westward to Woodland
Boulevard
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

6-4-1979



Highland Street
 

–

 
From Cherry Street westward to Factory Street
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

11-6-1978



SR 2360
 
West side
 
From intersection with N.C. 18-268 extending 200 feet to intersection with SR
2510
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

10-7-1974



SR 2510
 
North side
 
Intersection with SR 2360 to intersection with N.C. 18-268
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

10-7-1974



1834 Winkler Street
 

–

 
Wal-Mart in Wilkesboro, North Carolina 28697
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

5-1-1989



1605 Curtis Bridge Road
 

–

 
Wilkes Mall; all areas within the city limits of the Town of Wilkesboro
 
Unlawful to stop, leave standing or park a motor vehicle when all
establishments at the mall are closed
 

–

 

–




–

 

–

 
Parking lot at east end of Cub Creek Tennis Courts in Cub Creek Park
 
No stopping or parking between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
 

–

 

–



South Bridge Street in Cub Creek Park
 

–

 
Parking lots, including 1 on the west side and 1 on the east side
 
No stopping or parking between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
 

–

 

–



Old Highway # 16
 

–

 
Westwood Park parking lots at Westwood Park
 
No stopping or parking between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
 

–

 

10-3-1988




–

 

–

 
West and East parking lots in the Winkler Fields section of Cub Creek Park
 
No stopping or parking between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.
 

–

 

10-3-1988



Highway 421
 

–

 
Winkler’s Mill Shopping Center, Winkler’s Mill Market Place, Taco Bell
 
No parking
 

–

 

10-3-1988



Highway 421
 

–

 
Winkler’s Mill Shopping Center, Winkler’s Mill Market Place
 
No parking
 

–

 

10-3-1988



Highway 421
 

–

 
Winkler’s Mill Shopping Center, Drug World
 
No parking
 

–

 

10-3-1988



Highway 421
 

–

 
Winkler’s Mill Shopping Center, Fast Track
 
No parking
 

–

 

10-3-1988



Highway 421
 

–

 
Winkler’s Mill Shopping Center, Addison Motel
 
No parking
 

–

 

10-3-1988



Highway 421
 

–

 
All business establishments at Mall Square
 
No parking
 

–

 

2-6-1989



North Bridge Street
 
West side
 
Directly in front of the Old Wilkes Jail Museum of Old Wilkes, Inc.
 
Parking limited to 1 hour
 

–

 

12-7-1998



Broad Street
 
East side
 
Intersection of Broad Street and Main Street, the first 5 parking spaces in
front of the old Smithey building
 
Parking limited to 30 minutes
 

–

 

4-4-1995



Broad Street
 
East side
 
From north to south, the sixth parking space
 
Handicapped parking only
 

–

 

4-4-1995



South Street
 
South side
 
Beginning on the east corner of the Board of Education property extending to
South West Street
 
No parking
 

–

 

9-6-1988



North Street
 

–

 
From the intersection of West Street to Woodland Boulevard
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

4-6-1981



Main Street
 
North side
 
Beginning at 106 East Main Street to intersection with West Street
 
Parking limited to 1 hour between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday
 

–

 

8-7-1989



Main Street
 
South side
 
From intersection with Woodland Boulevard to 111 East Main Street
 
Parking limited to 1 hour between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday
 

–

 

8-7-1989



West Street
 
West side
 
Beginning on the north side of North Street extending to Cowles Street
 
Parking limited to 1 hour between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday
 

–

 

5-1-1989



West Street
 
East side
 
Beginning at the north side of Main Street extending along the east side of
West Street adjacent to the Town Hall
 
Parking limited to 1 hour between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday
 

–

 

5-1-1989



West Street
 
West side
 
Beginning on the north side of Main Street extending along the west side of
West Street to the south side of North Street
 
Parking limited to 1 hour between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday (police officers exempted)
 

–

 

5-1-1989



Factory Street
 
West side
 
Beginning at entrance to Holly Farms Weigh Station extending 235 feet south
 
No parking
 

–

 

3-3-1980



North Street
 

–

 
Intersection with West Street to Woodland Boulevard
 
No parking or leaving unattended
 

–

 

4-6-1981



Fletcher Street
 
Both sides
 
Intersection of Westwood Lane for 782 feet going east on Fletcher Street.

Prohibited on both sides of 782 feet on Fletcher Street from Westwood Lane
going east
 
No parking
 

–

 

4-4-2006



College Street
 
West side
 
From Main Street south 175 feet
 
No parking
 

2009-02

 

1-12-2009



College Street
 
East side
 
From Main Street to South Street
 
No parking
 

2009-02

 

1-12-2009



Lenderman Street
 
Both sides
 
A distance of 350 feet from the intersection of Lenderman Street and Main
Street
 
No parking
 

2010-1

 

3-1-2010



Main Street
 
–
 
Woodland Boulevard to East Street
 
Two-hour parking
 

2014-05

 

6-2-2014





 



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES





         91.   FIRE DEPARTMENT, FIRE PREVENTION AND FIREWORKS





         92.   DEMONSTRATIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES





         93.   ANIMALS





         94.   ABANDONED VEHICLES





         95.   FAIR HOUSING





         96.   TREES





         97.   CEMETERIES




CHAPTER 90: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES



Section




General




   90.01   Superintendent of Streets



   90.02   General maintenance and repair



   90.03   Width, grade and the like for streets and sidewalks



   90.04   Use while under construction or repair



   90.05   Removal, disturbance, nuisance and obstruction



   90.06   Riding, skating and the like on sidewalks



   90.07   Outdoor seating areas on public sidewalks or spaces




Private Driveways




   90.20   Permit required for construction; application



   90.21   Control of establishment; standards



   90.22   Requirements for construction; costs




Excavations




   90.35   Permit required



   90.36   Bond or cash deposit



   90.37   Restoration of surfaces



   90.38   Safety precautions



   90.39   Work to be prosecuted diligently



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt ordinances for regulation and use of streets, see
G.S. § 160A-296



   Local improvements, see G.S. §§ 160A-216 to 160A-236



   Similar provisions, see G.S. §§ 160A-297 to 160A-307




GENERAL




§ 90.01  SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS.



   As used in this chapter, the term SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS shall mean
the person designated by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners to administer
and enforce the provisions of this chapter, or his or her duly authorized
representative.



(Prior Code, § 15-1)



§ 90.02  GENERAL MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   The public streets, sidewalks and other public places within the town
which are not maintained by the state shall be kept up and repaired at the
discretion and under the supervision of the Mayor and the Board of
Commissioners by taxation and under the  regulations as the Board may, from
time to time, provide.



(Prior Code, § 15-2)



§ 90.03  WIDTH, GRADE AND THE LIKE FOR STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   The width, grade and specifications of streets and sidewalks
shall be as provided by the Board of Commissioners upon recommendation of the
Superintendent of Streets.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided in any instance, the following
specifications shall be complied with:



      (1)   Sidewalks on each side of all streets that are 66 feet
wide and wider shall be 12 feet wide from property line to curbstone; the
sidewalks on each side of all streets 60 feet wide and less shall be 10 feet
wide from property line to curbstone; and



      (2)   The top of all curbstones shall be on the grade line of
the street; that all sidewalks shall have a fall of 1/2 an inch to the foot,
from property line to curbstone; that all streets shall be the same height in
the center as the top of the curbstone, and shall slope gently from the
center of the street, each way to a point 6 inches below the top of the
curbstone on either side of the street; and that all streets that are
hereafter ordered graded or improved shall be graded to conform to the above
regulations.



(Prior Code, § 15-3)



§ 90.04  USE WHILE UNDER CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to walk on, ride or lead a horse or
any other animal, or drive a wagon or any other vehicle, over, across or
along any sidewalk or street while the street or sidewalk is under
construction or is being repaired and barricades or signs have been posted to
give notice of the prohibition; it shall be unlawful for any person knowingly
to tamper with or molest any construction or repair work.



(Prior Code, § 15-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.05  REMOVAL, DISTURBANCE, NUISANCE AND OBSTRUCTION.



   (A)   No person shall, without proper authority, disturb or remove
any sand, dirt or other component of any street, sidewalk or public place
within the town.



(Prior Code, § 15-5)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
building, fence or other structure so as to encroach upon or obstruct any
street, sidewalk or public place within the town; any building, fence or
other structure erected or maintained in violation of this section shall
constitute a nuisance which shall be subject to abatement by the town at the
expense of the violator.



(Prior Code, § 15-6)



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place anything on any
public street, sidewalk or public place, or in any gutter, which will impede
travel or traffic or annoy pedestrians. This prohibition shall be applicable
generally and is not limited to the use of sidewalks by merchants for the
display of merchandise or storage of materials, nor to the erection in
streets and upon sidewalks of booths or stands, nor to the use of streets and
sidewalks by contractors for temporary storage of lumber and the like during
the course of any construction project.



(Prior Code, § 15-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.06  RIDING, SKATING AND THE LIKE ON SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   No person shall ride or drive any horse or beast of burden, or
any bicycle or motor vehicle, or propel any wheelbarrow or hand cart, nor
shall any person roller skate, roller blade or skateboard upon any sidewalk
within the town.



   (B)   The parents and guardians of children under the age of 15
years shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for knowingly permitting their
children and wards to violate this section.



(Prior Code, § 15-8)  (Am. Ord. passed 2-6-1995)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.07  OUTDOOR SEATING AREAS ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS OR SPACES.



   (A)   Definitions. The following terms shall apply to this section
as written unless context indicates or requires a different meaning:



      OPERATOR. Any person who owns, operates, or manages a business
that uses or applies to use an outdoor seating area.



      OUTDOOR SEATING AREA. A permitted seating area on a public
sidewalk or public space that is used for seating purposes by a permit holder.



      PERMIT HOLDER. Any person who holds a current permit for an
outdoor seating area.



      PERMITTED BUSINESS. The business that regularly and customarily
sells food or drink and is allowed to use an outdoor seating area as
authorized under this section.



   (B)   Sidewalk use limited; outdoor seating area permit.



      (1)   No business may use a public sidewalk or public space to
seat its patrons without first obtaining a permit for an outdoor seating area
issued by the town. No person shall place tables, chairs, or other seating on
a public sidewalk or public space in conjunction with a business without
first obtaining a permit for an outdoor seating area that is issued by the
town.



      (2)   A business that regularly and customarily sells food or
drink may obtain a permit from the town to operate an outdoor seating area on
the terms and conditions set out in this section. The permit shall specify
the area to be used for outdoor seating, the furniture to be used within the
outdoor seating area, and the proposed arrangement of the furniture.



      (3)   An outdoor seating area permit authorizes a limited use
of the public sidewalk or public space so long as that private use does not
interfere with the public interest or public use of the sidewalk.



      (4)   The town may temporarily suspend a permit holder's use
of an outdoor seating area for any reason and for any length of time. During
periods of temporary suspension, the permit holder must remove its
furnishings from the outdoor seating area and shall not use the area. Outdoor
seating areas may be prohibited during special events, parades or pickets, or
for any other reason deemed appropriate by the town. The town will endeavor
to give permit holders reasonable advance notice before issuing a temporary
suspension, including a suspension related to a special event, parade, or
picket.



      (5)   The town will endeavor to give permitted businesses a
minimum of 24 hours advanced notice, using information as provided on the
permit application or renewal, of any pressure washing of the sidewalk or
public space to allow for the relocation of outdoor furniture.



   (C)   Sidewalk areas eligible for outdoor seating. An outdoor
seating area shall meet all of the following requirements:



      (1)   The building in which the permitted business operates
must share a common boundary line with a public sidewalk or public space.



      (2)   The outdoor seating area shall not extend beyond the
boundaries fronting the permitted business.



      (3)   The operation of the outdoor seating area must be
related to the sale of food or drink from the permitted business.



      (4)   The outdoor seating area shall allow a minimum
5-foot-wide unobstructed pedestrian corridor at all times. Wider pedestrian
corridors or increased clearances may be required where warranted by
pedestrian traffic or other circumstances or to comply with the North
Carolina Building Code, Americans with Disabilities Act, or other laws.
Furniture in an outdoor seating area may be located next to the curb (with 2
feet clearance) and/or adjacent to the building, so long as clearances are
maintained.



      (5)   Where curbside abuts on-street parking, curbside tables
shall be placed parallel to the street. A minimum 2 foot setback should be
maintained from the curb edge.



      (6)   A minimum clearance of 5 feet must be maintained between
the outdoor seating area and edge of driveways, alleys, and handicapped ramps.



      (7)   Outdoor seating area at corners must not extend to
within sight triangles at street intersections or driveway entrances.



      (8)   Clear unobstructed height of 7 feet must be maintained
between the sidewalk surface and overhead objects including umbrellas.



      (9)   The outdoor seating area must not block access to public
amenities like street furniture, trash receptacles, and way finding, or
directional signs.



      (10)   Furniture must be made of durable material. No plastic,
or unfinished or pressure treated wood furniture is permitted.



      (11)   Planters or pots may be used to define the outdoor
dining space but are not required.



      (12)   Tabletop signage is limited to menus and must not
exceed 4 square feet in area.



      (13)   Lighting must not cause glare to pedestrians or
vehicular traffic.



      (14)   Lighting must not be affixed to town landscaping for
site furniture without a permit from the town.



   (D)   Application; permit requirements.



      (1)   A person owning, operating, or managing a business that
regularly and customarily serves food or drinks may apply for an outdoor
seating area permit. At a minimum, the application shall require:



         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the
business desiring to operate an outdoor seating area;



         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of each of
the operators of the business;



         (c)   The hours of operation of the business and the
proposed hours of operation of the outdoor seating area;



         (d)   A scaled drawing or site plan of architectural
design standard quality showing of the proposed outdoor seating area boundary
and surrounding streetscape details covering seven feet on either side of the
frontage of the associated business, including but not limited to property
lines, sidewalks, curb lines, lighting, trees (including tree size), tree
grates, planters, street signs, bicycle parking, benches, bus stops, and fire
hydrants. The drawing shall show the section of any public right of way to be
used for the outdoor seating area and the section to be kept clear for
pedestrian use, and depict the proposed materials and placement of tables,
chairs, barriers, and other furnishings on the public right of way; and,



         (e)   The furniture to be used in the outdoor sealing
area and its proposed arrangement.



      (2)   An applicant shall also provide:



         (a)   An application fee as provided in the town fee
schedule to cover the cost of processing and investigating the application
and issuing the permit.



         (b)   Evidence of a valid insurance policy, through an
insurance carrier authorized or eligible to do business in the State of North
Carolina for any damage to the public right of way, and for any damages for
which the town might incur liability because of property damage or personal
injury arising out of the use of the public right of way for seating
purposes. The minimum liability limit of the policy shall be $1,000,000. The
Town of Wilkesboro shall be listed as an “additional insured as its
interests may appear” on all certificates of insurance;



         (c)   An indemnity agreement, approved by the Town
Attorney, whereby the permit holder and the permitted business agree to
indemnify and hold harmless the town and its officers, agents and employees
from any claim arising or resulting from the operation of the outdoor seating
area;



         (d)   A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the
state, county or town that are necessary for the operation of the business,
including health permits, ABC permits and business licenses. If no permit has
been issued, the applicant shall provide a copy of the application submitted.



      (3)   No permit shall be issued until the applicant has
submitted a completed application and all items required by this section.



   (E)   Permit renewals.



      (1)   A permit issued under this section shall be valid from
the date of issuance and shall expire on June 30. Permits must be renewed
annually by the applicant; applications must be submitted on or before May 31.



      (2)   (a)   The permit renewal process shall consist of
re-submission of the following:



            1.   Certificate of insurance;



            2.   Indemnity agreement;



            3.   A copy of all permits and licenses issued by
the state, county or city that are necessary for the operation of the
business, including health permits, ABC permits and business licenses. If no
permit has been issued, the applicant shall provide a copy of the application
submitted; and



            4.   Permit fee.



         (b)   No scaled drawing shall be required for a permit
renewal unless the permit holder has rearranged or reconfigured the tables,
chairs, or other furnishings used for outdoor seating purposes or otherwise
revised the outdoor seating area from the previous permit year.



   (F)   Denial of application; reconsideration.



      (1)   The town shall notify the applicant in writing if it is
determined that the proposed outdoor seating area does not meet the criteria
established by this section. The notice shall identify which criteria were
not met.



      (2)   Within 30 days of denial, the applicant may submit for
reconsideration one revised plan for an outdoor seating area for the same
business. The payment of a new application fee is not required.



      (3)   A revised plan that is submitted for reconsideration
after the 30 day period has expired must be accompanied by a new application,
including the application fee.



   (G)   Operation of outdoor seating areas.



      (1)   An outdoor seating and dining area may be used only by
the permitted business identified in the permit and only for the seating of
patrons in the furniture provided by the permit holder.



      (2)   A permit holder may place one host station, removable
tables, chairs, or other items used in conjunction with seating within an
outdoor seating area in the arrangement shown on the permit. No cash
registers, tents, minibars or similar appurtenances shall be permitted.
Furniture in an outdoor seating area shall be kept clean and in good repair.



      (3)   A permit holder may rearrange or reconfigure approved
tables, chairs, and other furnishings in the permitted outdoor seating area
without submitting a new application and without any fee only if:



         (a)   No prior rearrangement or reconfiguration had been
submitted within the permit year.



         (b)   The permit holder within seven days of the
reconfiguration provides the department with a scaled drawing or site plan of
architectural design standard quality of the new placement; and



         (c)   The furnishings or their new placement do not:



            1.   Extend outside of the approved area;



            2.   Constitute a danger to the health or safety
of a patron or the public; or



            3.   Otherwise violate the terms of the permit.



      (4)   Outdoor seating areas shall be open to the air, except
that seating may be located under approved umbrellas, awnings, or canopies.



      (5)   A permit holder must provide stanchions or other
portable, visible, above-ground barrier between the approved outdoor seating
area and the remainder of the public sidewalk whenever the outdoor seating
area is in use.



      (6)   Nothing shall be permanently affixed to a sidewalk or to
other public property.



      (7)   The permit holder and the permitted business shall not
operate outside the area specified in the permit.



      (8)   Permit holders and operators shall keep all licenses and
permits required for their business operations continuously in effect.



      (9)   Permit holders and operators shall ensure that the
permitted business obeys all laws related to alcohol service and consumption.
Permit holders shall post visible signs at all exit points from the outdoor
seating area to the public sidewalk reminding patrons that they cannot
possess open containers of alcohol outside the public seating area. To retain
an outdoor seating area permit, permit holders and operators shall ensure
that no alcohol is served or consumed outside the permitted outdoor seating
area.



      (10)   An outdoor seating area may be used by the permit
holder only when the permitted business is open to customers.



      (11)   No outdoor seating area shall operate after 2:00 a.m.
on Saturday or Sunday. No outdoor seating area shall operate after 12:00 a.m.
on any other day of the week. Permit holders shall ensure that their outdoor
seating areas are not available for use after the hours specified in this
subsection.



      (12)   The maximum occupancy permitted in the outdoor seating
area shall be posted on the exterior of the building in a conspicuous place.
The permit holder shall ensure that the number of occupants in the outdoor
seating area does not exceed the posted limit at any time. A server or other
person employed by the permit holder who briefly enters and exits an outdoor
sealing area shall not be considered an occupant for the purposes of this
division.



      (13)   The permit holder shall keep the outdoor seating area
and the adjacent 7 feet of public space surrounding it clean of any solid
waste, including, food debris, paper, cups, bottles, cans, and other garbage
associated with the operation of the outdoor seating area space on a daily
basis. The public right-of-way within and adjacent to the outdoor seating
area must be washed down with water and detergent when needed and cleaned on
a daily basis. Any stains from spills must be removed. The permit holder must
properly dispose of all waste and trash.



      (14)   The permit holder is responsible for the maintenance,
upkeep, and security of furniture and accessories used in the outdoor seating
area.



   (H)   Additional Requirements for N.C. DOT Streets. In addition to
the requirements set out in this section, when an outdoor seating area is
located on a sidewalk along an N.C. Department of Transportation street or
highway, applicants and permit holders shall meet all requirements
established by the N.C. Department of Transportation. Those requirements are
contained within North Carolina G.S. § 136-27.4 and can be found at:
https://www.ncleg.net/ EnactedLegislation/Statutes/PDF/BySection/Cha
pter_136/GS_136-27.4.pdf



   (I)   Assignment prohibited; effect of ceasing business operations.
An outdoor seating area permit is not transferable or assignable. The permit
authorizes use of the outdoor seating area by the permit holder for the
permitted business. Any change in the ownership of a business after the
issuance of an outdoor seating area permit shall cause the permit to be
immediately invalid and require the new owner to reapply for the permit. A
change in ownership shall mean acquisition of more than 10% of the stock in a
publicly traded corporation, any change in the ownership of shares in a
privately held corporation, sale of all or part of a sole proprietorship, or
any change in the membership of any form of limited liability organization.



   (J)   Enforcement.



      (1)   Civil penalties.



         (a)   Violations of any of the provisions of this
section will result in the following civil penalties:



            1.   First offense in any 12-month period: $100.



            2.   Subsequent offense in any 12-month period:
$500.



         (b)   The Town Manager or the Manager's designee may
issue a notice of violation assessing civil penalties. The notice shall be
issued in writing and shall set forth with reasonable specificity the basis
for the civil penalty. The notice of violation shall be served by registered
or certified mail, or by personal service. When service is made by registered
or certified mail, a copy of the notice may also be sent by first class mail.
Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first class mail is not returned by
the Post Office within 10 days after the mailing. Refusal to accept the
notice shall not relieve the violator of the obligation to pay the penalty.



         (c)   The notice of violation shall contain a time
period by which the violation must be corrected. From and after the date
specified in the notice, each subsequent day that the violation continues in
existence shall constitute a separate and distinct offense subject to
additional civil penalties.



         (d)   If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within
30 days after the decision becomes final, the town may recover the penalty,
together with all costs allowed by law, by filing a civil action in the
General Court of Justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt.



      (2)   Other remedies. In addition to civil penalties and
permit suspension, a violation of this division is a misdemeanor and may also
be enforced through injunctive or other equitable relief, or a combination of
remedies.



      (3)   Appeals.



         (a)   A party aggrieved may appeal any decision under
this section to the Town Manager within 15 calendar days after the contested
decision. An appeal must be made in writing and shall contain the reasons
supporting the appeal and any evidence that supports it. The person appealing
may review the evidence that is the basis of any suspension or violation
during the town's normal business hours. The Town Manager or his designee
shall review the information provided and shall issue a written decision
determining whether a violation has occurred.



         (b)   After receiving a determination from the Town
Manager or his designee, a party aggrieved may appeal to the Town Council
within 21 calendar days after the Town Manager's decision (or the decision of
his designee) was mailed. The scope of the Town Council's review shall be
limited to verifying the facts supporting a written decision or findings of
fact made on a suspension. If the Town Council finds that the facts as found
are correct, the civil penalty, administrative fee, or suspension shall not
be disturbed.



(Ord. 2018-12, passed 8-6-2018)




PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS




§ 90.20  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CONSTRUCTION; APPLICATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway
across any public sidewalk, walkway or parkway or into any street, or cut any
curb for that purpose, without first having obtained a permit as required in
this subchapter.



(Prior Code, § 15-9)



   (B)   Each application for a permit under this subchapter shall be
made to the Town Clerk and shall state, among other things, the location,
grade and dimensions of the proposed driveway and the purpose for which it is
desired. If the proposed driveway complies with provisions of this
subchapter, the Town Clerk shall issue a permit therefor.



(Prior Code, § 15-10)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Board of Commissioners to suppress  and remove nuisances,
see G.S.§ 160A-193



§ 90.21  CONTROL OF ESTABLISHMENT; STANDARDS.



   The establishment of driveways and entrances to streets shall be under
the supervision and control of the Board of Commissioners, who shall have the
power to establish standards.



(Prior Code, § 15-11)



§ 90.22  REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION; COSTS.



   (A)   Every person who intends to use any portion of the sidewalk as
a private driveway shall, if the Superintendent of Streets certifies that the
sidewalk area is inadequate for vehicular traffic, reconstruct the sidewalk
in a manner that the sidewalk is capable of carrying vehicular traffic
without creating pedestrian hazards, and in accordance with the
specifications of the Superintendent of Streets with respect to slope,
drainage, reinforcement, finish and other construction features.



(Prior Code, § 15-12)



   (B)   All costs of constructing driveways as required by this
subchapter shall be paid for by the property owners of the property where the
driveways are constructed.



(Prior Code, § 15-13)




EXCAVATIONS




§ 90.35  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig any hole, ditch or
excavation in or under any street, sidewalk or public place in the town
without first having procured a permit so to do from the Superintendent of
Streets.



(Prior Code, § 15-14)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.36  BOND OR CASH DEPOSIT.



   Each applicant for a permit required by this subchapter shall, as a
prerequisite to the issuance thereof, file with the Superintendent of Streets
a bond payable to the town, and in an amount as the Superintendent of Streets
shall consider adequate, conditioned upon restoration of the surface of the
place to be excavated in compliance with the requirements of this subchapter;
provided, that in lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be made with the Town
Treasurer.



(Prior Code, § 15-15)



§ 90.37  RESTORATION OF SURFACES.



   It shall be the duty of every holder of a permit issued pursuant to
this subchapter to put the street, sidewalk or public place in as good
condition in all respects as it was prior to the beginning of work under the
permit, and every day of failure so to do shall constitute a separate offense.



(Prior Code, § 15-16)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.38  SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.



   Every holder of a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter shall take
precautions as may be necessary for the protection of persons, animals and
property from injury.  The precautions shall include the erection and
maintenance of barriers and lights, and the Superintendent of Streets may
prescribe in the permit other precautions as he or she may deem necessary or
prudent.



(Prior Code, § 15-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 90.39  WORK TO BE PROSECUTED DILIGENTLY.



   Permit holders under this subchapter shall prosecute their work with
due diligence, to the end that the work may be completed and the surface
restored without undue delay.



(Prior Code, § 15-18)



CHAPTER 91: FIRE DEPARTMENT, FIRE PREVENTION AND FIREWORKS



Section




Fire Prevention and Fireworks




   91.01   Sale of fireworks and the like



   91.02   Obedience to police and firefighters; arrests



   91.03   Fire prevention code adopted



   91.04   Municipality defined



   91.05   Limits for storage of explosives and the like



   91.06   Permits; inspection and permit fees



   91.07   Administration and enforcement; modifications



   91.08   Decision of Fire Department Chief; appeals



   91.09   Updating procedure; penalties; conflicts of law




Fire Department




   91.20   Composition and organization



   91.21   Additional duties of Chief



   91.22   Rules and regulations



   91.23   Authority of members; interference with firefighters



   91.24   Construction and bylaws for volunteer members 



   91.25   First Responders Unit



 



   91.99   Penalties




FIRE PREVENTION AND FIREWORKS




§ 91.01  SALE OF FIREWORKS AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale in the
town any firecrackers, fireworks or pyrotechnics of any kind or any nature
whatsoever except as expressly allowed and condoned by the General Assembly
of the State of North Carolina by duly ratified and published General Statute.



(Prior Code, § 8-1) (Am. Ord. passed 4-5-1994)



Penalty, see § 91.99



Statutory reference:



   Fire protection generally, see G.S. Ch.69



   Regulations of the board of water and air resources, seeG.S. §§
143-211 et seq.



   Sale and use of pyrotechnics and fireworks, see G.S. §§ 14-410 to
14-415



§ 91.02  OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIREFIGHTERS; ARRESTS.



   (A)   Every person present at the scene of a fire shall obey all
lawful orders of firefighters and police officers in any matter relating to
extinguishing the fire, removal and protection of persons and property
endangered by fire, smoke or water, freedom of Fire Department personnel and
apparatus to perform their duties or to function properly, or the maintenance
of order at or near the scene of the fire, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to disobey any order of a firefighter or police officer.



   (B)   Firefighters and police officers at the scene of any fire
shall have authority to arrest any person wilfully disobeying any lawful
order and to hold the violator in custody until the fire has been
extinguished, at which time he or she shall be dealt with according to law.



(Prior Code, § 8-2)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED.



   (A)   There is hereby adopted, for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or
explosion, that certain code known as the North Carolina State Building Code
Fire Prevention Code, 2002 edition and all appendices thereof, and the whole
thereof, of which code not less than 1 copy is now and shall remain on file
in the office of the Town Clerk.



   (B)   The code is hereby adopted and incorporated in this subchapter
as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be
controlling within the limits of the town.



   (C)   The code adopted by this section shall be known and may be
cited as the Fire Prevention Code.



(Prior Code, § 8-3)



§ 91.04  MUNICIPALITY DEFINED.



   Wherever the word MUNICIPALITY is used in the Fire Prevention Code, it
shall be construed to mean the Town of Wilkesboro.



(Prior Code, § 8-4)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate, control and prohibit keeping, use and
the like of explosives, oil, gasoline and the like, see G.S. § 160A-183



   Fire escapes and fire doors, see G.S. § 143-138



   Safety provisions for hotels, see G.S. § 51-81-5



§ 91.05  LIMITS FOR STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND THE LIKE.



   The limits referred to in § 53b of the Fire Prevention Code, in which
storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited; the limits referred
to in § 74a of that code, in which storage of class I liquids in outside
aboveground tanks is prohibited; and the limits referred to in § 114 of the
code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are
hereby established to coincide with the Fire District established for the
town, and should the Fire District be changed, this section shall ipso facto
be amended accordingly; provided, that the storage of any such materials,
liquids or gasses as permitted in the Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted as
therein authorized.



(Prior Code, § 8-5)



§ 91.06  PERMITS; INSPECTION AND PERMIT FEES.



   (A)   Permits covered by § 17 of the Fire Prevention Code and
required in various articles thereof are for the purpose of giving the Board
of Commissioners, through the Chief of the Fire Department, more effective
control over hazardous conditions regulated by the code. Each permit shall be
for not more than 1 year, subject to renewal thereof; provided, that where a
town license is required periodically, in addition to a permit, then the
permit shall be for an indefinite period.



   (B)   The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, adopt a
schedule of fees for permits and inspections required by the Fire Prevention
Code, and when the resolution has been placed on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, no permit shall be issued and no inspection shall be made until
the fee therefor, as provided in the schedule, has been paid to the Tax
Collector.



(Prior Code, § 8-6)



§ 91.07  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT; MODIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code shall be administered and enforced by
the Chief of the Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 8-7)



   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have power to modify
any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing
by the owner or lessee of the property affected thereby, or his or her duly
authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the code; provided, that the spirit of the
code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done.
The particulars of the modification, when granted or allowed, and the
decision of the Chief of the Fire Department thereon, shall be entered upon
the records of the Department and a signed copy shall be furnished the
applicant.



(Prior Code, § 8-8)



§ 91.08  DECISION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT CHIEF; APPEALS.



   Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an
application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed
that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code do not apply or that the true
intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted,
the applicant may appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire
Department to the Board of Commissioners within 30 days from the date of the
decision appealed.



(Prior Code, § 8-9)



§ 91.09  UPDATING PROCEDURE; PENALTIES; CONFLICTS OF LAW.



   (A)   Whenever a new or revised edition of the Fire Prevention Code,
Abbreviated Edition, is recommended by the American Insurance Association or
its successor, the Chief of the Fire Department shall file at least 1 copy
thereof in the office of the Town Clerk, together with his or her
recommendations, if any, as to amendments thereof, and he or she shall,
concurrently, notify the Mayor and each Commissioner of his or her action.
Following the actions by the Chief of the Fire Department, the new or revised
edition, together with the recommendations, if any, of the Chief of the Fire
Department, shall, at the conclusion of the second regular meeting of the
Board of Commissioners following the date of filing and notification, become
the Fire Prevention Code of the town, replacing the then current code,
provided, that no action shall have been taken thereon by the Board of
Commissioners prior to the conclusion of the second meeting; and provided
further, that the Town Clerk shall make an appropriate entry in the minutes
of the Board of Commissioners following the second meeting.



(Prior Code, § 8-10)



   (B)   In the event of conflict between any provision of the Fire
Prevention Code and any provision of state law (including the North Carolina
State Building Code) or any rule or regulation made pursuant to state law,
the state law or rule or regulation made pursuant thereto shall prevail.



(Prior Code, § 8-12)




FIRE DEPARTMENT




§ 91.20  COMPOSITION AND ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   The Fire Department shall consist of full time and volunteer
members, and quarters, vehicles, apparatus, equipment and other property as
may from time to time be authorized by the Board of Commissioners.



   (B)   The organization of the Fire Department shall be as provided
by regulations promulgated pursuant to § 91.22.



   (C)   The Chief of the Fire Department, under general supervision of
the Mayor, shall have direct control of the members and property of the Fire
Department and shall be in command of the members. Members of the Fire
Department shall assume command in order of rank; as prescribed in
Departmental rules and regulations.



(Prior Code, § 8-13)



§ 91.21  ADDITIONAL DUTIES OF CHIEF.



   In addition to his or her duties as Commanding Officer of the Fire
Department, the Chief of the Fire Department shall perform all duties
prescribed for him or her by this code and other ordinances and by the
General Statutes of North Carolina.



(Prior Code, § 8-14)



§ 91.22  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The Mayor, in consultation with the Chief of the Fire Department, shall
prepare rules and regulations for the government of the Fire Department and
the personnel thereof. The rules and regulations, which may be amended from
time to time, shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners for approval.
It shall be unlawful for any member of the Fire Department to violate any
rule or regulation which has been approved by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners and placed on file in the office of the Town Clerk; and a copy
of all approved rules and regulations shall also be placed on file at Fire
Department headquarters.



(Prior Code, § 8-15)



Statutory reference:



   Appointment and duties of Chief of Fire Department, see G.S. §§
160A-291, 160A-292



   Authority of town to maintain Fire Department, see G.S. § 160A-291



   Authority to provide fire protection to property beyond town, see G.S.
§ 160A-293



   Investigations and reports by Chief of Fire Department, see G.S. §§
58-79-1 et seq.



§ 91.23  AUTHORITY OF MEMBERS; INTERFERENCE WITH FIREFIGHTERS.



   Members of the Fire Department shall have authority to do all acts
reasonably necessary to extinguish fires and protect life and property from
fire; it shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner of property
which is burning, wilfully to interfere in any manner with any firefighter in
the performance of his or her duty.



(Prior Code, § 8-16)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.24  CONSTRUCTION AND BYLAWS FOR VOLUNTEER MEMBERS.



   The constitution and bylaws applicable to volunteer members of the Fire
Department shall be consistent with state law, this code and other ordinances
and the rules and regulations of the Fire Department, and provision shall be
made for election of officers at the first meeting in November in each year
and for the holding of at least 1 practice drill per month, with the names of
those participating to be reported monthly to the Chief of the Fire
Department. Constitution and bylaws and all amendments thereto shall be
approved by the Board of Commissioners, by resolution or motion, and filed in
the office of the Town Clerk, before taking effect. A copy of the approved
constitution and by-laws shall also be on file in the office of the Chief of
the Fire Department.



(Prior Code, § 8-17)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of uniformed regular and volunteer members of the Fire
Department to direct traffic at scene of fire, see G.S. § 20-114.1



   Similar provisions, see G.S. §§ 58-81-5 through 58-81-15



§ 91.25  FIRST RESPONDERS UNIT.



   (A)   The Wilkesboro First Responders Unit will abide by and be
subject to all rules, regulations, bylaws and the constitution  of the
Wilkesboro Volunteer Fire Department. All Wilkesboro First Responders shall
be members of the Wilkesboro Volunteer Fire Department.  The Mayor, in
consultation with the Chief of the Fire Department and the highest ranking
Unit Officer liaison of the Wilkesboro First Responders Unit, shall prepare
rules and regulation for the government of the Wilkesboro First Responders
Unit and the personnel thereof.  Rules and regulations, which may be amended
from time to time, shall be submitted to the Board of Commissioners for
approval.  It shall be unlawful for any member of the Wilkesboro First
Responders Unit to violate any rule or regulation of the Wilkesboro Fire
Department or Wilkesboro First Responders Unit which has been approved by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners and placed on file in the office of
the Town Clerk; a copy of approved rules and regulations shall also be placed
on file at Fire Department headquarters and/or First Responders headquarters.
The constitution and/or bylaws applicable to volunteer members of the
Wilkesboro First Responders Unit shall be consistent with state law and the
constitution and bylaws applicable to volunteer members of the Wilkesboro
Fire Department, this code and other ordinances and rules and regulations of
the Wilkesboro First Responders Unit.  Provisions shall be made for election
of officers immediately upon recognition by the Town Board of Commissioners
of the Town of Wilkesboro of the Wilkesboro First Responders Unit and
thereafter election of officers of the Wilkesboro First Responders Unit will
be decided during the monthly meeting in September during even-numbered
years.  Constitution and bylaws and all amendments thereto regarding the
Wilkesboro First Responders Unit shall be approved by the Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro, by resolution or motion and filed in
the office of the Town Clerk before taking effect. A copy of the approved
constitution and bylaws shall also be filed in the office of the Chief of the
Fire Department and/or the highest ranking officer of the Wilkesboro First
Responders Unit.



(Am. Ord. passed 4-20-1989)



   (B)   (1)   All Wilkesboro first responders will abide by the
bylaws of the Wilkesboro Fire Department.  All Wilkesboro first responders
will abide by the bylaws set by the Wilkes County EMS for first responders.
Any person wishing to apply for membership as a Wilkesboro first responder
must have been a productive member of the Wilkesboro Fire Department for at
least 1 year prior to application.  The number of Wilkesboro first
responders will be limited to 8 members.  If the need for additional members
arises, the members must be approved by the First Responder Unit, the
officers of the Wilkesboro Fire Department and consent and authorization of
the Town Board of Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro.  The structure of
the Wilkesboro First Responders Unit will be as follows:



         (a)   Unit Officers-Liaison whose duties will be to:
direct all meetings of the Wilkesboro first responders, attend quarterly
countywide first responder meetings and to act as a liaison between the
Wilkes County EMS and the Wilkesboro first responders.



         (b)   Unit Officer-Liaison Assistant whose duties will
be to assist the Director-Liaison in his or her  duties.



         (c)   Secretary whose duties will be to record member
attendance at meetings and calls.  The secretary will record training hours
and see that all members maintain the needed number of training hours.



      (2)   The structure of the First Responder Unit will be
decided upon during the first monthly meeting after recognition by the
Wilkesboro Town Board of Commissioners.  The Wilkesboro first responders
will hold a monthly meeting on the fourth Tuesday of every month (or as
deemed necessary by the members of the First Responder Unit). The first first
responder on the scene of a call will advise Wilkes County communications as
soon as possible as to the situation. Wilkesboro first responders will
respond to a call only when dispatched. 



      (3)   Any application for membership as a Wilkesboro first
responder must be approved by the existing first responders and the officers
of the Wilkesboro Fire Department.  Any first responder acting in a manner
not becoming the Wilkesboro Fire Department and/or the Wilkesboro First
Responder Unit shall be punished in the following manner, unless other rules
regarding suspension are applicable:



         (a)   First offense: Written reprimand;



         (b)   Second offense: Suspension; length determined by
officers of the Wilkesboro Fire Department; and



         (c)   Third offense: Automatic dismissal.



      (4)   Any member of the First Responder Unit who is suspended
from the Wilkesboro Volunteer Fire Department is automatically suspended from
the First Responder Unit until reinstatement in good standing of the member
with the Wilkesboro Volunteer Fire Department.



      (5)   It shall be the duty of the Secretary/Treasurer to
receive and keep an accurate record of all monies and/or securities and bonds
belonging to the Wilkesboro First Responders Unit.  The secretary/treasurer
shall keep a record of all funds disbursed by him or her.  All
disbursements, other than current obligations, shall be subject to approval
by a majority of members present.  The secretary/treasurer shall make a
financial report at each monthly meeting and make an annual account to the
Town Board of the Town of Wilkesboro.



(Am. Ord. passed 4-20-1989)



Cross-reference:



   Franchises; miscellaneous, see TSO Table II



§ 91.99  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire
Prevention Code or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder, and approved thereunder, or any
certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been
taken, or who shall fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by
the Board of Commissioners or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within
the time fixed therein, shall severally for each and every  violation and
noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by fine of
not more than $50 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, in the
discretion of the court. The imposition of 1 penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all those persons
shall be required to correct or remedy the violations or defects within a
reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each 10 days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.



(Prior Code, § 8-11)



CHAPTER 92: DEMONSTRATIONS AND ASSEMBLAGES



Section



   92.01   Definitions



   92.02   Permit required



   92.03   Permits; issuance, denial and revocation



   92.04   Acts prohibited



   92.05   Interference with permitted activity prohibited



   92.06   Picketing regulations



   92.07   Parade and group demonstration regulations



   92.08   Exceptions for chapter



Statutory reference:



   Authority of Board of Commissioners to adopt ordinances for the
regulation and use of streets, squares, parks and other public property for
the public welfare, see G.S. § 160A-296



   Authority to provide for the regulation, diversion and limitation of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic  upon the public streets and sidewalks, see
G.S. § 160A-300



   General police powers of town, see G.S. § 160A-174



§ 92.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BLOCK.  That portion of any street lying between its intersections
with other streets.



   GROUP DEMONSTRATION.  Any assembly together or concert of action
between or among 2 or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter
or of making known any position or promotion of persons, or of or on behalf
of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting
attention to assembly.



   PARADE.  Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession
of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, parks or other public
grounds or places.



   PICKET LINE.  Any 2 or more persons formed together for the purpose of
making known any position or promotion of persons, or of or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons.



(Prior Code, § 7-1)



§ 92.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate
in any parade, picket line or group demonstration in or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the town unless a permit has been
issued by the town in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 7-2)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.03  PERMITS; ISSUANCE, DENIAL AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue permits as required
in the preceding section, and in the issuance thereof he or she shall:



      (1)   Require a written application for permit to be filed not
less than 24 hours in advance of a parade, picket line or group
demonstration. An application shall be on a form prescribed by the Chief,
shall be signed by the applicant or applicants, including the person or
persons to be in charge as mentioned in division (A)(4) of this section, and
shall show the proposed time, place, purpose and size of the parade, picket
line or group demonstration and whether or not any minors below the age of 18
years shall participate;



      (2)    Refuse to issue a permit when the activity or purpose
stated in the application would violate any ordinance of the town or statute
of the state or the United States or when the activity or purpose would
constitute a clear and present danger to the public health or safety or would
hinder or prevent the orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on
the streets, sidewalks or public places in the town;



      (3)    Specify in the permit whether or not minors below the
age of 18 years will be permitted to participate. The Chief shall pass upon
whether or not  minors may participate, and shall base his or her
determination upon whether or not the purpose or time or place of the
particular activity will be detrimental to or endanger the health, safety or
welfare of the minors, or will interfere with their education;



      (4)    Require that the application for a permit shall
specify, and the permit shall designate, the person or persons in charge of
the activity. This person shall be required to accompany the parade, picket
line, or group demonstration and shall carry the permit with him or her at
that time. The permit shall not be valid in the possession of any other
person;



      (5)   The permit may set the starting time, duration, route,
speed of travel and space between persons or vehicles in the parade, picket
line or group demonstration; may prescribe the portions or areas of streets,
sidewalks or other public places to be used; and may impose other reasonable
requirements as the Chief may prescribe for the control and free movement of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or for the health, safety and property
rights of the participants and the general public;



      (6)    Require that the application for permit shall contain
other pertinent information as the Chief reasonably may need in order to
determine the purposes and character of the activity for which the permit is
sought and whether the activity would or would not constitute a clear and
present danger to the public health or safety or hinder or prevent the
orderly movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the streets, sidewalks
or public places in the town; and



      (7)   Among other considerations, consider and find as a
requisite to issuance the following:



         (a)   The activity will not require excessive diversion
of police from other necessary duties;



         (b)   The activity will not interfere with the right of
property owners in the area to enjoy peaceful and lawful occupancy and use of
their property; and/or



         (c)   The activity can be conducted without unreasonable
interference with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area, and
will not prevent normal police and fire protection to the public, and will
not be likely to cause injury to persons or property or to provoke disorderly
conduct or to create a public disturbance.



(Prior Code, § 7-3)



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a
parade, picket line or group demonstration for any of the following causes:



      (1)   The violation by any participant of any provision of
this chapter; and/or



      (2)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of
the permit.



(Prior Code, § 7-5)



§ 92.04  ACTS PROHIBITED.



   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of any parade, picket line or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:



   (A)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm or any weapon
or article, including but not limited to: blackjacks, nightsticks or
flashlights, which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon;



   (B)   The taking or keeping of any dog or vicious animal, whether
leashed or unleashed; and/or



   (C)   The carrying or displaying of any flag or emblem of any
foreign state or any foreign political party or other organization which is
engaged in hostilities against the armed forces of the United States.



(Prior Code, § 7-4)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.05  INTERFERENCE WITH PERMITTED ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.



   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade,
picket line or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a
permit duly issued by the Chief of Police.



(Prior Code, § 7-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 92.06  PICKETING REGULATIONS.



   Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional
regulations:



   (A)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic.



   (B)   Not more than 10 pickets promoting the same objective shall be
permitted to use either of the 2 sidewalks within a single block at any one
time.



   (C)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not
exceeding 2 feet in width and 2 feet in length promoting the objective for
which the picketing is done; provided, that the words used are not derogatory
or defamatory in nature.



   (D)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and not
march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. Pickets
shall not be allowed to walk more than 5 feet from curb line and shall be in
continuous motion.



   (E)   If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use the
same sidewalk for picketing and the use would result in the presence of more
than 10 pickets thereon, the Chief of Police shall allot time to each group
of pickets for the use of the sidewalk on an equitable basis.



(Prior Code, § 7-7)



§ 92.07  PARADE AND GROUP DEMONSTRATION REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Prior to the granting of a parade or group demonstration
permit, and as a condition precedent to the granting of either permit, the
Chief of Police may require that the person named in the application as the
one to be in charge of the parade or group demonstration shall give good bond
to the town, with corporate surety and in an amount as the Chief may consider
necessary, conditioned upon the full satisfaction of all claims, judgments
and decrees which may result by reason of any negligent or unlawful act or
omission of any person managing or participating in the parade or group
demonstration and covered by the permit, and that he or she will save the
town harmless therefrom; and with the further condition that he or she shall
pay to the town all extra expenses incurred for clearing the town's streets,
sidewalks and public places of litter resulting from the occurrence of the
parade or group demonstration and for the cleansing and repair of public
property defaced, soiled or damaged by paraders or demonstrators.



   (B)   Any applicant for a parade or group demonstration permit who
feels aggrieved by the decision of the Chief of Police made pursuant to
division (A) above may appeal from the decision to the Board of
Commissioners; and the Board shall consider the appeal at its next meeting,
at which the applicant may appear, with counsel, to present his or her case.
After hearing the appeal, the Board shall waive or uphold the requirement for
bond, and if the requirement for bond is upheld, the Board may amend the
terms and conditions thereof as in its sound discretion shall be in the best
interests of the town, and the decision of the Board shall be final.



   (C)   Bonds required by this section shall be approved as to form
and surety by the Town Attorney.



(Prior Code, § 7-8)



§ 92.08  EXCEPTIONS FOR CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:



   (A)   Funeral processions; but funeral directors are requested to
give advance notice to the Chief of Police so that he or she may arrange for
the expeditious handling of traffic;



   (B)   Students going to or from school classes or participating in
educational or recreational activity where the activity is under the
supervision and direction of proper school authorities; and



   (C)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its
functions.



(Prior Code, § 7-9)



CHAPTER 93: ANIMALS



Section




General Animal Regulations




   93.01   Definitions



   93.02   Running at large



   93.03   Hogs, pigs and shoats



   93.04   Maintenance of pens, coops and the like



   93.05   Grazing; where prohibited



   93.06   Reckless riding and driving; horses and mules on streets



   93.07   Disposal of carcasses




Dogs




   93.20   Required listing for taxation



   93.21   Rabies; vaccination tag and certificate



   93.22   Running at large



   93.23   Vicious dogs



   93.24   Declaration of nuisance



   93.25   Town park



 



   93.99   Penalty




GENERAL ANIMAL REGULATIONS




§ 93.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AT LARGE.  An animal or fowl shall be considered to be AT LARGE when
it is off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of a
responsible person either by leash, cord or otherwise.



   DOG. Any canine animal, male or female.



   OWNER.  Any person owning, keeping or harboring an animal or fowl
within the town.



(Prior Code, § 4-1)



§ 93.02  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   No person shall permit any horse, sheep, livestock, barnyard animal,
fowl or poultry or any nondomestic, dangerous or offensive animal owned, kept
or harbored by him or her to run at large.



(Prior Code, § 4-2)  Penalty, see § 93.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to regulate or restrain animals  running at large,
see G.S. § 160A-186



§ 93.03  HOGS, PIGS AND SHOATS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any
hog, pig, shoat, or any cow, bull, calf or any domestic bovine animal
irrespective of sex or age within the town limits of the Town of Wilkesboro.



(Prior Code, § 4-3)  (Am. Ord. passed 11-30-1992)



§ 93.04  MAINTENANCE OF PENS, COOPS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Each stable, pen, hutch, coop or other place wherein any
animal or fowl is kept shall be maintained at all times in a clean, sanitary
and unoffensive condition and shall conform to all the requirements of the
Health Departments of the town, county and state.



   (B)   Any stable, pen, hutch, coop or other place wherein any animal
or fowl is kept which becomes offensive to persons residing in the
neighborhood or which becomes a menace to the public health is  declared to
constitute a nuisance and, as such, subject to abatement as provided by law.
The provisions of this division are made applicable within the territory 1
mile beyond the town in all directions.



(Prior Code, § 4-4)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.05  GRAZING; WHERE PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any horse, sheep or
livestock owned, kept or harbored by him or her or under his or her control
to graze on any street right of way or on any public property in the town, or
upon any property not zoned for those purposes.



(Prior Code, § 4-5)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.06  RECKLESS RIDING AND DRIVING; HORSES AND MULES ON STREET.



   No person shall ride or drive any horse or mule on the streets of the
town at a reckless rate of speed or in any manner dangerous to persons or
property; nor shall any person turn any horse or mule loose on the streets of
the town.



(Prior Code, § 4-6)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.07  DISPOSAL OF CARCASSES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any street,
public place or public or private premises in the town any animal or fowl
carcass or part thereof.



   (B)   Property owners shall be responsible for the prompt, sanitary
and lawful disposal of animal and fowl carcasses found upon their property,
and carcasses which remain on private property for 8 hours after notice to
the property owner or occupant to so dispose of any carcass may be removed by
the town at the expense of the property owner, the expense to be collected in
the same manner as property taxes. Any notice pursuant to this section which
cannot be given personally may be served by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place on the property whereon the carcass is found.



   (C)   Animal and fowl carcasses found upon the streets or other
public places shall be taken up by the office or department of the town
designated by the Mayor and shall be disposed of in a sanitary and lawful
manner.



(Prior Code, § 4-7)  Penalty, see § 93.99




DOGS




§ 93.20  REQUIRED LISTING FOR TAXATION.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner or keeper of a dog which
is 6 months or more of age to list the dog for taxes at the same time and
place that other personal property is listed.



   (B)   In listing a dog as provided in division (A) above, the owner
or keeper shall state the dog's breed, age, markings and sex, and if the dog
be a female, whether spayed or not spayed.



(Prior Code, § 4-8)



§ 93.21  RABIES; VACCINATION TAG AND CERTIFICATE.



   Each person owning a dog of the age of 6 months or more shall have the
dog vaccinated to prevent rabies, and the vaccination shall be given
according to the directions and instructions of a duly licensed veterinarian
or physician. Each person, immediately after having his or her dog
vaccinated, shall place on the dog's collar a tag furnished by the party
doing the vaccination, to be worn by the dog at all times; and he or she
shall then file with the Town Clerk a certificate of vaccination, which shall
be recorded by the Clerk in his or her office, and shall be prima facie
evidence that the dog owner has complied with this section.



(Prior Code, § 4-11)



§ 93.22  RUNNING AT LARGE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or keeping any
bitch to knowingly permit her to run at large during the erotic stage of
copulation.



   (B)   Dogs 6 months or more of age shall not be permitted to run at
large without wearing a collar to which is attached a town dog license tag
for the current year and a rabies vaccination tag showing current
immunization from rabies.



(Prior Code, § 4-12)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.23  VICIOUS DOGS.



   Each owner of a dog which is known to be vicious or to have bitten or
attacked a person shall keep the dog securely enclosed on his or her premises
and shall not permit the dog to run at large; and the dog, while off the
premises of the owner, shall be securely muzzled so as to prevent the biting
of any person, and shall be securely attached to a leash to be held by the
owner or some other responsible person.



(Prior Code, § 4-13)



Statutory reference:



   Rabies control, see G.S. Chapter 130A



   Similar state law, see G.S. § 67-2



§ 93.24  DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.



   (A)   (1)   The keeping or maintenance outside a proper enclosure
of any dog or dogs having dangerous or destructive propensities is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as provided in this
section.



      (2)   The keeping or maintenance of any dog or dogs which by
prolonged and habitual barking, howling or whining causes serious annoyance
to the neighboring resident or residents and interferes with the reasonable
use and enjoyment of the premises occupied by the resident or residents, or
with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the public streets, sidewalks or
public areas is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as
provided in this section.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section a DOGHAVING DANGEROUS OR
DESTRUCTIVE PROPENSITIES shall mean a dog which has been trained or taught to
attack humans or other animals, or which attacks or attempts to attack
persons, or which habitually turns over garbage cans, habitually destroys
shrubs, flowers, grass or other plants, habitually kills other animals or
habitually performs similar acts.



   (C)   Upon receipt of a written detailed and signed complaint being
made to the Police Department by a resident or residents of the Town of
Wilkesboro, that a person is maintaining a public nuisance as described in
division (A) above; the Chief of Police shall cause the owner or keeper of
the dog or dogs in question to be notified that a complaint has been received
and shall cause the situation complained of to be investigated. The report
and findings of the investigation shall be reduced to writing by the
investigating officer.



   (D)   If the written findings of the investigating officer indicate
the complaint or complaints is/are duly justified, then the Chief of Police
shall cause the owner or keeper of the dog or dogs in question to be notified
in writing and ordered to abate nuisance within 48 hours. In the event the
owner or keeper of the dog or dogs is unknown and cannot be ascertained, the
notice and order along with the general description of the dog or dogs shall
be posted for 48 hours at the Town Hall.



   (E)   On failure of the owner or keeper of the dog or dogs to fail
to abate the nuisance on the order of the Chief of Police within 48 hours,
the Chief of Police shall cause the dog or dogs in question to be
impounded.  If the owner or keeper shall so request, the dog or dogs shall
be released to him or her upon his or her execution of his or her written
agreement to comply with the abatement order. If upon the execution of the
agreement, the owner or keeper fails to comply with the order of abatement of
the nuisance within 5 days from the order of the Chief of Police, the owner
or keeper shall be considered guilty of failure to abate the nuisance.



   (F)   In addition, the enforcement of this order may be by
injunction, restraining order or abatement in a court of competent
jurisdiction as provided by G.S. §§ 160A-175(d) and/or 160A-175(e).



(Am. Ord. passed 12-2-1991)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.25  TOWN PARK.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog to be on
the premises of any Town Park of the Town of Wilkesboro unless the dog is
secured by a leash and accompanied by the person owning or keeping the dog.



   (B)   The activities regulated or prohibited under division (A)
herein shall be enforceable only where signs are placed, erected or
installed, giving notice that dogs on the premises of a town park shall be
leashed. The number, form, placement and message content of the sign shall be
approved by the Parks and Recreation Director of the Town of Wilkesboro to
ensure that the public will have adequate notice of the conduct prohibited
and regulated as set forth herein.



(Ord. passed 12-7-1998)  Penalty, see § 93.99



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which
no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to § 10.99.



   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500, or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days as provided by G.S. § 160A-175(b) and
§ 10.99 of the Wilkesboro Town Code.



   (C)   Further, § 93.03 may be enforced by injunction and order of
abatement in the General Court of Justice and the Town of Wilkesboro may
apply for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement
commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the
unlawful use of the property as provided by G.S. § 160A-175(e) and § 10.99
of the Wilkesboro Town Code.



   (D)   If any person, being the owner or keeper of dog or dogs for
which an order of abatement has been issued, shall fail or refuse to abate
the nuisance, he or she is guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable upon
conviction by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment of not more than
30 days.



   (E)   Violation of this chapter shall be a Class 3 Misdemeanor as
set forth in G.S. § 14-4(a).



   (F)   This chapter may be enforced by any 1, all, or a combination
of the remedies authorized and prescribed herein, as provided by G.S. §
160A-175(f) and § 10.99 of the Wilkesboro Town Code.



   (G)   That each day’s continuing violation of this chapter shall
be a separate and distinct offense as provided by G.S. § 160A-175(g) and §
10.99 of the Wilkesboro Town Code.



(Prior Code, § 4-3) (Am. Ord. passed 11-30-1992)



CHAPTER 94:  ABANDONED VEHICLES



Section



   94.01   Administration



   94.02   Definitions



   94.03   Abandoned vehicles; removal



   94.04   Nuisance vehicles; removal



   94.05   Junked vehicles; removal



   94.06   Abandoned, nuisance and junked vehicles; pre-towing



   94.07   Exceptions to prior notice requirement



   94.08   Removal of vehicles; post-towing requirements



   94.09   Right to probable cause hearing



   94.10   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings



   94.11   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles



   94.12   Removal of vehicles from private property



   94.13   Protection against criminal/civil liability



   94.14   Exceptions to chapter



   94.15   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle



   94.16   Alternative remedies



§ 94.01  ADMINISTRATION.



   The Police Department and the Code Administrator of the town shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The
Police Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and
disposition of vehicles determined to be "abandoned" on the public streets
and highways within the town, and on property owned by the town. The Code
Administrator (and/or other public official as designated by the Town
Manager) shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposal of
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicles located on private property. The
town may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or
towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles,
nuisance vehicles, and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this chapter
and applicable state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
limit the legal authority or powers of officers of the Police Department and
Fire Department in enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their
duties.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7- 2014)



§ 94.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, an
abandoned motor vehicle is one that:



      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of
a law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or



      (2)   Is left upon a public street or highway for longer than
7 days;



      (3)   Is left upon property owned or operated by the town for
longer that 24 hours; or



      (4)   Is left upon private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant, or lessee thereof for longer than 2 hours.



   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department
or the Town Code Administrator, respectively, designated to order the removal
of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.



   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2,
the term JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE means a vehicle that does not display a current
license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and that:



      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;



      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or move in the manner in which
it originally was intended to move; or



      (3)   Is more than 5 years old and appears to be worth less
than $500.



   MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel
over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled
vehicle.



   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance,
and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other
insects, rats or other pests;



      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious
vegetation over 8 inches in height;



      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;



      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil,
or other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;



      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be
operated from the inside, such as trunks, hoods and the like;



      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it
falling or turning over;



      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food
waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescent matter of any kind;



      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or
contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or



      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and
safety hazard and a public nuisance by the Town Council.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7- 2014)



§ 94.03  ABANDONED VEHICLES; REMOVAL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be
abandoned as the term is defined herein.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the authorizing officials of the town may
determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle
removed.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7- 2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.04  NUISANCE VEHICLES; REMOVAL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of a motor vehicle, or tor the owner, lessee, or
occupant of the real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after it has been declared a
nuisance vehicle.



   (B)   Upon investigation, the Code Administrator may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle as
defined above, and order the vehicle removed.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7- 2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.05  JUNKED VEHICLES; REMOVAL.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is
located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the
vehicle has been ordered removed.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to have more than 1 junked motor vehicle,
as defined herein, on the premises of private property. A single, permitted
junked motor vehicle must strictly comply with the location and concealment
requirements of this chapter.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, person entitled to the
possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to fail to
comply with the location requirements or the concealment requirements of this
chapter.



   (D)   Subject to the provisions of division (E), the Code
Administrator may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle found in
violation of this chapter, to a storage garage or area. No such vehicle shall
be removed from private property without the written request of the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the premises unless the Code Administrator finds in
writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the
burdens imposed on the private property owner. That finding shall be based on
a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the
corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community,
neighborhood, or area appearance. The following, among other relevant
factors, may be considered:



      (1)   Protection of property values;



      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development
opportunities;



      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;



      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the
community; and



      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional
stability of the area residents.



   (E)   Permitted concealment or enclosure of junked motor vehicles.



      (1)   One junked motor vehicle, in its entirety, may be
located in the rear yard, as defined in the town zoning ordinance, provided
the junked motor vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from a public
street and/or abutting premises by an acceptable covering for not more than
60 calendar days. Junked motor vehicles kept on the premises more than 60
calendar days shall be kept inside a completely enclosed building. The Code
Administrator has the authority to determine whether any junked motor vehicle
is adequately concealed as required by this provision. The covering must
remain in good repair and must not be allowed to deteriorate.



      (2)   Any 1 or more junked motor vehicles kept for a period
exceeding 60 calendar days shall be kept within a completely enclosed
building, as defined in the town zoning ordinance.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.06  ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED VEHICLES; PRE-TOWING.



   (A)   Except as set forth in § 94.07 below, an abandoned, nuisance,
or junked motor vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed only after
notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the
vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor vehicle, if the
names and addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the
possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail. The
person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written record to show the
name(s) and address(es) to whom and to which mailed, and the date mailed. If
such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be
removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on
the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice
indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date
(no sooner than 7 days after the notice is affixed). The notice shall state
that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date, no sooner
than 7 days after the notice is mailed or affixed, unless the vehicle is
moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.



   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property,
nuisance vehicles and junked vehicles to which notice is required to be
given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not
remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle
is abandoned, a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle
that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens,
such appeal shall be made to the Board of Adjustment in writing, heard at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Adjustment, and further
proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard
and decided.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.07  EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of
an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the police and public welfare.



   (B)   Those findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the
authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances
justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice include:



      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on
the public streets and highways, the Town Council hereby determines that the
immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are:



         (a)   Obstructing traffic,



         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or
restricting parking,



         (c)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone,



         (d)   Parked in loading zones,



         (e)   Parked in bus zones, or



         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking
restrictions.



      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to
abandoned or nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property other than the
streets or highways, and on private property, the vehicles may be removed
without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing
official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the
public health, safety, and welfare. By way of illustration and not of
limitation, those circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing
ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in the kind
of location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing
damage to public or private property.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.08  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST- TOWING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which has
been ordered removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage
garage or area by a tow truck operator or towing business contracted to
perform such services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the
authorized town official shall immediately notify the last known registered
owner of the vehicle with such notice to include the following;



      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;



      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;



      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;



      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the
vehicle; and



      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a
probable cause hearing on the removal.



   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, indicating the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through
(A)(5) above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known
address, unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his
agent. If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall
be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the
vehicle.



   (C)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle is
removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates,
the authorized town official shall make reasonable efforts, including
checking the vehicle identification number to determine the last known
registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of the information set
forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) above.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.09  RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING.



   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle, or junked
motor vehicle, the owner or any person entitled to possession is entitled to
a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for
removing the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the
county magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to receive
such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of
receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with
the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11, as amended.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.10  REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.



   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fees, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double
the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing
business having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of
a vehicle, the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle
shall not allow or engage in further violations of this chapter.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.11  SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.



   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed
by the owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the
tow truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle.
Disposition of such a vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the
town and in accordance with G.S. § 44A-1.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.12  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written
request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where the
vehicle is a nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been
ordered removed by the Code Administrator. The town may require any person
requesting the removal of an abandoned, nuisance, or junked motor vehicle
from private property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or
liability incurred because of the removal, storage, or sale thereof.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.13  PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL/CIVIL LIABILITY.



   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to
any owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance, or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of such vehicle as provided
in this chapter.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.14  EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER.



   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:



   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or
junkyard as defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard
Control Act, G.S. §§ 136-141 et seq.;



   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;



   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being
operated in a lawful place and manner; or



   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository
maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 94.15  UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from
any storage facility designated by the town, any vehicle which has been
impounded pursuant to the provision of this chapter unless and until all
towing and impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have
been paid.



(Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 94.16  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   Nothing in this chapter, nor any of its provisions, shall be construed
to impair or limit in anyway the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or
otherwise, nor shall enforcement of 1 remedy provided herein prevent the
enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for herein, any
violation of the terms of this chapter shall subject the violator to the
penalties and remedies, as set forth in § 10.99.



(Ord. 2014-03, passed 4-7-2014)



CHAPTER 95: FAIR HOUSING



Section



   95.01   Declaration of policy



   95.02   Application of chapter



   95.03   Prohibited practices enumerated; exceptions



   95.04   Alleged grievances; establishment of Board of Appeals



   95.05   Interpretation and conflict



§ 95.01  DECLARATION OF POLICY.



   The Policy of the Town of Wilkesboro is to assure equal housing
accommodations for sale or for rent.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 95.02  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter relative to discrimination in housing
shall apply to the sale or rental of housing to a person or persons in a
single dwelling unit and to the rental or lease of a portion of a dwelling
house containing accommodations for a family, except when the remainder of
the dwelling is occupied by the owner or a member of his or her  immediate
family.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 95.03  PROHIBITED PRACTICES ENUMERATED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   No owner of real property shall discriminate against any other
person because of religion, race, color or national origin, or ancestry of
the other person, of the friends or associates of other persons in regard to
the sale or rental of, or dealings concerning, real property located within
the town. Any  discrimination shall be considered an unlawful housing
practice.



   (B)   Nothing is this section shall require an owner to offer
property to the public at large before selling or renting it, nor shall this
section be deemed to prohibit owners from giving preference to prospective
tenants or buyers for any reason other than religion, race, color or national
origin.



   (C)   Nothing in the section shall be construed to bar any
organization operated for religious, charitable or educational purposes,
which is operated, supervised or controlled by an organization which is
recognized as being established for these purposes from limiting admission to
or giving preference to persons legitimately seeking the services of the
organization or from making a selection as is calculated by the organization
to promote the principles and purposes for which it has been established and
maintained.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 95.04  ALLEGED GRIEVANCES; ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person who contends that the provisions of this chapter
have been violated may file a written complaint under oath with the Town
Manager of the Town of Wilkesboro, hereby designated as the officer to whom
complaints shall be filed. Within a reasonable time after the complaint has
been filed, the Town Manager shall make a determination of the merit’s
reasonableness of the complaint, and shall attempt to adjust the grievance
between the parties.



   (B)   The Town Board of Commissioners shall establish a Fair Housing
Board of Appeals, which shall adopt rules governing its organization and for
all proceedings before it, subject to approval by the Town Board of
Commissioners. The Board of Appeals shall consist of 4 members and a
chairperson appointed by the Town Board of Commissioners whose terms shall be
for 1 year.



   (C)   If the complaint or grievance is not resolved by the parties
through the officer, either party to the alleged complaint or the officer,
may appeal or refer the same to the Fair Housing Board of Appeals. An 
appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of
the Board. Upon an appeal being properly filed, the officer shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all papers constituting the record of the matter.



   (D)   The Board shall make a decision and direct what action should
be taken within 45 days of receipt of all papers constituting the record of
the matter.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 95.05  INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.



   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter,
the purpose and spirit for which it is offered shall be of primary concern.



   (B)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with,
abrogate, annul or circumvent the 1968 Civil Rights Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§
3601 et seq., or other laws with regard to fair housing practices. The filing
of a complaint under this section will not preclude the claim from being
pursued in any other court or jurisdiction. It is intended to offer
reasonable persons, acting in good faith, an opportunity to resolve their
differences in an atmosphere of a non-adversary proceeding.



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 96: TREES



Section



   96.01   Purpose and intent



   96.02   Definitions



   96.03   Creation and establishment of Town Tree Board



   96.04   Tree Board duties and responsibilities



   96.05   Administration



   96.06   Public trees -  care and protection



   96.07   Private and government/institutional landowner
responsibilities and rights



   96.08   Unsafe trees



   96.09   Tree care and maintenance



   96.10   Care and maintenance of trees on public property



   96.11   Regulation of tree care professionals



   96.12   Maintenance of regulated planting spaces



   96.13   Removal of regulated trees



   96.14   Landscaping requirements for commercial development



   96.15   Street tree plantings



   96.16   Bufferyards between non-compatible zoning



   96.17   Parking lot plantings



   96.18   Credit for existing vegetation



   96.19   Alternative compliance



   96.20   Removal of historic trees



   96.21   Enforcement; notice and appeal



 



   96.99   Penalty



§ 96.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The Town of Wilkesboro, realizing that trees have a profound
effect on the quality of life in the community, deems it necessary and
desirable in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to enact an
ordinance for the preservation, planting, replacement and removal of trees
without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property.



   (B)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the planting of new
trees and shrubbery; to vigorously encourage the protection of existing trees
and shrubbery, including their root systems; to regulate the preservation,
replacement and indiscriminate removal of trees and to establish procedures
for fulfilling these purposes.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.   The acting Public Works Director or her or his
designee shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions of
this chapter.



   CALIPER.  Diameter measurement of the trunk taken 6 inches above
ground level for trees up to and including 4-inch-caliper size. Measurements
shall be taken 12 inches above the ground for larger tree.



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE. That area of tree roots around the tree measured to
be no less than 1.5 feet in radius for every inch of trunk diameter measured
4 feet above the ground.



   DISEASED TREE.  A process in which fungi, bacteria, mycoplasms, and
viruses are able to invade and infect trees causing poor growth and weak
appearance, disruption of plant processes, distortion of certain tree parts
and strain or death of the tree.



   DBH (DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT).  The diameter of a tree 4-1/2 feet above
the average ground level.



   GOVERNMENT/INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.  Property owned by the federal,
state or county governments but is located in the town. For the purposes of
this chapter government/institutional property specifically excludes property
owned by the Town of Wilkesboro.



   HISTORIC TREE.  A tree that has been specifically designated by the
Town of Wilkesboro Council as historic.



   LARGE MATURING TREE.  Any tree whose height exceeds 35 feet at
maturity.



   MAINTENANCE.  Proper cultural practices including pruning,
fertilization, pest management, and root system protection. The standards of
MAINTENANCE are those published by the National Arborists Association.



   PARK/PUBLIC TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody
vegetation in public parks and on public property at public facilities, and
all area owned by the town.



   PAVED AREA.  Any ground surface covered with concrete, asphalt, stone,
compacted gravel, brick or other paving material.



   PLANNING DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR.  The head of the Town of Wilkesboro
Planning Department and person charged with directing the Town Tree Board.



   PRESERVATION.  Maintaining a stable environment among mature trees is
critical in delaying the transition from maturity to decline and death.
(Prevention of construction damage, root system care, proper tree care
maintenance, etc.) Tree care PRESERVATION should be proactive and then
reactive. Treatments should be preventative rather than remedial to maintain
tree health once tree decline begins. The periodic inspection of trees for
structural defects such as root system damage.



   PRIVATE PROPERTY.  Property that is not owned by a federal, state or
local government.



   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Property owned by the Town of Wilkesboro, North
Carolina or that property on which the town maintains a right-of-way.



   PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.  The head of the Town of Wilkesboro Public
Works Department and person charged with enforcement of this chapter.



   REGULATED TREE.  A tree which is located on private property and whose
establishment and/or maintenance is required in order to acquire a
certificate of occupancy for a proposed use.



   REPLACEMENT.  Replacement of dead, dying, diseased, or removed trees
with trees of equal or comparable size, species, vigor and health.



   REMOVAL.  The cutting down of any tree or shrubbery and all other acts
which cause the actual removal or the effective REMOVAL through damaging,
poisoning or other direct or indirect actions resulting in the death of a
tree or shrubbery.



   ROOT PROTECTION ZONE.  Generally, 18 to 24 inches deep and a radius
distance from the trunk of the tree equal to 1 foot for each 1 inch of trunk
diameter or the outermost drip line of the tree, whichever is greater.



   SMALL MATURING TREE.  Any tree whose height is less than 35 feet at
maturity.



   STREET TREES.  Trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation
on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues,
or ways within the county/town.



   TOWN.  The Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina.



   TOWN ATTORNEY.  The Town Attorney for the Town of Wilkesboro or his or
her designee.



   TOWN PROPERTY.  All real property which is owned or leased by the town
or which is maintained by it or any part of any town right-of-way.



   TOPPING.  Any pruning practice that results in pruning back the main
leader stem of the tree or causes disfigurement of the normal shape of the
tree.



   TREE EVALUATION FORMULA.  A formula for determining the value of
ornamental trees and shrubs as published by the International Society of
Arboriculture.



   UNSAFE TREE.  For a tree to be considered unsafe, one of the following
criteria must apply:



      (1)   A combination of a structural defect and a target.



         (a)   A structural defect which predisposes the tree to
failure; i.e., dead tree, trunk decay, dead branches, V-crotches; and



         (b)   A target such as a structure, road, walkway,
campsite or other area where property exists or people reside. In urban
areas, target areas are almost always in close proximity to trees; or



      (2)   A tree that is otherwise structurally sound trees but
which interfere with the routine activities of people. Such interference
might include obstructions, sight distance problems for motorists, buckling
of sidewalks, attracting lightning, or interference with utilities.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.03  CREATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF TOWN TREE BOARD.



   (A)   The Town Council may establish a Town Tree Board which shall
consist of 5 voting members who are residents of the Town of Wilkesboro. A
slate of members shall be approved by the Town Council. The term of the 5
persons to be appointed by the Council at large shall be 3 years, except that
the term of 2 of the members appointed to the first board shall be for 2
years and the term of 1 member of the first board shall be for 4 years. In
the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his/her
successor shall be appointed for the remaining portion of the term. Members
of the board shall serve without compensation.



   (B)   The Tree Board shall serve under the direction of the Town
Planning Department. The Tree Board shall be staffed by the Planning
Department Director or the director's designee. Non-voting members may be
added to the Tree Board as necessary. Such nonvoting members may include, but
are not limited to, persons from the Town Public Works Department, the Town
Parks and Recreation Department, the local public utility servers and the
local Cooperative Extension Service representative. Non-voting members may be
nominated by any voting member of the Tree Board and shall be installed by a
simple majority vote.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.04  TREE BOARD DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Board to study and
develop and/or update annually, specifications for the care, conservation,
pruning, planting, replanting, of publicly owned trees and shrubs in parks,
along streets, and in other public areas. Such information and reports plan
will be presented annually to the Town Council. The Board, when requested by
the Town Council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and
recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its
work.



   (B)   The Board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules
and regulations, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the
members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business.



   (C)   The Town Tree Board develops and maintains arboricultural
specifications for tree care and replacement as follows:



      (1)   A list of desirable trees for planting along streets in
3 size classes based on mature height: small (under 20 feet,) medium (20 to
35 feet) and large (over 35 feet).



      (2)   A manual of tree planting and tree maintenance
specifications.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.05  ADMINISTRATION.



   (A)   Public Works Director.  For the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this chapter, the Public Works Director shall have
responsibility and control over all trees and shrubbery planted or growing in
or upon town property. The Public Works Director shall also have
responsibility and control over all regulated trees, unsafe and diseased
trees located upon private property.



   (B)   Planning Department Director.  The Planning Department
Director shall facilitate all functions of the Tree Board. This shall
include, but not be limited to, setting meeting times and place, establishing
an agenda, functioning as a liaison to the Town Council and serving as the
Tree Board representative at public forums.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.06  PUBLIC TREES - CARE AND PROTECTION.



   Except as hereinafter provided, no person except a public utility shall
cut, prune, injure or remove any living tree on or in a public highway,
right-of-way, neutral ground, public park, public place, triangle, sidewalk,
or other public property; or cut or disturb or interfere in any way with the
roots of any tree on public property; or spray with any chemical insecticides
or other oils or whitewash any tree on public property; or place any wire,
rope, sign, poster, barricade, or other fixture on a tree or tree guard on
public property; or injure, misuse or remove any device placed to protect any
such tree.



   (A)   No person shall pile building material or other material,
about any tree, plant or shrub in a street in any manner that will in any way
injure such tree, plant or shrub.



   (B)   No person shall pave or place gravel, soil or other such
material within 12 feet of any tree on public property, unless approved by
the administrator.



   (C)   No person shall dump, pour or spill any oil, herbicide,
pesticide or other deleterious matter upon any tree or tree space in any
street, or keep or maintain upon any street, any receptacle from which oil or
herbicide, pesticide or other deleterious matter leaks or drips, or said
material onto any parking or concrete gutter so as to injure any tree on any
public property.



   (D)   No person shall use the neutral grounds, parks, sidewalks, or
public places to dump grass clippings, tree trimmings, rocks or refuse of
airy nature.



   (E)   No person shall decorate a tree or shrub on any public
highway, neutral ground, park, triangle, or sidewalk, either with or without
lights, or place advertising matter, posters or political placards on trees
or in public properties.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.07  PRIVATE AND GOVERNMENT/INSTITUTIONAL LANDOWNER RESPONSIBILITIES
AND RIGHTS.



   (A)   Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way
within the town shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not
(severely) obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there
shall be a clear space of 13 feet above street surface or 8 feet above the
sidewalk surface. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous
trees, or broken or decayed limbs that constitute a menace to the safety of
the public. The town shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on
private or government/institutional property when it interferes with
visibility of any traffic control device or sign or sight.



   (B)   Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the planting
of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and
location of said trees is in accordance with planting specifications of this
chapter and that any such plantings conducted under utility lines shall be
limited to planting material taken from the first 2 classes (small and
medium) of Tree Board's list of desirable trees.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.08  UNSAFE TREES.



   (A)   The Public Works Director may cause or order to be removed any
tree or part thereof on private or government/institutional property which is
unsafe, injurious to the public welfare or which, by reason of its nature, is
injurious to sewers or other public improvements or is infested with an
injurious fungus, insect or other pest.



   (B)   The Public Works Director may enter upon
government/institutional property in the town to spray, or otherwise treat or
cause or order to be sprayed or otherwise treated, any tree infected or
infested by any parasite, insect or pest when it shall be necessary to do so
to prevent the breeding or scattering of any parasite or animal pest and to
prevent danger there from to persons or property or to trees planted on town
property.



   (C)   Whenever, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, the
removal of a tree or shrubbery or government/institutional property shall be
necessary, under the provisions of this section, the Public Works Director
shall have the power to remove such tree or shrubbery or cause or order the
same to be done upon notice and an opportunity to be heard to the property
owner.



   (D)   Prior to exercising the authority conferred by this section,
the Public Works Director shall give the owner notice and an opportunity to
correct the condition by requesting that corrective action be taken. The
request shall be in writing to the owner of the property in question and
shall be acted upon within 30 days (or a lesser period of time if an imminent
threat to life or property exists, from the date of the receipt of the
request.) If, after 30 days or such less time period, the owner has not
corrected the condition or undertaken action that would lead to a timely
correction of the condition, the Public Works Director may enter upon the
property, perform the work necessary to correct the condition and bill the
owner for the actual costs incurred. In situations involving an imminent
threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the town may act without
prior notification to the property owner but notice shall be given within a
reasonable time.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.09  TREE CARE AND MAINTENANCE.



   The Town Council finds and declares that regulation of the cutting,
trimming, and pruning of trees within the town will help ensure that the
health, function and value of trees are protected, and will help to prevent
dangerous branching conditions that may result in danger or injury to
citizens or property.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.10  CARE AND MAINTENANCE OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   (A)   The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and
remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys,
avenues, lanes, public grounds, right-of-ways and squares, as may be
necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and
beauty of such public grounds.



   (B)   All tree work taking place on public property being conducted
by contractors, subcontractors, or town employees will conform to ISA ANSI
standards for tree work.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person,
firm, or town department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on
public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to
shrubs larger than 3 inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a
degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may
be exempted from this provision of this chapter by the Administrator.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any entity, utility, citizen, or tree
care company or government to trench, cut, grade, or fill within the critical
root zone of any public tree without the written consent of the Administrator.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.11  REGULATION OF TREE CARE PROFESSIONALS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to engage in the
business or occupation of pruning, treating, or removing street or park trees
or tree within a public right of way within the town without first applying
for and procuring a permit.



   (B)   In order to receive a permit, applicants must first sign an
affidavit agreeing to abide by ANSI 300 Standards for tree care. A copy of
the most recent ANSI A300 Standards will be available from the Administrator.
Specifically the "topping" of trees shall be prohibited except in cases where
the top of the tree has been injured beyond repair by a storm or related
incident.



   (C)   No permit shall be required of any public service company
including electric utilities and their agents and contractors or town
employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors.



   (D)   Before any permit shall be issued, each applicant shall first
file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of
$300,000 for bodily injury and $100,000 property damage indemnifying the town
or any person injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors
as herein described.



   (E)   The Administrator is authorized to suspend or revoke the tree
care license of any person or business that performs work which does not
comply with tree care standards as specified in this chapter and the related
ANSI standards.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.12  MAINTENANCE OF REGULATED PLANTING SPACES.



   Regulated spaces are those physical areas in which trees and landscape
materials are required by the Tree Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance,
Floodplain Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance or other statute of the Town of
Wilkesboro.



   (A)   The owner or lessee of the property where landscaping is
required shall be responsible for the maintenance and protection of all plant
and screening material. Landscaped areas shall be maintained in good
condition and kept free of debris.



   (B)   Failure to maintain or replace dead, damaged, or diseased
material or to repair a broken fence or wall shall constitute a violation of
this chapter and shall be subject to the penalty provisions in § 96.21 if
not replaced within 30 days of notification.



   (C)   If an act of God or other catastrophic event occurs which
destroys a large quantity of vegetation, the owner or lessee shall have 120
days to replant. Replaced plant material must be in compliance with the
minimum size, spacing, and quantity standards of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.13  REMOVAL OF REGULATED TREES.



   No regulated tree shall be removed without first acquiring a permit
from the Administrator. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the penalty provisions in § 96.21.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.14  LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Applications for zoning permits shall include a landscape plan
if 1 or more of the 4 following conditions are met:



      (1)   The subject property is zoned for non-residential use,
grading is eminent and building is to ensue within 12 months from the date of
the start of grading.



      (2)   Building is planned within 12 months on a previously
graded site.



      (3)   Property contains existing commercial use and a
disturbance of 50% or more of the land area is planned for the purpose of
renovation or addition.



      (4)   Property contains existing commercial use and the cost
of a planned addition or renovation will meet or exceed 50% of the assessed
value of the property as determined by the Wilkes County tax assessor.



   (B)   The landscape plan shall be submitted in written/design form
and shall conform to the general provisions of this section and all
specifications set out in the applicable guidelines as issued by the town.
The landscape plan must address the following 3 vegetative areas:



      (1)   Street tree plantings;



      (2)   Bufferyards between non-compatible zoning; and



      (3)   Parking lot plantings.



   (C)   A landscape plan shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit, or a landscape plan shall be submitted prior to the issuance
of a building permit. Landscaping must be installed and inspected prior to
receiving a certificate of compliance/ occupancy. Vegetation shall be planted
to ensure the best chance of survival and to reduce the potential expense of
replacing damaged plant materials. If the season or weather conditions
prohibit planting the materials, the developer may provide a bond, an
irrevocable letter of credit, or other financial surety in an amount equal to
150% of the cost of installing the required landscaping to guarantee the
completion of the required planting. Upon approval of the financial surety,
the certificate of compliance/occupancy shall be issued. The financial surety
shall be canceled and/or returned upon completion of the required landscaping.



   (D)   All trees planted pursuant to this division must be planted in
amended soils as specified in the guidelines. The trees also must be from an
approved list supplied by the town. Where trees are specified to be 2-inch
caliper, the minimum height shall be 8 feet. If multistem trees are used,
they must have 3 to 5 stems and posses an average height of 8 or greater at
the time of planting. All trees must comply with the American Standard for
Nursery Stock, published by the American Association of Nurserymen.



   (E)   A stand of grass or mulch cover shall be established within 45
days upon any area where soil has been disturbed though grading. This 45 day
period shall begin upon the first day of grading. A stand of grass shall be
considered established when grass blades 3 inches tall or taller cover 80% or
more of the bare earth. Mulch cover shall be considered sufficient when a
layer of organic material is placed on 80% of the exposed surface area to a
depth of 2 inches or more.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.15  STREET TREE PLANTINGS.



   A continuous perimeter planting strip, located on private or
government/institutional property abutting the public right-of-way, with a
minimum width of 8 feet, shall be required.



   (A)   Wherever planting strips are free of overhead lines they shall
be planted with large maturing trees, 1 such tree to be planted not more than
30 feet apart and not less than 15 feet apart. In cases where overhead
utility lines exist, a small maturing tree shall be planted. If small
maturing trees are planted 1 such tree shall be planted not more than 20 feet
apart and not less than 8 feet apart. Each tree shall have a minimum two-inch
caliper when planted. The planting strip for street trees shall be a minimum
width of 8 feet.



   (B)   The public property in the right-of-way may not be used to
fulfill requirements for minimum width or area.



   (C)   Planting materials must be selected from the approved plant
materials list of the Town of Wilkesboro Tree Maintenance and Planting
Specification Manual. Shrubs, ground covers and other vegetative plantings
may be included in landscaped buffer strips but are not required.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.16  BUFFERYARDS BETWEEN NON-COMPATIBLE ZONING.



   Certain land uses may create an adverse impact when developed adjacent
to other less intensive land uses. Bufferyards with a screen shall be
required between a proposed development and a dissimilar existing land use or
zoning designation to provide a transition between them. A bufferyard is a
strip of land together with some form of screening such as existing
vegetation, planted vegetation, a landscaped earthen berm, a fence, a wall,
or a combination of the above.



   (A)   Landscaped bufferyards must be a minimum width of fifteen
feet. Total number of plants required for every 100 linear shall equal or
exceed 18. The composition of these required plants shall be 6 evergreen
trees, 2 large deciduous trees, 2 small deciduous trees, 6 evergreen shrubs
and 2 deciduous shrubs.



   (B)   Grade changes in areas to be included in the landscaped
bufferyards shall not exceed 5% from the pre-development profile, except
wherein an earthen berm is incorporated as part of the landscaped area.



   (C)   All dumpsters, loading docks, or utility structures visible
from a public street or adjacent property line shall be screened unless
already screened by an intervening building or bufferyard. Landscaping shall
not interfere with the access and operation of any such structure or
facility. All unenclosed outdoor storage areas greater than 25 square feet
shall also be screened from adjacent properties and streets. Screen types
shall include 1 of the following:



      (1)   A continuous hedge of evergreen and/or densely twigged
deciduous shrubs;



      (2)   A row of evergreen trees planted no more than 8 feet
apart; or



      (3)   A fence or wall with a minimum height of 6 feet.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.17  PARKING LOT PLANTINGS.



   (A)   Interior parking areas shall be landscaped in addition to the
required landscaped buffer strip.  Trees must be provided in each parking
lot at a minimum average density of 1 shade tree (2-inch caliper minimum) for
each 15 parking spaces provided, or any fraction thereof. In the case of mini
warehouses, such parking spaces shall be determined by the number of parallel
parking spaces contained in the required loading and unloading lanes.



   (B)   The minimum area to be set aside per tree planted is 140
square feet. The minimum width for any 1 dimension of a parking lot planting
space shall be 8 feet.



   (C)   Additionally, interior parking lot landscaping shall include a
minimum area equal to 6.5% of the total project area as depicted in the
landscape plan.



   (D)   Interior landscaped area for individual trees may be reduced
by 10% when required plantings are grouped together. Example: minimum square
footage for 1 tree planted singularly: 140 square feet; minimum square
footage for 2 trees planted together: 252 square feet (140 X 2 - 28 = 252). A
maximum of 25% of the trees planted in compliance with this chapter may be
grouped as specified above. This credit will not apply to parking lots with
less than 8 trees required.



   (E)   Interior landscaped area may be reduced by thirty percent on
any portion of parking lot where water pervious surface material, such as,
gravel, brick pavers, porous concrete or fractured slate is used.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.18  CREDIT FOR EXISTING VEGETATION.



   (A)   Existing preserved trees and shrubs may be credited towards
required buffer trees, street trees, and parking lot trees.



   (B)   (1)   Credits and other incentives to preserve vegetation.
Preserved trees may be credited at the rate of:



         2"-6" caliper tree = 1 tree



         7"-12" caliper tree = 2 trees



         13"-18" caliper tree = 3 trees



         19"-24 " caliper tree = 5 trees



         25" + caliper tree = 6 trees



      (2)   In order to receive credit, preserved vegetation must be
in good health and condition. Trees designated to be preserved must be
indicated on the landscape plan.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.19  ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.



   Modifications for alternative compliance with the requirement of this
chapter may be issued by the Tree Board. The petitioner must show due cause
why said requirements can not be met. Any alternative compliance measures
agreed to by the Tree Board must meet with the intention of this chapter and
must equal or exceed in beneficial effect those of the standard requirements.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.20  REMOVAL OF HISTORIC TREES.



   Please Refer to the Town of Wilkesboro Historic Preservation Commission
Design Guidelines, Section II, Project Review and Approval.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.21  ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE AND APPEAL.



   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
notified by the Public Works Director of the specific violation by certified
or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery. The notice
shall set forth the nature of the violation, the measures required to comply
with this chapter, if compliance is at all practicable, and a reasonable time
period within which compliance must be had.



   (B)   If any aggrieved person disagrees with a decision of the
Public Works Director, such person may request a hearing within 10 working
days of receipt of the violation. The request must be in writing and directed
to the Tree Board's secretary. The secretary shall immediately assemble an
appeals board from among the membership of the Tree Board. The chairperson of
the Town of Wilkesboro Tree Board shall always serve on the appeals board as
the chairperson and shall not vote except to cast the deciding vote in case
of a tie. The members to sit on the board shall be selected on a rotating
basis. The owner shall have the right to be represented by counsel, examine
and cross-examine witnesses at said hearing. The town attorney shall serve as
the appeals board's legal advisor during said hearing. The appeals board
shall render its written decision within 30 days after the hearing.



   (C)   The appeals board may modify, amend or revise the decision
appealed. The decision of the appeals board shall be served upon the
appealing party by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or
by hand delivery.



   (D)   If any aggrieved party is dissatisfied with the decision of
the appeals board, an appeal may be taken to the Wilkes County Superior
Court. Notice of the appeal must be filed within 10 working days of receipt
of the appeals board's decision. The parties may stipulate that the appeal to
the Wilkes County Superior Court shall be a review of the record only. In the
absence of a mutual stipulation, the review shall be de novo.



   (E)   Any aggrieved party may request an injunction to preserve the
status quo during the pending of any appeal in accordance with applicable
North Carolina law.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Civil penalty.  Any person who violates any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty. The amount of the civil
penalty shall be $100 except as hereinafter provided. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. The appeals board
shall determine and assess the civil penalty, if any, at the time of the
appeals hearing, if one is requested. In the absence of an appeal, the Public
Works Director shall submit a request to the chairperson of the appeals board
who shall assemble the appeals board and assess the civil penalty with
supporting documentation upon prior notice to the violating party of the date
and time of the appeals board hearing. At least 10 days notice shall be given
to the violating party of the date, time and location whereby the appeals
board will consider the request to assess a civil penalty. In determining the
amount of the civil penalty, the appeals board shall take into consideration
the amount of money that the violator would be required to spend in order to
be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the amount of money
saved by the violator in violating the ordinance, the cost of replacement of
any removed tree, shrubbery or regulated tree. In determining the specific
amount of the civil penalty for damage or destruction to regulated trees, the
appeals board shall use the standard tree evaluation formula provided by the
International Society of Arboriculture, as it may be amended from time to
time. The standard tree evaluation formula is made a part of this chapter and
adopted herein by reference. A maximum fine of $5,000 is hereby set for that
portion of the civil penalty dealing with replacement cost of an individual
tree. The appeals board shall have no discretion to vary the cost figures set
forth in the formula. The appeals board may however, recommend that the
amount of the civil penalty be modified as part of a negotiated settlement
with the city. Upon failure of the violator to pay the assessed penalty or
reach an equitable settlement within 30 days, an action in the nature of debt
in the name of the city in the appropriate division of the general courts of
justice may be instituted by the city attorney for recovery of a debt.



   (B)   Criminal penalty.  A violation of this chapter subjects the
offender to a civil penalty, pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. §
160A-175, and does not subject the offender to the criminal penalty
provisions of G.S.  § 14-4.



   (C)   Injunctive relief.  Whenever there exists reasonable cause to
believe that any person is violating this chapter or any standards adopted
pursuant to this chapter or any term, condition or provision of an approved
permit, the city may, either before or after the institution of any other
action or proceeding authorized by this chapter, institute a civil action in
the name of the town for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and an order
of abatement demanding the violator to correct the unlawful condition upon or
cease the unlawful use of the property.



(Ord. passed 9-11-2006)



CHAPTER 97:  CEMETERIES



Section



   97.01   Definitions; application



   97.02   Management of cemeteries



   97.03   Burials



   97.04   Disruptive activity prohibited



   97.05   Hours of operation



   97.06   Trees, plantings and landscaping



   97.07   Grave liners



   97.08   Marking new graves



   97.09   Cemetery map required



   97.10   Purchase of burial rights



   97.11   Burial rights



   97.12   Mausoleums, monuments and markers



   97.13   Coping, curbing and the like



   97.14   Approval from Cemetery Administrator



 



   97.99   Penalties and remedies



§ 97.01  DEFINITIONS; APPLICATION.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ADMINISTRATOR.  Any person(s) designated by the Board of
Commissioners to perform the functions and exercise the responsibilities
assigned by this chapter to the ADMINISTRATOR.



      LOT. A plot of ground within the town cemetery, having dimensions
of 4 feet by 12 feet or 4 feet by 10 feet, and intended as a place of
interment for 1 person.



      MARKER. A plaque installed at ground level at the site of a grave
to indicate the name, date of birth and date of death of the person buried
there.



      MAUSOLEUM.  A structure or building substantially exposed above
ground intended to be used for the entombment of remains of a deceased person.



      MONUMENT. A memorial stone or other structure erected at a
gravesite in remembrance of the dead.



   (B)   The following sections apply to all cemeteries within the
town: §§ 97.03(A), 97.04(A), 97.04(B) and 97.04(C).  The remaining
sections of this chapter apply only to cemeteries owned or operated by the
town.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



§ 97.02  MANAGEMENT OF CEMETERIES.



   (A)   The power of decision-making shall rest in the Cemetery
Committee. This Board shall be comprised of 4 Wilkesboro citizens and 1 Town
Commissioner. The Town Manager and the Town Attorney shall be ex officio
members of the Committee and shall be present at each meeting. The Cemetery
Administrator shall be present at each meeting as well and must enact
decisions made by the Cemetery Committee.



   (B)   The term of office for Committee members will be 4 years as
appointed by the  Board of Commissioners.  There shall be no term limits.



   (C)   Nominations will be made each year for Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson and Secretary.



   (D)   The Cemetery Committee will meet quarterly or on-call basis,
with day meetings on the second Tuesday of each quarter at 2:00 p.m. Meetings
will be held on the second Tuesday of January, April, July and October.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



§ 97.03  BURIALS.



   (A)   No person may bury or cause to be buried the body of any
deceased person within the town limits in any place other than a church
cemetery or a cemetery operated by a governmental entity or a private
cemetery licensed or specifically exempted from licensing according to the
North Carolina Cemetery Act (G.S. Article 9 Chapter 65).



   (B)   One interment shall be made per grave, except that of a mother
and infant child, or 2 infant children may be placed in a singular space.



   (C)   Multiple burials in a single grave shall be limited to  the
interment of family members in 1 burial vault with no more than 2 cremation
urns.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.04  DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   (1)   No person may drive any motor vehicle of any kind in
any cemetery except upon the main roads and avenues provided therein for
vehicular traffic.



      (2)   No person may drive any motor vehicle or park any motor
vehicle in any cemetery unless in attendance at burial services or otherwise
engaged in activities consistent with the use of a cemetery as a cemetery.



      (3)   No person may take any dog, horse or other animal into
any cemetery or allow any animal to run at large therein.



      (4)   No person may intentionally disrupt any funeral services
or disturb the quiet and good order of any cemetery by extremely loud or
boisterous conduct, except in the case of military funerals and veterans or
military commemorative exercises, no person may carry or discharge firearms
in any cemetery.



      (5)   No person may post or attach any bills, posters,
placards, pictures or other form of political or commercial advertising
within the cemetery or on the inside or outside of any wall or fence
enclosing any cemetery.



   (B)   As provided in G.S. § 14-148(c) if any person shall willfully
commit any of the acts set forth in the following divisions, he or she shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, in the discretion of the court:



      (1)   Throwing, placing or putting any refuse, garbage, trash
or articles of similar nature in or on a public or private cemetery where
human bodies are interred;



      (2)   Destroying, removing, breaking, damaging, overturning or
polluting any flower, plant, shrub or ornament located in any public or
private cemetery where human bodies are interred without the express consent
of the person in charge of the cemetery; or



      (3)   Provided nothing contained in this section shall
preclude operators of cemeteries from exercising all the powers reserved to
them in their respective rules and regulations relating to the care of
cemeteries.



   (C)   As provided in G.S. § 14-148, if any person shall unlawfully
and on purpose remove from its place any monument of marble, stone, brass,
wood or other material erected for the purpose of designating the spot where
any dead body is interred, or for the purpose of preserving and perpetuating
the memory, name, fame, birth, age or death of any person, whether situated
in or out of the common burying ground, or shall unlawfully and on purpose
break or deface a monument or alter the letters, marks or inscription
thereof, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.  Provided that nothing
contained in this section shall preclude operators of public or private
cemeteries from exercising all the powers reserved to them in their
respective rules and regulations relating to the use and care of cemeteries.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.05  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   The town cemetery shall remain open to the public throughout
the year from sunrise until sunset.



   (B)   No person may enter the town cemetery at any time other than
the hours of operation established by division (A) above.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



§ 97.06  TREES, PLANTINGS AND LANDSCAPING.



   (A)   No person may plant, prune or remove any tree, shrub, flower,
grass or other plant of any kind except with the consent of and in accordance
with the directions of the Cemetery Administrator.



   (B)   The Cemetery Administrator may enter any lot and remove or
trim any tree, shrub or other plant that encroaches upon any other lot or any
walkway, driveway or other part of the cemetery.



   (C)   The Cemetery Administrator may remove from the cemetery all
floral designs, flowers, weeds or plants of any kind from the cemetery as
soon as they deteriorate or otherwise become unsightly.



   (D)   Artificial flowers used in floral decorations may be used in
the cemetery but a limit of 2 months is established as a reasonable period of
use of decorations.  After 2 months arrangements will be removed and
disposed of by the Cemetery Administrator. Flowers and items left on grave
sites:



      (1)   Must be placed near monument to facilitate mowing;



      (2)   Groundskeeper may dispose of wilted flowers;



      (3)   Flowers shall be placed no earlier than 10 days prior
to, and must be removed 14 days after Memorial Day; and



      (4)   Christmas wreaths shall be allowed only for the months
of December and January.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.07  GRAVE LINERS.



   Concrete, steel or fiberglass grave liners shall be used for all
interments in any town-regulated cemetery.  This requirement shall not be
waived under any circumstances.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



§ 97.08  MARKING NEW GRAVES.



   (A)   Placement of monuments, markers or footstones for
identification of grave sites shall be the responsibility of the owners and
shall be accomplished within 6 months from the time of burial.  Temporary
markers may be removed by the town when they have outlived their usefulness.



   (B)   No person shall erect or cause to be erected any coping,
border or other delineation of a grave space unless the materials used to
achieve an effect are flush with the surface or ground that they are placed
upon.  Any border or coping hereafter erected shall be subject to removal by
the town if not installed according to the above requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



§ 97.09  CEMETERY MAP REQUIRED.



   (A)   There shall be maintained in the Town Clerk’s office an
official cemetery map which shall depict, as accurately as possible, the
boundaries of the town cemetery and the location and dimension of all lots
within the cemetery.



   (B)   Burial rights in all lots shall be sold in reference to the
official cemetery map.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



§ 97.10  PURCHASE OF BURIAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   The town shall sell burial rights in cemetery lots in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the schedule of fees
adopted and revised from time to time by the Board of Commissioners, a copy
of which schedule shall be maintained in the office of the Town Clerk. 



   (B)   A surveying and locating fee of $100 must be paid in full at
the time of internment.



   (C)   A deed or certificate of burial right shall be issued to the
person who purchases a burial right.  The deed or certificate shall identify
the purchaser and the specific lot or lots to which the deed or certificate
applies.



   (D)   A discounted rate of 20% shall be applied to the purchase of
burial rights for any citizen of the Town of Wilkesboro.



   (E)   Proof of purchase shall be required prior to any burial. 
Proper proof shall be a copy of the deed issued by the town.



   (F)   Effective with the adoption of this chapter the town shall
record all newly issued deeds for cemetery lots.  The recording fee shall be
noted in the town’s schedule of fees and paid prior to the issuance of the
deed.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



§ 97.11  BURIAL RIGHTS.



   (A)   The deed or certificate of burial right entitles the owner
thereof (i.e., the purchaser) to use the designated lots as a place of
burial, subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and subject to
the town’s authority to operate, regulate, control and abandon cemeteries.
Upon the death of the owner of a deed or certificate of burial right, all
rights evidenced by the deed or certificate shall pass to the owner’s
heirs, legatees or devisees in the same manner as other interests in personal
property.



     (B)   No person may purchase or otherwise acquire any burial
right for the purpose of sale or exchange. No person may sell or exchange any
burial right for a profit or gain.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.12  MAUSOLEUMS, MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.



   (A)   No mausoleums may be placed or located within a town cemetery
after the effective date of this chapter.



   (B)   Monuments may be placed only in areas so designated on the
town cemetery plat of record.  The designated area may be enlarged, reduced
or eliminated in accordance with the provisions for the amendment of town
ordinances.



   (C)   (1)   Individual lots shall be marked with a bronze or
stone marker placed flush with the ground on an apron.



      (2)   Tombstones and markers must have a 4 to 6-inch base
border to facilitate mowing.



      (3)   No gravel or decorative rock is allowed around grave
markers.



      (4)   Tombstones and markers must be set on foundations and
set so tops are level with the sod and must be made of bronze, granite,
marble or other suitable material approved by the Cemetery Administrator.



      (5)   Tombstones and markers should be installed under the
supervision of the Cemetery Administrator.



      (6)   No grave marker or ledger shall be placed on top of any
grave in which interment was not made in a vault made of metal, cement or
other material that will not decay.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.13  COPING, CURBING AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or construct any
coping, curbing, border or corner post on any lot or grave in a town cemetery
unless the coping, curbing, border or corner post is flush with the surface
of the adjacent ground.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any wire arbors,
fencing or any sign.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)  Penalty, see § 97.99



§ 97.14  APPROVAL FROM CEMETERY ADMINISTRATOR.



   To avoid overlapping plots, the town Cemetery Administrator must
approve of all monuments and markers before their being put into place. 



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



§ 97.99  PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.



   (A)   A violation of any  provisions in this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4.



   (B)   Violations shall also subject the offender to a civil penalty
of $100.  If a person fails to pay this penalty within 10 days after being
cited for a violation, the town may seek to recover the penalty by filing a
civil action in the nature of debt.



   (C)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter through any
appropriate equitable action.



   (D)   Each day that a violation continues after the offender has
been notified of the violation shall constitute separate a offense.



   (E)   The town shall have the right to apply any monetary relief
acquired towards remedying the violation as noted in the citation.



   (F)   The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any 1 or
any combination of the foregoing remedies.



(Ord. passed 10-3-2005)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   GENERAL REGULATIONS





         111.   SALESPERSONS AND PEDDLERS





         112.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES





         113.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS





         114.   SHORT-TERM LEASE/RENTAL VEHICLES





         115.   CABLE TELEVISION





         116.   ALARM SYSTEMS





         117.   INSTALLATION OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT





         118.   VEHICLES FOR HIRE




CHAPTER 110:  GENERAL REGULATIONS



Section



General Provisions



   110.01   Definitions



   110.02   Construction of chapter



Levy



   110.15   Levy of tax



   110.16   Who must pay tax



   110.17   Period of license; due date



   110.18   Proration of tax



   110.19   Refunds



   110.20   Separate businesses



   110.21   Computation of tax based on gross receipts



   110.22   Exemptions



Licenses



   110.35   Application



   110.36   Reasons for refusal or revocation of a license



   110.37   Unqualified applicants; right to a conference



   110.38   Tax collector to issue license; payment of tax a
prerequisite



   110.39   Amount of tax disputed



   110.40   Revocation



   110.41   Form and contents of license



   110.42   Assignments



   110.43   Changes in the business conducted by licensee during the
tax year



   110.44   Tax collector to furnish duplicates



   110.45   Record of conferences



   110.46   Providing notice to an applicant or licensee



   110.47   Duty to determine whether tax due



   110.48   Tax collector to investigate



   110.49   Duty to keep books



   110.50   Duty to permit inspection



   110.51   Duty to post license



   110.52   Notice of deficiency



   110.53   Request for a conference



   110.54   Deficiency to become final



   110.55   Conference held



   110.56   Collection of deficiency



   110.57   Enforcement of chapter



 



Editor’s Note:



   The License Ordinance, as herein defined, is omitted from this code due
to the frequency of changes therein; but all ordinances which constitute the
License Ordinance have been saved from repeal and are filed, together, in the
office of the Town Clerk and maintained by him or her in current status at
all times. The License Ordinance is available for inspection and use during
all regular business hours.



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to levy an annual license tax on trades, businesses
and the like, see G.S. § 160A-194



   Collection of town licenses generally, see G.S. § 105-33



   Prohibition against licensing by town of certain professional people,
see G.S. § 105-41



   State tax on businesses and the like, see G.S. §§ 105-33 et seq.



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 110.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUSINESS.  includes each trade, occupation, profession, business, and
franchise taxed under this ordinance.



      A business is SEASONAL in nature when it is conducted for profit
six months out of the year or less.



   PERSON.  includes any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary,
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship,
company, firm, or other legal entity.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.02  CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER .



   This chapter is enacted for revenue purposes only. Therefore, it should
be construed to require payment of the maximum tax permitted under its terms.
In addition issuance of a license in accordance with this chapter does not
excuse a licensee from compliance with any other applicable ordinance or
statute. This chapter does not prevent the Town of Wilkesboro from imposing
license taxes on additional businesses, from increasing or decreasing the
amount of any license tax or from regulating any business taxed.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



LEVY



§ 110.15  LEVY OF TAX.



   An annual privilege license tax is hereby levied on each business
conducted within this city listed in sections A through D of this chapter in
the amount set forth in those sections.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.16  WHO MUST PAY TAX.



   Each person who conducts a business within the Town of Wilkesboro is
subject to this chapter. A person “conducts business” when he or she
engages in one act of business taxed under this chapter. He or she conducts
the business “within the city” if he or she maintains a business location
within the city; or if, either personally or through agents, he or she:



   (A)   Solicits business within the city limits; or



   (B)   Picks up or delivers goods or services within the Town of
Wilkesboro limits.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.17  PERIOD OF LICENSE; DUE DATE.



   (A)   Annual licenses. Unless the section of this chapter levying
the privilege license tax applicable to a particular business provides
otherwise, a license issued in accordance with this chapter is good for the
12 month period beginning May 1 and ending April 30. The tax is due on May 1
of each year. However, if a person begins a business after May 1 of a year,
the tax for that year is due before the business is begun.



   (B)   Licenses for periods shorter than one year. If the section of
this chapter levying the privilege license tax applicable to a particular
business so provides, a license may be issued for a period of one day, one
week, or some comparable period of less than a full license year. A person
may not commence a business conducted within the Town of Wiikesboro and taxed
under such a provision until the privilege license tax due is paid and may
not continue such a business beyond the period for which the license is
issued.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.18  PRORATION OF TAX.



   If a business is begun after November 1 and before May 1, the amount of
tax due is half the amount otherwise due. If a business is seasonal in nature
and if the amount of tax is not based on gross receipts, the amount of tax
due is half the amount otherwise due.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.19  REFUNDS.



   If for any reason a licensee discontinues his or her business during
the license year, he or she is not entitled to a refund.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.20  SEPARATE BUSINESSES.



   A separate license is required and a separate privilege license tax
must be paid for each place of business unless two or more places of business
under common ownership are contiguous to each other, communicate directly
with and open into each other, and are operated as a unit. In addition a
separate privilege license tax must be paid for each business taxable under
this chapter conducted by the taxpayer at any one location; however, the tax
collector may issue a single license for all taxable business conducted at
one location by a single taxpayer.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.21  COMPUTATION OF TAX BASED ON GROSS RECEIPTS.



   (A)   Whenever this chapter levies a privilege license tax computed
on the basis of gross receipts, “gross receipts” means the amount
reported as gross receipts on a business’s state income tax return, or on
the federal income tax return filed with the state income tax return if the
state return does not separately state gross receipts for the most recently



completed tax year. The tax payer will be responsible for the separation of
gross receipts for each type of business license issued.



   (B)   (1)   If a business has not been in operation long enough
for the information required in division (A) of this section to be available,
the tax collector shall estimate gross receipts for the business on the basis
of gross receipts of comparable businesses, or any other information that the
tax collector considers useful.



      (2)   On or before the May 31 immediately after the license
year, each licensee who paid the tax for the past license year based on
estimated gross receipts shall submit to the tax collector a sworn final
report showing the amount of gross receipts, for the license year. If the
amount shown is more than estimated gross receipts the licensee shall pay the
amount of additional tax that would have been due had the estimate been
accurate. If the amount shown is less than estimated gross receipts, the Town
of Wilkesboro shall apply a credit toward current license fees for the
difference between the actual tax paid and the amount of tax that would have
been due had the estimate been accurate.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.22  EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided in this section or by
state law, no person is exempt from the payment of a privilege license tax
levied by this chapter.



   (B)   Charitable organizations. A person, who operates a business
for a religious, educational, charitable, or fraternal purpose, when the
entire gross income of the business is used for such a purpose, is exempt
from paying any privilege license tax levied by this chapter. The 501C3
(non-profit) forms must be presented to the tax collector in order to receive
this exemption.



   (C)   Blind persons and members of the armed forces and merchant
marine. Blind persons and persons who serve in the United States armed forces
or the merchant marine are exempt from paying any privilege license tax
levied by this chapter to the extent provided by G.S. § 105-249 and G.S. §
105-249.1.



   (D)   Must obtain license. A person exempt from paying a privilege
license tax levied by this chapter shall nevertheless obtain a license from
the tax collector. The license shall state that the licensee is exempt from
paying the privilege license tax.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



LICENSES



§ 110.35  APPLICATION.



   A person shall apply to the tax collector for each license required by
this chapter no less than thirty days before the date the tax is due. The
application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by the tax collector,
shall contain:



   (A)   The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an
individual, a partnership, a corporation, or some other entity;



   (B)   The nature of the business;



   (C)   Where the business is conducted;



   (D)   An address where notices and statements may be mailed to as
required by this chapter;



   (E)   Whether the business is regulated by a state occupational
licensing board subject to G.S. Chapter 93B, and if so, the serial number,
preferably a copy of the state license the applicant currently holds; and



   (F)   Any other information the tax collector determines to be
necessary to compute the amount of tax due.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.36  REASONS FOR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE.



   The tax collector shall refuse to issue a license or shall revoke a
license for either of the following reasons:



   (A)   The applicant must first obtain zoning compliance and fire
inspection, if applicable;



   (B)   The applicant misrepresents a fact relevant to the amount of
tax due or his or her qualifications for a license; or



   (C)   The applicant refuses to provide information necessary to
compute the amount of tax due.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.37  UNQUALIFIED APPLICANTS; RIGHT TO A CONFERENCE.



   (A)   After receipt of the completed application, if the tax
collector believes that a reason exists for refusing a license under §
110.36, the tax collector shall refuse to accept payment of the tax and shall
not issue the license. At the applicant’s request, the tax collector shall,
in accordance with §§ 110.46, give the applicant a written statement of the
reason for refusing the license. The applicant may, within ten days after the
day the statement is received, request a conference to discuss the refusal.
In the request the applicant shall specify why the application for a license
should not be refused. The tax collector shall arrange the conference within
a reasonable time.



   (B)   If the collector refuses to issue a license, the applicant may
reapply for a license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the
application was refused no longer exists, and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the tax collector shall issue the license in
compliance with § 110.38.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.38  TAX COLLECTOR TO ISSUE LICENSE; PAYMENT OF TAX A PREREQUISITE.



   After receipt of the completed application, if the tax collector
believes that no reason exists for refusal of a license under § 110.36, the
tax collector shall determine the amount of tax due and notify the applicant
of that amount. The tax collector shall not issue a license until the tax is
paid.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.39  AMOUNT OF TAX DISPUTED.



   If disputes arise over the amount the tax collector determines to be
due, the applicant may either refuse to pay and request a conference with the
tax collector to discuss the determination, or pay the amount and request a
conference to discuss the right to a refund. If a conference is requested,
the tax collector shall arrange it within a reasonable time.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.40  REVOCATION.



   (A)   The tax collector shall revoke a license if a reason exists to
revoke it as set forth in § 110.36. Before revoking a license, the tax
collector shall give the licensee written notice of the grounds for
revocation, in accordance with § 110.46. The licensee may within ten days
after the day on which notice is served request a conference with the tax
collector in writing. The request shall specify the reasons why the license
should not be revoked. The tax collector shall arrange the conference within
a reasonable time.



   (B)   If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days
after the day on which notice is served, the tax collector shall revoke the
license. If the licensee requests a conference, the tax collector may not
revoke the license until after the conference.



   (C)   If the tax collector revokes a license, the former licensee
may apply for a new license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which
the license was revoked no longer exists and if no other reason exists for
refusing to issue a license, the tax collector shall issue the license in
accordance with § 110.38.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.41  FORM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE.



   A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where
the business is conducted (if it is to be conducted at one place), the nature
of the business licensed, the period for which the license is issued, and the
amount of tax paid. The tax collector shall keep a copy of each license
issued.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.42  ASSIGNMENTS.



   A license may be assigned if (1) a business licensed under this chapter
and carried on at a fixed place is sold as a unit to any person, and (2) the
purchaser is to carry on the same business at the same place. Such a change
shall be reported to the tax collector in accordance with § 110.43.
Otherwise, each license issued under this chapter is a personal privilege and
is not assignable.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.43  CHANGES IN THE BUSINESS CONDUCTED BY LICENSEE DURING THE TAX YEAR.



   A licensee or an assignee shall report a change in the information
contained in the license application to the tax collector within ten days
after the change occurs. If information shown on the license itself is
affected, the licensee or assignee shall surrender the license to the tax
collector when reporting the change.



   (A)   Changes affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no
reasons for revoking the license under § 110.36 and the change results in
the imposition of a separate or additional tax, the tax collector shall
reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of the separate or
additional tax.



   (B)   Changes not affecting the amount of tax due. If there are no
reasons for revoking the license under § 110.36 and the change does not
result in an imposition of a separate or additional tax, the tax collector
shall reissue a license reflecting the change upon payment of a fee of $5.



   (C)   Change requiring refusal of a license. If there is reason for
revoking the license under § 110.36, the tax collector shall refuse to
reissue a license and shall instead begin proceedings to revoke the license
in accordance with § 110.18.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.44  TAX COLLECTOR TO FURNISH DUPLICATES.



   Upon satisfactory proof that a license has been lost or destroyed, the
tax collector shall furnish a duplicate for a fee of $1 per copy.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.45  RECORD OF CONFERENCES.



   The tax collector shall maintain for 3 years a record of each
conference held in accordance with this chapter. The record shall contain the
applicant’s or licensee’s name, the date of the conference, and a brief
statement of the issues discussed and the result reached. After 3 years, the
tax collector shall dispose of the record in accordance with G.S. § 121-5.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.46  PROVIDING NOTICE TO AN APPLICANT OR LICENSEE.



   Whenever this chapter requires the tax collector to give written
statement or notice to an applicant or a licensee, the tax collector may do
so in one of 3 ways:



   (A)   By personally delivering the statement or notice to the
applicant or licensee;



   (B)   By mailing the statement or notice by registered or certified
mail and returning the receipt requested to the address specified for that
purpose in the license application; or



   (C)   By causing the statement or notice to be served on the
applicant or licensee in accordance with the procedures for service of
process under Rule 4, North Carolina Rules of Civil Procedure.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.47  DUTY TO DETERMINE WHETHER TAX DUE.



   Each person has the duty to determine whether the business he or she
conducts is taxed under this chapter and if so, whether that tax has been
paid for the current year.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.48  TAX COLLECTOR TO INVESTIGATE.



   If the tax collector has reason to believe that a person is conducting
a business in the city in violation of this chapter, the tax collector shall
conduct an investigation to determine the person’s tax liability.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.49  DUTY TO KEEP BOOKS.



   Each person who conducts a business taxed under this chapter shall keep
all records and books necessary to compute the tax liability. If a person
fails to keep books and records as required, the tax collector shall make a
determination of that person’s tax liability from the information available.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.50  DUTY TO PERMIT INSPECTION.



   Each person who conducts business in the city shall permit the tax
collector to inspect the business premises during normal business hours to
determine the nature of the business conducted there and to examine the books
and records to determine the nature and amount of business transacted.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.51  DUTY TO POST LICENSE.



   A licensee shall post the license or licenses conspicuously in the
place of business licensed. If the licensee has no regular place of business,
the license must be kept where it may be inspected at all times by the proper
city officials.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.52  NOTICE OF DEFICIENCY.



   If the tax collector determines that a person has not paid the full
amount of tax due under this chapter, either for the current license year or
for a prior license year, the tax collector shall give the person written
notice of the deficiency, in accordance with § 110.46. The notice of
deficiency shall specify the total amount of tax due; the section of this
chapter upon which the tax is based; the amount of tax paid; any interest
due; the balance owed; the manner and time period in which the person may
respond to the notice of the deficiency; and the consequences of failing to
respond as specified.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.53  REQUEST FOR A CONFERENCE.



   The person may, within 10 days after the day on which notice is served,
request a conference in writing. The request shall specify the person’s
objections to the notice of deficiency. By way of illustration but not
limitation, a person who receives notice of a deficiency may object on the
following grounds:



   (A)   That the tax due has already been paid;



   (B)   That the tax collector miscalculated the amount of tax due;



   (C)   That the tax collector based his calculation on incorrect or
insufficient information concerning either the nature or the amount of
business conducted; or



   (D)   That the tax collector based the determination on an erroneous
interpretation of a section of this chapter that establishes a category of
business subject to a particular tax.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.54  DEFICIENCY TO BECOME FINAL.



   If the taxpayer fails to request a conference under § 110.53, the
deficiency becomes final and the tax collector shall proceed to collect the
deficiency.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.55  CONFERENCE HELD.



   If the taxpayer requests a conference, the tax collector shall not
proceed to collect the deficiency until hearing the taxpayer’s objections
and determining that the deficiency should become final. The tax collector
shall maintain a record of each conference held for three years in accordance
with § 110.53. The record shall contain the name of the taxpayer, the date
of the conference, a brief statement of the issues discussed, and the results
of the discussion. After three years, the tax collector shall dispose of the
record in compliance with G.S. § 121-5.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.56  COLLECTION OF DEFICIENCY.



   (A)   The tax collector may use any of the following methods to
collect a deficiency:



      (1)   Criminal prosecution in accordance with § 110.57(A);



      (2)   Equitable relief in accordance with § 110.57(B); or



      (3)   The remedies of levy, sale, attachment and garnishment
in accordance with G.S. § 160A-207.



   (B)   Any person who continues to conduct a business taxed under
this chapter without payment of the tax is liable for the additional tax of
5% every 30 days as imposed by G.S. § 105-109.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



§ 110.57  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Criminal remedies. Conducting business within the Town of
Wilkesboro without having paid the privilege license tax imposed by this
chapter, or without a valid license issued in accordance with this chapter,
or without posting a license in compliance with § 110.51 of this chapter is
a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. § 105-109 or § 14-4. Each day
that a person conducts business in violation of this chapter is a separate
offense. A fine of $50 per separate offense will apply. Payment of a fine
imposed in criminal proceedings in accordance with this section does not
relieve a person of the liability for taxes imposed under this chapter.



   (B)   Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set
forth in division (A) of this section and in compliance with G.S. §
160A-175(d), the Town of Wilkesboro may seek an injunction against any person
who conducts a business in violation of this chapter.



(Ord. 2012-1, passed 4-2-2012)



CHAPTER 111:  SALESPERSONS AND PEDDLERS



Section



   111.01   Peddlers of books, magazines and the like



   111.02   Salespersons of advertising matter



   111.03   Application for and issuance of permit



   111.04   Permits not in lieu of any license which may be required



   111.05   Itinerant merchants prohibited



   111.06   Waiver



   111.07   Definition



§ 111.01  PEDDLERS OF BOOKS, MAGAZINES AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business, trade or
profession of peddler, book agent, magazine agent or salesperson traveling on
foot or by vehicle or other conveyance of any kind and going from house to
house or from person to person and soliciting patronage in his or her
respective line of business, to peddle his or her wares, publications or
other merchandise of whatsoever kind or description upon the streets of the
town or in any public place within the corporate limits of the town without
first procuring a permit from the Board of Commissioners to engage in the
business.



(Prior Code, § 10-11)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Licensing peddlers, see G.S. § 66-252



   Payment of license taxes to municipal tax collectors, see G.S. § 105-33



§ 111.02  SALESPERSONS OF ADVERTISING MATTER.



   Any person selling or offering for sale advertising space, advertising
novelties or advertising devices shall, before engaging in business in the
town, procure from the Board of Commissioners a permit to do so; provided
that this section shall not apply to the sale of advertising space in any
daily, weekly, semiweekly or monthly newspapers of recognized character or in
nationally known magazines published by business institutions and issued with
regularity at least 12 times a year, or on buses, airplanes, cabs,
billboards, posters, wall signs, motion picture screens, radio or in the city
or town and state directories and telephone directories, nor to the sale of
calendars and novelties to be given away by the purchaser to advertise his or
her own business.



(Prior Code, § 10-12)



§ 111.03  APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Any person desiring to engage in a business, trade or profession for
which a town permit is required by this chapter shall file with the Board of
Commissioners an application for a permit, which application shall state the
name of the applicant, the nature of his or her business and any other
reasonable information which may be requested by the Board, and the Board
shall not issue a permit, as provided herein, to any person unless the Board
shall be satisfied as to the legality of the wares, devices, publications or
other merchandise offered for sale.



(Prior Code, § 10-13)



§ 111.04  PERMITS NOT IN LIEU OF ANY LICENSE WHICH MAY BE REQUIRED.



   Permits required by this chapter shal1 be in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any license or license tax which may be imposed in the License
Ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 10-14)



§ 111.05  ITINERANT MERCHANTS PROHIBITED.



   Itinerant merchants who operate for profit are hereby prohibited from
any business activities within the corporate limits of the Town of Wilkesboro.



(Ord. passed 12-11-2006)



§ 111.06  WAIVER.



   All provisions of Chapter 111 are hereby waived on the grounds or
premises of town-sanctioned festivals or events.



(Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-12-2009)



§ 111.07  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ITINERANT MERCHANT.  Any person or persons, firm or corporation,
either principal or agent, employer or employee who engages in a temporary
business in the city by selling or offering for sale goods, wares,
merchandise or things or articles of value for a period of less than 60 days
and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, hires, leases or
occupies any room, building, structure or stand on any real property or on or
adjoining any street or public place in the city.  The person, firm or
corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this
chapter by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader,
merchant or auctioneer, or by reason of conducting such temporary business in
connection with or as a part of any local business or in the name of any
local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.



(Ord. 2009-01, passed 1-12-2009)



CHAPTER 112:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



Section



   112.01   Where alcoholic beverages prohibited



   112.02   Alcohol; sale and consumption in public streets and parks



§ 112.01  WHERE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or serve wine, beer,
whiskey or other alcoholic beverages of any kind on the public streets or in
any public building within the limits of the town.



(Prior Code, § 3-1)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 112.02  ALCOHOL; SALE AND CONSUMPTION IN PUBLIC STREETS AND PARKS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or serve wine, beer,
malt beverages, alcoholic liquor, whiskey or other alcoholic beverages of any
kind on the public streets, in any public building, or within the boundary of
any park or parking lot associated with a park within the limits of the town.



(Am. Ord. passed 5-1-1989)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 113:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



Section



   113.01   Massage and body work therapy practice



§ 113.01  MASSAGE AND BODY WORK THERAPY PRACTICE.



   Massage establishments as referred to as massage and body work therapy
practice as set forth in G.S. Article 36, §§ 90-620 et seq. shall govern
massage establishments, as referred to as massage and body work therapy
practice as set forth therein, within the town limits of the Town of 
Wilkesboro effective March 3, 2003.



(Am. Ord. passed 3-3-2003)



CHAPTER 114:  SHORT-TERM LEASE/RENTAL VEHICLES



Section



   114.01   Definitions



   114.02   Levy of tax; collection of the tax



   114.03   Report and payment of tax



   114.04   Taxpayer to keep records



   114.05   Tax Collector to provide forms



   114.06   Situs



   114.07   Penalties and remedies



   114.08   Administration



   114.09   Authority and effective date



§ 114.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CUSTOMER. Any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a short-term
lease or rental basis.



   GENERAL STATUTES.  The North Carolina General Statutes and any
reference to a particular section thereof shall include the same as may be
from time to time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  The amount that is or would be reported as gross
receipts on a business’s state income tax return, or on the federal income
tax return filed with the state income tax return if the state return does
not separately state gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year.
Taxes collected hereunder are not subject to the tax herein imposed and are
not included in GROSS RECEIPTS.



   LEASE or RENTAL.  A transfer for consideration of the use, but not the
ownership, of property to another for period of time.



(G.S. § 105-164.3(17))



   LONG-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL.  A lease or rental made under a written
agreement to lease or rent property to the same person for a period of at
least 365 continuous days.



(G.S. § 105-187.1(3))



   PERSON.  Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary,
corporation, unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship,
company, firm or other legal entity.



   SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL.  Any lease or rental of a vehicle that is
not a long-term lease or rental.



(G.S. §§ 160A-215.1(e)(2) and 105-187.1(7))



   TAX COLLECTOR.  That individual appointed by the governing body
pursuant to G.S. § 105-349 (the provisions of the municipal charter), to
collect taxes on behalf of the Town of Wilkesboro and any other person
authorized to carry out the duties and functions of that individual.



   TAXPAYER.  Any person liable for the taxes imposed by this chapter.



   VEHICLE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A motor vehicle of the private passenger type, including
a passenger van, minivan or sport utility vehicle.



      (2)   A motor vehicle of the cargo type, including a cargo
van, pickup truck or truck with a gross vehicle weight of 26,000 pounds or
less used predominantly in the transportation of property for other than
commercial freight, and that does not require the operator to possess a
commercial drivers license.



      (3)   A trailer or semitrailer with a gross vehicle weight of
6,000 pounds or less.



(G.S. 160A-215.1(e)(1))



(Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



§ 114.02  LEVY OF TAX; COLLECTION OF THE TAX.



   (A)   A tax hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to 1.5% of
the gross receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at
retail to the general public. This tax on gross receipts is in addition to
the privilege taxes authorized by G.S. § 160A-211.



   (B)   Every person engaged in the business of the short-term lease
or rental of vehicles at retail to the general public shall collect at the
time of the lease or rental the tax herein levied, place the tax so collected
in a segregated account, and thereafter remit the tax to the Tax Collector in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The taxpayer shall include a
provision in each retail short-term lease or rental agreement stating that
the percentage amount enacted by this chapter of the total lease or rental
price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The
amount of the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and
shown separately on the taxpayer’s records. The tax shall be paid by the
customer to the taxpayer as trustee for an account of the Town of Wilkesboro.
The taxpayer shall be liable for the collection thereof and for its payment
to the Tax Collector and the taxpayer’s failure to charge or to collect the
tax from the customer shall not affect liability.



(Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



§ 114.03  REPORT AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   Taxes levied under this chapter are due and payable when a return is
required to be filed. Every taxpayer shall, within the time specified, submit
a return to the Tax Collector on the form prescribed by the Tax Collector. A
return must be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s agent. Returns of
taxpayers are due to the Tax Collector each month on or before the fifteenth
day of the month following the month in which the tax accrues. As provided in
G.S. § 160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public record and
information contained in a return may be disclosed only in accordance
therewith.



(Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



§ 114.04  TAXPAYER TO KEEP RECORDS.



   The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross
receipts received by the taxpayer in the conduct of business and other books
or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which
the taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this chapter.  It shall be
the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of 3 years all
records of gross receipts and other books and accounts described.  All
records, books and accounts herein described shall be open for examination at
all reasonable hours during the day by the Tax Collector or his or her duly
authorized agent.



(Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



§ 114.05  TAX COLLECTOR TO PROVIDE FORMS.



   The Tax Collector shall design, prepare, print and make available to
all taxpayers operating within the municipal boundaries of the Town of
Wilkesboro forms and instructions for filing returns to ensure a full
collection of and an accounting for taxes due. The failure of any taxpayer to
obtain or receive forms shall not relieve taxpayer from the payment of the
tax at the time and in the manner provided.



(Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



§ 114.06  SITUS.



   The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be deemed to
have occurred at the location of the entity from which the customer takes
delivery of the vehicle.



(G.S. § 160A-215.1(b))  (Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



§ 114.07  PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.



   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable
Subchapter VIII (Local Government Sales and Use Tax) of Chapter 105 of the
General Statutes, as contained in Article 5 and Article 9, Subchapter 1,
Chapter 105 thereof, shall be applicable in like manner to the tax authorized
to be levied and collected under this chapter to the extent that the same are
not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The governing body of the Town
of Wilkesboro may exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in
collecting sales and use tax.



(Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



§ 114.08  ADMINISTRATION.



   In addition to the provisions herein, the levy and collection of the
taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the same manner as
the sales and use tax as provided in G.S. Article 5, Chapter 105, Subchapter
1.



(G.S. § 160A-215.1(d))



(Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



§ 114.09  AUTHORITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §
160A-215.1.



   (B)   This chapter and the taxes thereby levied and imposed shall
become effective July 1, 2000.



(Ord. passed 6-5-2000)



CHAPTER 115:  CABLE TELEVISION



Section




General Provisions




   115.001   Statement of intent and purpose



   115.002   Short title



   115.003   Definitions




Franchise Requirements




   115.015   Franchise required



   115.016   Federal, state and town jurisdiction



   115.017   Rights reserved to grantor



   115.018   Franchise agreement and renewal; fees



   115.019   Initial franchise applications; consideration



   115.020   Grant of additional franchise and competing service



   115.021   Permits for non-franchised entities



   115.022   Review for competition




Design Provisions




   115.035   System design; upgrades



   115.036   Drops to public buildings



   115.037   Use of grantee facilities



   115.038   Non-discriminatory access to cable system



Access Channels; Technical Standards and Customer Service Practices



   115.050   Institutional network; access channels



   115.051   General technical standards and customer service practices



   115.052   Books and records available to grantor



   115.053   Reports required



   115.054   Test and compliance procedure



   115.055   Emergency requirements



   115.056   Programming decisions



   115.057   Cable system office hours and telephone availability



   115.058   Parental control



   115.059   Periodic subscriber survey



   115.060   Installations exceeding standard installation



   115.061   Service area and line extension policy



   115.062   Town monitoring



   115.063   Access to inside wiring




Construction Standards




   115.075   Right-of-way construction



   115.076   Compliance with laws



   115.077   Minimum interference



   115.078   Repair of property



   115.079   Erection of poles



   115.080   Reservations of street rights



   115.081   Underground installation



   115.082   Conduit



   115.083   Clearing poles and cables



   115.084   Moving facilities



   115.085   Work performed by others



   115.086   Relief from liability




General Financial and Insurance Provisions




   115.100   Franchise fee



   115.101   Performance bond



   115.102   Penalties procedure



   115.103   Bonds, indemnification and insurance




Revocation and Foreclosure; Receivership and Abandonment




   115.115   Grounds for revocation



   115.116   Procedure



   115.117   Foreclosure



   115.118   Receivership




Purchase of System; Sale or Transfer




   115.130   Upon termination of franchise term or revocation of
franchise



   115.131   Sale or transfer of franchise




Rights of Individuals Protected




   115.145   Discriminatory practices prohibited



   115.146   Subscriber privacy




Miscellaneous Provisions




   115.160   Rate regulation



   115.161   Rights reserved to grantor



   115.162   Non-enforcement by the town



   115.163   Governing law and choice of forum



   115.164   Severability



   115.165   Publication of notices



   115.166   System construction capabilities and schedule



   Appendix A:   Customer service standards




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 115.001  STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   (A)   The Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina, pursuant to applicable
federal and state law, is authorized to grant 1 or more nonexclusive
franchises to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable systems
within the incorporated areas of the town.



   (B)   The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro finds
that cable service has become an integral part of its citizens’ lives, and
that evolving cable systems have the potential to play an even more dramatic
role in the future, providing great benefits and advanced capabilities to the
town. At the same time, the Board further finds that the public convenience,
safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory
powers that are vested in the town or those persons as the town designates.



   (C)   In order to ensure that the town and its residents receive
state-of-the-art cable services and capabilities as this technology further
evolves, all franchises granted pursuant to this chapter will be subject to
periodic review to keep current with changing law, technology and services.
It is the intent of this chapter to help ensure that local cable operators
provide the best possible cable service to residents of the town, and any
franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed to include this
finding as an integral part thereof.



   (D)   Further, it is recognized that cable systems have the capacity
to provide entertainment and information services to the town’s residents,
and may have the capacity to provide a variety of broadband, interactive
communications services to institutions and individuals. For these purposes,
the following goals underlie the regulations contained herein:



      (1)   Cable television services should be made available to
all of the town’s residents at the lowest reasonable cost;



      (2)   The system should be capable of accommodating both the
present and reasonably foreseeable future state-of-the-art cable television
needs of the town; and



      (3)   The systems authorized by this chapter shall be
responsive to the needs and interests of the local community, and shall
provide the widest possible diversity of information sources and services to
the public. Each of the above-enumerated goals shall be sought to the maximum
extent, taking into account the costs and benefits to the residents of the
Town of Wilkesboro.



   (E)   The Board further finds that ongoing industry consolidation
could result in less local accountability, and that, therefore, stringent
customer service standards, including liquidated damages provisions, may be
the only practical means of ensuring compliance and approximating the costs
of franchise agreement non-compliance to the town and its residents.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.002  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as  Chapter 17 Town of
Wilkesboro Master Cable Services Regulatory Ordinance, and it shall become a
part of the ordinances of the town. This chapter shall take effect and be in
force from and after its adoption for the grant of any new franchise
agreement or renewal of any franchise existing at the time of adoption. All
chapters or parts of the Town of Wilkesboro Code in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter are repealed.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.003  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADDITIONAL SERVICE.  Any cable service other than basic service
provided over the system.



   BASIC CABLE SERVICE.  Any cable service tier that includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any Public,
Educational and Governmental Access programming required by this chapter or a
franchise agreement to be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as
defined herein shall be consistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7) (1997), and
shall include any signal of any television broadcast station that is provided
by a grantee to any subscriber, except a signal which is secondarily
transmitted by a satellite carrier beyond the local service area of the
station. Additional signals may be added to the basic tier by the grantee.



   BOARD.  The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro, North
Carolina or its delegates.



   CABLE ACT.  The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No.
98-549, (codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 & Supp. V. 1987) as amended
by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub.
L. No. 102-385, and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-104
(1996) as may, from time to time, be amended.



   CABLE INTERNET SERVICE.  Any cable service offered by a grantee
whereby persons receive access to the internet or high-speed data information
services through the cable system.



   CABLE SERVICE or SERVICE.



      (1)   The 1-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service;



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection or use of video programming or other programming service; and



      (3)   For purposes of this chapter, cable internet service
shall be considered CABLE SERVICE unless determined otherwise by state or
federal law.



   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM or CABLE SYSTEM. A facility, consisting of a
set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception
and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service to multiple
subscribers within the franchise area, but the term does not include:



      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of 1 or more television broadcast stations;



      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any
public right-of-way; or



      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201-226, except that
the facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent that facility,
whether on a common carrier basis or otherwise, is converter dial locations
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers.



   CAPITAL CONTRIBUTION.  A contribution provided by a grantee as
determined in a franchise agreement that may at the town’s discretion be
utilized for the capital costs of the municipal access channel facilities, or
to help defray the costs of an I-Net.



     CHANNEL.  A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum that
is capable of carrying 1 standard video signal, in either analog or digital
form. Consistent with future changes in technology and/or applicable law, the
parties may mutually agree to a different definition in an individual
franchise agreement.



   COMPLAINT. Any written or electronic inquiry, allegation or assertion
made by a person regarding service.



   CONTROL.  The holding of legal or financial control of or over the
holder of the franchise, the service provider or system owner or operator,
regardless of whether control is direct or indirect, or is exercised or is
permitted to be exercised directly or indirectly through other persons,
holdings or entities. CONTROL shall always be deemed to rest in the hands of
any person or entity that has the right or authority to establish or change
any policy or practice of the holder of the franchise or the service
provider, whether CONTROL may be exercised directly or indirectly through
other persons, holdings or entities.



   CONVERTER.  An electronic device that converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a
subscriber and, through the use of an appropriate channel selector, permits a
subscriber to view all authorized subscriber signals delivered at designated
converter dial locations.



   DIRECT INCREMENTAL COSTS.  The costs actually incurred by grantee in
meeting an obligation under its franchise which grantee would not otherwise
have incurred in order to either operate and conduct the business of its
cable system or meet another obligation of the franchise.



   DOWNSTREAM SIGNAL.  A signal originating from or provided by a system
to a subscriber terminal or other terminal including video, audio or digital
signals or any other type of data or information for either programs or other
uses, such as security alert services and the like.



   DROP.  The cable or cables that connect users of the system to the
distribution system in order to receive service.



   EDUCATIONAL ACCESS CHANNELS.   Channels specially designated for
locally produced non-commercial educational access programming use.



   EFFECTIVE DATE.  The date a franchise becomes effective in accordance
with the franchise and the rules and procedures of the town.



   FAIR MARKET VALUE.  The price that a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller for a going concern based on the system valuation prevailing
in the industry at the time.



   FCC.  The Federal Communications Commission or a designated
representative.



   FRANCHISE.  The rights and obligations extended by the Town of
Wilkesboro pursuant to an initial authorization or a renewal thereof, to a
person to own, lease, construct, maintain or operate a cable system in the
right-of-way within the franchise area for the purpose of providing cable
services. Any authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean or
include:



      (1)   Any other permit or authorization required for the
privilege of transacting and carrying  on a business within the town
required by the ordinances and laws of the town, including the provision of
telecommunications services;



      (2)   Any generally applicable non-discriminatory permit,
agreement or authorization required in connection with operations in the
right-of-way including, without limitation, permits and agreements for
placing devices on or in poles, conduits or other structures, whether owned
by the town or a private entity or for excavating or performing other work in
or along the right-of-way.



   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.  That document which grants a franchise pursuant
to this chapter.



   FRANCHISE AREA.  The geographic area for which a franchise is granted
under the authority of this chapter. If not otherwise specifically stated in
the franchise agreement, the franchise area shall be the entire geographic
unincorporated area within the town as it is now, or may in the future be
constituted.



   FRANCHISE FEE. Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the
town or other governmental entity on a grantee solely because of its status
and activities. The term FRANCHISE FEE does not include:



      (1)   Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability
(including any tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable
operators or their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment that
is unduly discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);



      (2)   Capital costs that are required by a franchise agreement
be incurred by a grantee for Public Access Channels equipment and facilities;



      (3)   Requirements or charges incidental to the award or
enforcement of a franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds,
letters of credit, insurance, indemnification, compliance audits, penalties
or liquidated damages; or



      (4)   Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code.



   GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNELS.  Channels specially designated for locally
produced non-commercial governmental access programming use.



   GRANTEE.  A person who is granted a franchise or that person’s
lawful successors, transferees or assignees.



   GRANTOR.  The town.



   GROSS REVENUES.  Any and all revenue, whether received in the form of
cash, credits, barter, trade, property or consideration of any kind arising
from, attributable to or in any way derived by the grantee from the operation
of a grantee’s system to provide cable service, whether the revenue is
received by the grantee, its affiliates or any person in which the grantee
has a financial interest or by any other person who operates the system,
directly or indirectly. This definition is intended to reach as broadly as
possible to encompass all revenue. GROSS REVENUE includes, by way of
illustration and not limitation, amounts charged for basic service; optional
premium, per-channel, per-program services; cable programming services; audio
services; launch fees; channel guide subscriptions; installation,
disconnection, reconnection and changes-in-service; equipment sales or
rentals; leased channel fees; late fees and administrative charges of any
type; consideration received from programmers; advertising revenue and
revenue from the sale of subscriber names and addresses. To the extent that
grantee receives revenue from cable services provided to a subscriber for a
fixed price that also includes non-cable services (i.e., those services are
bundled), grantee shall allocate an appropriate portion of those revenues for
inclusion in GROSS REVENUES. If the fixed price of the bundled services is
lower than the aggregate of the prices of those services if purchased
individually, then the appropriate amount of the revenue to be allocated to
each service shall be proportional to the individual price of that service
when compared to the aggregate of the individual prices of those services
when unbundled. GROSS REVENUE shall not include:



      (1)   Bad debt except to the extent that bad debts are
recovered;



      (2)   The revenue of any person including, without limitation,
a supplier of programming to the grantee to the extent that the revenue is
also included in GROSS REVENUE of the grantee;



      (3)    Pass-through payments received by the grantee from
third-party programmers to purchase services from entities other than the
grantee, which services benefit only the third-party programmers and for
which the grantee neither received nor provides any consideration; or



      (4)   Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee which are
imposed directly on any subscriber by the state, the town or other
governmental unit and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of the
governmental unit. A franchise fee is not that kind of a tax. To the extent
the scope of GROSS REVENUES is limited by federal law or judicial action, the
definitions herein shall be so amended.



   HEADEND.  The electronic control center of the system including
components that amplify, filter and convert incoming broadcast and other
television and electronic signals for distribution over the cable system.



   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK or I-NET. Capacity, fibers or both, from both
within the primary cable network and/or separately constructed networks that
are dedicated to municipal users or other governmental and educational users
as determined by the town for 2-way, broadband, non-commercial,
non-competitive, not for profit communications. The I-Net includes all
equipment and maintenance of equipment required to make the capacity
available including but not limited to fiber, cable modems, coaxial cable and
all switching, routing, transmitting and receiving equipment necessary for
the use of the I-Net as determined in the individual franchise agreement.



   INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK SERVICES. The provision of an I-Net by a grantee
to municipal users and other governmental and educational users as determined
by the town, pursuant to the terms of a franchise agreement for
non-commercial, non-competitive, not for profit applications including but
not limited to: 2-way dedicated voice, data, video, internet and telephony
channels connecting and interconnecting user facilities; computerized traffic
control systems; GIS systems and the interconnection of facilities serving
police, fire and other public safety systems.



   LOCKOUT DEVICE. A mechanical or electrical accessory to a subscriber's
terminal that inhibits the video or audio portions of a certain program or
certain channel(s) provided by way of a cable system.



   NON-COMMERCIAL.  Channels or programming that are operated on a
not-for-profit basis.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS.  Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases, NORMAL
BUSINESS HOURS must include some evening hours at least 1 night per week
and/or some weekend hours.



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.  Any and all situations or conditions
that are ordinarily within the control of a grantee, including, but not
limited to: management or corporate decisions; employee conduct; staffing
levels; special promotions; pay-per-view events; rate increases; regular peak
or seasonal demand periods; electronic and video equipment and maintenance,
repair or upgrade of the cable system and any associated computer or software
systems. Those conditions that are not within the control of a grantee
include, but are not limited to: natural disasters; civil disturbances; power
outages; telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather conditions.
A condition shall not be deemed to be beyond the grantee’s control if
committed by a corporation or other business entity which the grantee
controls.



   OTHER PROGRAMMING SERVICE.  Information that a grantee makes available
to all subscribers generally.



   PERSON.  Any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual,
organization, company, governmental entity or any natural person.



   PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS.  Channels specially designated for locally
produced non-commercial public access programming use.



   REASONABLE NOTICE.  Written notice addressed to the town or grantee at
a location the parties have designated in the franchise agreement as the
address to which notice shall be transmitted to it, which notice shall be
sent by certified mail and postmarked not less than 7 business days prior to
that day in which the party giving notice shall commence any action which
requires the giving of notice. In computing the 7 days, holidays recognized
by the town shall be excluded.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  Each of the following which have been, or are hereafter
dedicated to the public and maintained by any public authority or by others
and located within the town, including without limitation, the surface and
space within, above and below any real property in which the town has an
interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest,
or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to: any public
street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, swale, river, tunnel, viaduct, bridge, park or any other place,
area, easements, rights-of-way and similar public property and areas or real
property owned by or under the control of the town.



   SCHOOL.  Any state-accredited public or nonprofit educational
institution including primary and secondary schools, both public and private.



   SERVICE INTERRUPTION.  The loss of picture or sound on 1 or more cable
channels.



   STANDARD INSTALLATION.  Any service drop not exceeding 150 feet from a
single point or pedestal attachment to the subscriber’s residence.



   STATE-OF-THE-ART.  The addition of new services and associated
equipment as they are developed, available and when economically feasible and
marketable to subscribers as specifically required under the terms of a
franchise agreement.



   SUBSCRIBER.  Any person who elects to subscribe for any purpose to
cable service provided by a grantee by means of, or in connection with, the
cable system, and whose premises or facilities are physically wired and
lawfully activated to receive cable service from grantee’s cable system.



   SYSTEM.  A grantee’s cable system operated pursuant to a franchise
agreement within the franchise area.



   TOWN.  The Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina, as it is now or may in
the future be constituted.



   TOWN ADMINISTRATOR.  A person designated by the Town Manager to
represent the town in all business with the grantee.



   TRAINED REPRESENTATIVE.  Employees of the grantee who have the
authority and capability while speaking with a subscriber to, among other
things, answer billing questions, adjust bills and schedule service and
installation calls.



   UPSTREAM SIGNAL.  A signal originating from a subscriber’s terminal
to the headend of the system including video, audio or digital signals or any
other type of data or information for either programs or other uses, such as
security alert services and the like.



(Ord. passed - -)




FRANCHISE REQUIREMENTS




§ 115.015  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or
maintain a cable system or to provide cable service in the town without a
franchise; any person shall be subject to a fine of $500 per day. The payment
of the fine notwithstanding, all violators shall be subject to all other
applicable provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the
payment of a franchise fee.



   (B)   Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be
nonexclusive. The grantor specifically reserves the right to grant, at any
time, additional franchises for a cable system or any component thereof, to
any other person including itself, as it deems appropriate, subject to
applicable federal and state law.



   (C)   In the event the town grants more than 1 franchise or similar
authorization for the construction, operation or maintenance of any cable
system to a qualified person in the town, the town shall grant the franchises
on terms that are non-discriminatory and competitively neutral, provided that
nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the use of identical terms or
conditions, in accordance with federal law.



   (D)   A franchise agreement shall establish the term of each
individual franchise.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.016  FEDERAL, STATE AND TOWN JURISDICTION.



   (A)   The town shall exercise appropriate regulatory authority under
the provisions of this chapter and all applicable laws. This authority shall
be vested in the Town of Wilkesboro Board of Commissioners and administered
through the Town Manager or his or her designee in order to provide
day-to-day administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
and any franchise granted hereunder, and to carry out the town’s
responsibilities with regard to cable service.



   (B)   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with
all applicable federal and state laws.



   (C)   In the event that the federal or state government discontinues
preemption in any area of cable communications over which it currently
exercises jurisdiction, in a manner as to expand, rather than limit municipal
regulatory authority, grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules and
regulations in these areas to the extent permitted by law, provided the same
do not materially alter the rights and obligations of a grantee under any
existing franchise.



   (D)   Grantee’s rights are subject to the police powers of the
town to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. Grantee shall comply with all applicable general laws
and ordinances enacted by the town pursuant to that power.



   (E)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all franchises
granted or renewed after the effective  date of this chapter. This chapter
shall also apply to all existing franchises, to the extent not inconsistent
with the terms of any franchise or applicable law. In the event of any
conflict between the terms and conditions of a franchise agreement and the
provisions of this chapter and other generally applicable regulatory
ordinances of the town, the terms of this chapter shall  control unless
otherwise expressly set forth in the franchise agreement. A franchise
agreement (including all of grantee’s particular rights, powers,
protections, privileges, immunities and obligations associated therewith as
the same exist on the date hereof shall constitute a legally binding contract
between the town and grantee, and cannot be amended, modified or changed by
the town or grantee without the consent of grantee and in any manner
whatsoever, whether by ordinance, rule, regulation or otherwise, to impose on
grantee more stringent or burdensome requirements or conditions; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall preclude the town from the
proper exercise of its police powers, or its powers of eminent domain.



   (F)   In an event of a change in state or federal law which by its
terms would require the town to amend this chapter, the parties shall modify
the existing franchise in a mutually agreed upon manner.



   (G)   Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement by reason of
any failure of the town to enforce prompt compliance.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.017  RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR.



   In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the grantor by this
chapter or a franchise agreement, grantor reserves to itself every right and
power that is required to be reserved by a provision of any other chapter or
under any other franchise.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.018  FRANCHISE AGREEMENT AND RENEWAL; FEES.



   (A)   Every grantee shall agree to the terms and provisions of a
franchise agreement as negotiated between the grantee and the grantor. In
addition to those matters required elsewhere in this chapter to be included
in the franchise agreement, each franchise agreement must contain the
following express representations by each grantee:



      (1)   Grantee has examined all of the provisions of this
chapter and accepts and agrees to all of the provisions of this chapter as it
exists as of the effective date of the grantee’s franchise agreement.



      (2)   Grantee recognizes, unless otherwise agreed in the
applicable franchise agreement, the right of the town to adopt additional
regulations of general applicability as it shall find necessary in the
exercise of its police power.



      (3)   Every franchise agreement shall contain further
conditions or provisions as may be negotiated between the town and a grantee,
except that no conditions or provisions shall be as to conflict with any
provisions of state or federal law. In case of any conflict or of any
ambiguity between any terms or provisions of a franchise agreement and this
chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control, unless expressly set
forth in the franchise agreement.



   (B)   Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law
including, but not limited to, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984,
being 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., as amended. Grantor and a grantee, by
mutual consent, may enter into renewal negotiations at any time during the
term of the franchise.



   (C)   (1)   An application fee shall not be deemed to be
franchise fees within the meaning of § 622 of the Cable Act (47 U.S.C. §
542), and payments shall not be deemed to be payments in kind or any
involuntary payments chargeable against the compensation to be paid to the
town by grantee, or  part of the compensation to be paid to the town by
grantee pursuant to this chapter or a franchise agreement.



      (2)   All applicants for an initial franchise grant shall
submit an application fee of $2,500 to compensate the town for its costs in
reviewing, preparing and awarding a franchise, including the costs of outside
consultants. Upon grant of a franchise the town may request the payment of an
additional fee to the extent that the reasonable costs of the franchise
review and negotiation process exceed the initial application fee amount.
Consistent with the Cable Act, all fees shall not constitute or be credited
towards a grantee’s franchise fee obligations. Reasonable costs include
staff time, professional fees and administrative costs as determined
necessary by the town.



      (3)   The town reserves the right, unless prohibited by
applicable law, to require a grantee to pay the incidental costs of the
franchise renewal and negotiation process. Incidental costs include staff
time, professional fees and administrative costs as stated in the franchise
agreement.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.019  INITIAL FRANCHISE APPLICATIONS; CONSIDERATION.



   (A)   Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable system
shall file an application with the town. An application for an initial
franchise for a cable television system shall contain, where applicable:



      (1)   A statement as to the proposed franchise area;



      (2)   Résumé of prior history of applicant, including the
legal, technical and financial expertise of applicant in the cable television
field;



      (3)   List of the partner (general and limited) of the
applicant, if a partnership or a list of the principals of the applicant, if
a limited liability company, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled
by shareholders holding 10% or greater, if a corporation;



      (4)   List of officers, directors and managing employees of
applicant, together with a description of the background of each person;



      (5)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of
applicant or any other business entity owning or in control of applicant, in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by applicant;



      (6)   A current financial statement of applicant verified by a
CPA audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the
reasonable satisfaction of the town;



      (7)   Proposed preliminary construction and cable service
schedule; and



      (8)   Any additional information that the town may require for
the administration of the franchise.



   (B)   Upon receipt of any application and application fee for an
initial franchise, the Town Administrator shall prepare a report and make his
or her recommendations respecting the application to the Board.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.020  GRANT OF ADDITIONAL FRANCHISE AND COMPETING SERVICE.



   (A)   Competing or overlapping franchises may have an adverse impact
on the public rights-of-way and on the quality and availability of services
to the pubic. In considering whether to grant 1 or more additional
franchises, the town shall specifically consider, and address in a written
report or in provisions of the franchise agreement, the following issues:



      (1)   The positive and/or negative impact of an additional
franchise on the community;



      (2)   The ability and willingness of the specific applicant in
question to provide cable services to the franchise area;



      (3)   The amount of time it will take the applicant to
complete construction of the proposed system and activate service in the
franchise area; and whether the applicant can complete construction and
activation of its system pursuant to industry standards;



      (4)   The financial capabilities of the applicant and its
guaranteed commitment to make the necessary investment to erect, maintain and
operate the proposed cable system for the duration of the franchise term. In
order to ensure that any prospective grantee does have the requisite current
financial capabilities, the town may request equity and debt financing
commitment letters, current audited financial statements, bonds, letters of
credit or other documentation to demonstrate to the town’s satisfaction
that the requisite funds to construct and operate the proposed system are
available;



      (5)   The quality and technical reliability of the proposed
system, based upon the applicant’s plan of construction and the method of
distribution of signals, and the applicant’s technical qualifications to
construct and operate the system;



      (6)   The experience of the applicant in the erection,
maintenance and operation of a cable system;



      (7)   The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate
1 or more additional cable systems and the potential disruption of those
public rights-of-way and private property that may occur if 1 or more
additional franchises are granted;



      (8)   The likelihood and ability of the applicant to continue
to provide competing cable service to subscribers within the franchise area
for the duration of the franchise;



      (9)   Other information as the town may deem appropriate to be
considered prior to granting any competing or overlapping franchise; and/or



      (10)   The purpose of this section is to ensure that any
competition which may occur among grantees will be on terms which when taken
as a whole are non-discriminatory according to federal law.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.021  PERMITS FOR NON-FRANCHISED ENTITIES.



   (A)   The town may issue a license, easement or other permit to a
person other than the grantee to permit that person to traverse any portion
of the grantee’s franchise area within the town in order to provide service
outside, but not within the town.  That license or easement, absent a grant
of a franchise in accordance with this chapter, shall not authorize nor
permit a person to provide cable service to any subscriber within the town
nor render any other service within the town.



   (B)   The granting of a license, easement or permit shall be
conditioned upon the payment of fee for occupancy of the public right of way
to the extent permitted by applicable law.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.022  REVIEW FOR COMPETITION.



   The town recognizes that the cable television and telecommunications
industries are in a period of convergence, that the technologies and services
provided by these industries are rapidly changing, and that the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 151 et seq., promoted
and encouraged competition between and among these formally discrete
industries. At this time it is premature to know fully the extent to which
there will be changes in law, technology or services that may impact entities
that have been or may be granted franchises or licenses to use the town’s
rights-of-way. It is the desire of the town to be a communications friendly
town that encourages the development of competitive advanced communications
capabilities for the benefit of all its citizens. For this reason the
regulatory ordinances and franchises of the town should not impede or
restrict the fair opportunity to compete, but rather are intended to provide
uniform and consistent requirements for all similarly situated providers.



(Ord. passed - -)




DESIGN PROVISIONS




§ 115.035  SYSTEM DESIGN; UPGRADES.



   (A)   System design.   



      (1)   Every grantee shall offer service that meets the current
and future needs of the town, taking into account the costs of meeting those
needs. The franchise agreement shall incorporate a description of the
grantee’s application in accordance with this chapter, including the
general design and capabilities of the system to identify for the town how
the system will meet the current and future cable service needs of the town.



      (2)   The franchise agreement shall include provisions to
ensure cable service and cable system compatibility with changes in law,
technology and programming and services to maintain a state-of-the-art system
throughout the franchise term.



   (B)   The system. Every system shall pass by every single-family
dwelling unit and multiple-family dwelling unit within the franchise area in
accordance with line extension policies set forth in this chapter. Service
shall be provided to subscribers in accordance with the schedules and line
extension. Unless specified otherwise, service shall also be extended to
commercial buildings on a consistent basis with the residential line
extension policies.



   (C)   Upgrade of system. Every grantee shall upgrade its system
(herein referred to as the system upgrade), if required, as set forth in its
respective franchise agreement.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.036  DROPS TO PUBLIC BUILDINGS.



   (A)   Every grantee shall provide installation of at least 1 cable
drop, and provide monthly basic cable service, without charge, to public
buildings in accordance with the line extension policies of this chapter as
otherwise specified in the applicable franchise agreement. Schools shall also
receive 1 cable drop and basic cable service at no charge. Following the
town’s designation of additional buildings(s) to receive cable service, and
upon the town’s request, a grantee shall complete construction of the drop
and outlet within 30 days.



   (B)   All cable service outlets shall not be utilized for commercial
purposes.



   (C)   In instances where the drop to the public building exceeds 150
feet, the grantee may charge for the actual and reasonable cost of its labor
and materials.



   (D)   Every grantee that offers 2-way interactive broadband services
to subscribers within the town shall provide and install at no cost for the
term of the franchise agreement cable modems at every school and to all
public libraries, within the franchise area that are passed by the portions
of the grantee’s cable system that are capable of supporting 2-way services.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.037  USE OF GRANTEE FACILITIES.



   The town shall have the right to install and maintain town equipment at
the actual cost for the space, not including cost for existing space. Cost
will be limited to any incremental cost for any wire or fixtures. This
applies to the excess space upon the poles and within the underground pipes
and conduits of a grantee, any wires and fixtures desired by the town to the
extent that installation and maintenance does not interfere or compete with
existing operations of a grantee. Town will relinquish its use of poles and
conduits upon 90-days’ notice from a grantee that town’s use interferes
with company’s actual or anticipated use of the same.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.038  NON-DISCRIMINATORY ACCESS TO CABLE SYSTEM.



   Grantee may be required to allow non-discriminatory access to its cable
system if it shall be required by federal law. Prior to the enactment of any
like requirement, a grantee shall be provided with reasonable notice and an
opportunity to be heard, including the right to present evidence with respect
to the need for that requirement. Grantee reserves, and has not waived, any
right it may have, or may later be determined to have, to challenge the
town’s implementation of an open access requirement.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99




ACCESS CHANNELS; TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE PRACTICES




§ 115.050  INSTITUTIONAL NETWORK; ACCESS CHANNELS.



   (A)   Every grantee shall, to the extent required by federal
statutes, provide institutional network to the extent that a grantee is
obligated to provide support pursuant to its franchise agreement. These may
be supported pursuant to a separate contract arrangement if so agreed upon in
the franchise agreement.



   (B)   Every grantee shall provide a channel or channels, bandwidth
capacity, service and funding for separate Public, Educational and Government
(PEG) Access Channels as specified in its franchise agreement. All like PEG
access channels shall be available to all subscribers as part of basic cable
service.



   (C)   Oversight and administration of the PEG Access Channels shall
be set forth in the franchise agreement. The town may designate a community
access corporation or similar entity to administer 1 or more of the access
channels.



   (D)   Cost associated with construction and operation of the I-Net
shall not be a franchise fee unless specified in the franchise agreement.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.051  GENERAL TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND CUSTOMER SERVICE PRACTICES.



   (A)   This chapter incorporates technical standards and establishes
customer service practices with which a grantee must comply. In addition, a
grantee shall comply with any additional or stricter requirements established
by FCC regulations, or other federal regulation that may be adopted or
amended from time to time.



   (B)   A grantee shall maintain equipment and keep records as are
required to enable the grantor to determine whether the grantee is in
compliance with all standards required by these regulations and applicable
laws.



   (C)   The technical standards used in the operation of a system
shall comply, at a minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the
FCC relating to cable systems pursuant to the FCC’s rules and regulations
found in Title 47, §§ 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from
time to time, which regulations are expressly incorporated herein by
reference. The results of any tests required by the FCC, or a franchise
agreement shall be made available to the town within 30 days of written
request.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.052  BOOKS AND RECORDS AVAILABLE TO GRANTOR.



   (A)   The grantee shall maintain an office within the town. The town
shall have the right, upon reasonable notice, to inspect and copy or
transcribe at any time during normal business hours, all books, records,
maps, plans, financial records, service complaint logs, performance test
results and other like materials of the grantee kept or maintained by grantee
or under its control concerning the operations, finances, affairs,
transactions or property of grantee when necessary to ascertain the
grantee’s compliance with this chapter or the franchise agreement. Access
to the aforementioned records shall not be denied by the grantee on the basis
that the records contain proprietary information. Access to proprietary
information shall be allowed at a site of the grantee’s choosing and shall
be held in confidence by the town.



   (B)   If any maps or records are not kept in the town, or upon
reasonable notice made available in the town, and if the town shall determine
that an examination of the records is necessary or appropriate, all
reasonable expenses necessarily incurred in making the examination shall be
paid by grantee.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.053  REPORTS REQUIRED.



   The grantee shall file with the town, upon reasonable request:



   (A)   All reports required by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) including, but not limited to: annual proof of performance tests and
results, Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) reports and all petitions,
applications and communications of all types submitted by grantee to the FCC,
the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC), or any other federal or state
regulatory commission or agency, having jurisdiction over any matter
affecting operation of grantee’s system.



   (B)   An annual report setting forth the physical miles of plant
construction and plant in operation at the end of the fiscal year will be
made available at the local office of the grantee for review by the town.



   (C)   Rebuild/upgrade/construction reports shall be sent to the town
30 days after the initial franchise agreement is awarded and monthly
thereafter until construction is completed as specified in this chapter or
the franchise agreement.



   (D)   Proof of performance test results performed as required by the
FCC shall be supplied to the town.



   (E)   Tests required by town as specified in this chapter shall be
submitted within 30 days of notification.



   (F)   The grantee’s schedule of charges, regular subscriber
service policy regarding the processing of subscriber complaints, delinquent
subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures and any other terms and
conditions adopted as the grantee’s policy in connection with its
subscribers shall be in accordance with applicable state and federal laws,
rules or regulations.



   (G)   Grantee shall submit to the town the required performance
bond, or a certified copy thereof, and insurance certificates as required
under the terms and conditions described in this chapter.



   (H)   The following financial reports for the franchise area shall
be submitted to the town, upon reasonable notice and as required by the town:



      (1)   A statement verifying the amount of gross annual
revenues derived from the franchise, certified by the Vice President for
Finance or a duly authorized officer or manager of the grantee;



      (2)   An annual list of officers and members of the Board of
Directors of grantee and of grantee’s parent corporation, if applicable; and



      (3)   The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the town at the
times and in the form prescribed, additional reports with respect to its
operation, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary
and appropriate to ascertain grantee’s compliance with this chapter or the
franchise agreement.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.054  TEST AND COMPLIANCE PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Tests for a system shall be performed periodically in a manner
so as to conform to FCC specifications. The town shall notify the grantee of
its desire to witness the tests for a period of 90 days beyond the date of
request. Grantee shall notify the town at least 5 business days prior to
conducting tests. Representatives of the town may witness the tests and
written test reports shall be made available to the town upon request. If any
test locations fail to meet the specifications, the grantee shall be required
to indicate what corrective measures have been or will be taken. Grantee
shall have the site re-tested on a timely basis as needed.



   (B)   Whenever there have been similar complaints made or when there
exists other evidence, which, in the reasonable judgment of the town, casts
doubt on the reliability or quality of the grantee’s system, the town shall
have the right and authority to compel the grantee to test, analyze and
report on the performance of its system. The town may require additional
tests, full or partial repeat tests, different test procedures or tests
involving a specific subscriber’s terminal. Reports on tests shall be
delivered to the town no later than 30 days after the town formally requests
the tests and shall include the following information: the nature of the
complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system component was
tested; the equipment used and procedures employed in testing; the results of
the tests and methods by which complaints were resolved. Tests and analyses
shall be supervised by an engineer or other trained technical specialist who
shall sign all records of the special tests and forward same to the town with
a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending what actions
should be taken by the town. All tests conducted by grantee shall be at the
expense of the grantee.



   (C)   The town shall have the right to employ or contract with
qualified consultants and attorneys if necessary or desirable to assist in
the administration of this, or any other section of this chapter or the
franchise agreement. If test results differ by more than 10% from the FCC
technical standard, the grantee shall reimburse the town for its reasonable
costs associated with the testing.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.055  EMERGENCY REQUIREMENTS.



   Each grantee must provide emergency alert override capabilities in a
manner consistent with the FCC’s emergency alert system (EAS) rules and
consistent with any state and/or regional emergency alert system plans
adopted in response to the FCC’s EAS rules that are applicable to the
franchise area.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.056  PROGRAMMING DECISIONS.



   Each grantee shall provide programming from each of the broad
programming categories identified in its franchise agreement. All programming
decisions remain within the sole discretion of each grantee, provided that
each grantee complies with federal law regarding notice to grantor and
subscribers prior to any channel additions, deletions or realignments, and
further subject to the grantee’s signal carriage obligations pursuant to 47
U.S.C. §§ 531-536, as may be amended and subject to the town’s rights
pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 545, as may be amended. The grantee shall use its
good faith efforts to ensure diversity of programming.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10



§ 115.057  CABLE SYSTEM OFFICE HOURS AND TELEPHONE AVAILABILITY.



   Cable system office hours and telephone availability attached as
Appendix A are the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) customer service
standards with which grantee must comply.



(Ord. passed -)  Penalty, see § 10.92



§ 115.058  PARENTAL CONTROL.



   Every grantee shall make available to any subscriber upon request a
lockout device for blocking both video and audio portions of any channel(s)
of programming entering the subscriber’s premises. The device shall be
provided at a reasonable charge, except to the extent that federal law
specifically provides otherwise. The grantee may, however, require a
reasonable security deposit for the use of a device. This section shall not
apply to channels that are on the basic or expanded basic tier of programming
unless the subscriber receives service via a programmable terminal device,
such as a converter.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.059  PERIODIC SUBSCRIBER SURVEY.



   The franchise agreement shall provide terms for a periodic subscriber
survey to assess the cable service needs and interests of the community
throughout the term of the franchise, as well as procedures for review and
implementation of changes identified through any survey.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.060  INSTALLATIONS EXCEEDING STANDARD INSTALLATION.



   Service drops in excess of 150 feet and concealed wiring in the home
shall be charged to the subscriber based upon time and material. The desire
of the subscriber as to the point of entry into the residence shall be
observed whenever possible. Runs in building interiors shall be as
unobtrusive as possible. The grantee shall use due care in the process of
installation and shall repair any damage to the subscriber’s property
caused by installation.  Restoration shall be undertaken within no more than
10 days after the damage is incurred and shall be completed as soon as
possible thereafter.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.061  SERVICE AREA AND LINE EXTENSION POLICY.



   (A)   No grantee may discriminate in the build-out of its system to
a particular area of the town in providing service to an individual or groups
of residents on the basis of race, creed, religion or economic condition.
Unless the franchise agreement provides otherwise, every grantee shall serve
all areas of the town equally with populations of at least 15 residential
dwelling units per cable mile as measured from a grantee’s existing
distribution system, including areas annexed subsequent to the grant of the
franchise. The franchise agreement shall provide a schedule of the areas to
be served, and the specific build-out requirements of the grantee, and shall
also describe the process for extending service to areas that will meet
minimum density requirements at some future date. Unless the franchise
agreement provides otherwise, every grantee shall extend service to
commercial areas at no additional costs where the costs to do so does not
exceed the same costs of providing service in a residential area with a
density of 15 homes per mile.



   (B)   During the initial construction phase of a new system, a
grantee may implement its system in stages pursuant to a schedule and line
extension policy established in its franchise agreement that serves all areas
of the town equally, provided that any deviation from the service and line
extension requirements of this chapter do not discriminate between different
areas of the town on the basis of race, creed, religion or economic
condition. A grantee of any new franchise shall comply with all customer
service obligations with respect to customers whose premises are passed by
portions of the grantee’s network which are fully activated, tested and
available for service.



   (C)   Pursuant to § 115.016(A)  of this chapter, and in franchise
agreements with a 15 homes per mile requirement in areas with less than 15
homes per proposed cable mile, grantee shall offer a cost-sharing arrangement
to residents. Grantee shall hear its pro rata share of the current
construction costs based upon the actual number of homes per mile. The
cost-sharing arrangement shall consist of the following: On the request of a
subscriber desiring service, grantee shall prepare, at its cost, an
engineering survey and cost analysis to determine the cost of the plant
extension required to provide service to the subscriber from the closest
usable point on the cable system. The cost of construction shall be allocated
based on the following formula: If a request for extension into a residential
area requires the construction of cable plant which does not pass at least 15
homes per cable mile, a proportionate share of construction costs shall be
borne by grantee and by the subscribers. For example, if there are 10
dwelling units per mile, grantee’s share will equal 10/15th of the
construction cost. The remaining cost will be shared equally by each
subscriber in the area to be constructed. The line extension formula shall
also be applied to a portion of a cable mile meeting proportionate density
requirements. For example, if there are 7 dwelling units per 1/2 mile, the
grantee shall construct the plant. The cost sharing described above would be
utilized if there were less than the proportionate share of dwelling units
per the portion of 1 mile needed to reach the dwelling units. Should
additional subscribers request cable service, subscribers utilizing the
cost-sharing plan for extension shall be reimbursed pro-rata for their
contribution or a proportional share thereof. In that case, the pro-rata
shares shall be recalculated and each new subscriber shall pay the new
pro-rata share, and all prior subscribers shall receive refunds. In any
event, at the end of 24 months from completion of the project, the
subscribers are no longer eligible for refunds, and the amounts paid by
subscribers will be credited to the plant account of the grantee. The average
cost of the line extension shall be recalculated annually based upon the
current costs of labor and material. Each person contributing toward the
direct cost of the line extension shall waive all ownership interest in the
line extension. All equipment and components of the line extension,
including, but not limited to, cable wire, electronics and pedestals shall at
all times remain the exclusive property of the grantee.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.062  TOWN MONITORING.



   In addition to free cable service required by the chapter, grantee
shall provide 1 service feed to town administration offices (unless otherwise
specified by town) that shall receive, without charge, all basic and expanded
basic cable service programming provided by grantee.  The service shall be
provided in manner that the town may monitor the programming and use of the
cable system for compliance with the franchise agreement and this chapter. 
The services provided pursuant to this requirement shall be in a secure
office location, and not in a location open to public viewing.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.063  ACCESS TO INSIDE WIRING.



   Access to, and ownership of, inside wiring shall be in accordance with
§§ 76.800 et seq. of the FCC rules and regulations as the same may be
amended from time to time.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99




CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS




§ 115.075  RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION.



   Prior to commencing any construction in the town, a grantee must obtain
all necessary permits and licenses required by federal, state and generally
applicable town laws, ordinances and rules, and pay all associated
non-discriminatory fees. Further, a grantee shall comply with all applicable
laws, ordinances, rules and standards relating to the construction, operation
and maintenance of a cable system.



(Ord. passed- -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.076  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.



   The construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system
shall be effectuated by grantee in a manner that is consistent with the laws,
ordinances and construction standards of the State of North Carolina, the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, the National Electrical Safety
Code, National Electrical Code and the FCC, to the extent applicable, as well
as all other laws, rules, regulations and ordinances that are generally
applicable and promulgated pursuant to the town’s lawful police power. All
open connections on splitters, couplers and other devices shall be properly
terminated.



(Ord passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.077  MINIMUM INTERFERENCE.



   All of grantee’s construction, installation, operation, repair and
maintenance, and the arrangement of its lines, cables and other
appurtenances, on public or private property, shall be conducted in a manner
as to not unreasonably interfere with the rights and reasonable convenience
of property owners that may be affected. In the event that work is not in
accordance with applicable rules and regulations, the town may require the
removal, within a period of time after notice as is reasonable under the
circumstances, of grantee’s lines, cables and appurtenances from the public
rights-of-way in question, at the sole expense of the grantee.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.078  REPAIR OF PROPERTY.



   Grantee shall promptly repair and restore any town or private property
which may be damaged as a result of the construction, installation,
operation, repair, maintenance or removal of the cable system. Any property
damaged or destroyed shall be promptly repaired and restored by grantee, at
grantee’s sole cost and expense to the reasonable satisfaction of the town,
to its condition prior to being damaged, or shall be replaced by grantee with
equivalent property. The town may inspect and approve the condition of the
public rights-of-way and cables, wires, attachments and poles after
restoration. The liability, indemnity, insurance and performance bond as
provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of
any removal and until the grantee has fully complied with the terms and
conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. In the event of a
failure by the grantee to complete any restoration work required by the town
within the time as may be established by the town and to the reasonable
satisfaction of the town, the town may, following reasonable notice to the
grantee, cause work to be done and the grantee shall reimburse the town the
cost thereof within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of cost, or the
town may at its option recover costs through the performance bond provided by
grantee. The town shall be permitted to seek legal and equitable relief to
enforce the provisions of this section.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.079  ERECTION OF POLES.



   Grantee shall not erect any pole on or along any public rights-of-way
in an existing aerial utility system without the advance written approval of
the town. If additional poles in an existing aerial route are required,
grantee shall negotiate, as needed, with the owners thereof for the
installation of the needed poles. Grantee shall negotiate the lease of pole
space and facilities from the existing pole owners for all aerial
construction, under mutually acceptable terms and conditions.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.080  RESERVATIONS OF STREET RIGHTS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the town from
constructing storm or sanitary sewers, grading, paving, repairing or altering
any public rights-of-way, or laying down, repairing or removing water mains,
traffic signal control systems, town fiber plant or constructing or
establishing any public utility, service or other public work that the town
may operate or undertake now or in the future. All work shall be done,
insofar as practicable, in a manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the
free use and operation of poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or
appurtenances of grantee. If town in its reasonable judgment shall determine
that grantee’s facilities interfere with the construction location or
repair of any public right-of-way or public improvement, then all facilities
of grantee shall be removed or replaced or temporarily disconnected, in a
manner as shall be directed by the town so that the same shall not interfere
with the public works of the town. The removal or replacement shall be at the
expense of grantee; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall
preclude grantee from seeking reimbursement or removal or replacement costs
from any public funds generally available to rights-of-way users for a
reimbursement of the costs.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.081  UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION.



   In those areas within the town where cable television, telephone or
electrical facilities are currently placed underground, all cable system
facilities shall remain or be placed underground. In areas where either
telephone or electric utility facilities are above ground at the time of
installation, grantee may install its cable system facilities above ground,
provided that at those times as both electric and telephone utility
facilities are placed underground, grantee shall likewise place its cable
system facilities underground without cost to the town. Nothing contained in
this section shall require a grantee to construct, operate and maintain
underground any ground-mounted appurtenances, except that grantee shall take
steps to minimize the number and visual impact of facilities. If the grantor
reimburses any utility for relocation, grantee shall be similarly reimbursed.
This section shall not prevent the town or any of its agencies or joint
agencies from requiring the installation or relocation of cable services
facilities underground pursuant to a separate ordinance or regulation or
requirement imposed in accordance with the exercise of the general police
power or regulatory function of agency or joint agency.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.082  CONDUIT.



   (A)   The town shall not be responsible for any cuts or damage to
buried or underground facilities of a grantee that are not clearly marked or
cannot be located through the North Carolina One-call service.



   (B)   Grantee shall provide the town detailed strand and trench maps
in both paper and a mutually agreed upon electronic format of all new
underground and buried cable facilities upon activation of those sections of
the system.



   (C)   Grantee shall provide a contact number for the town to call in
emergency situations requiring an immediate response on the part of the town.
If the grantee does not properly and effectively identify the precise
location of its facilities within 45 minutes of an emergency call from the
town, the town shall not be responsible for damage to the grantee’s
facilities.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.083  CLEARING POLES AND CABLES.



   Grantee shall have the right to remove, trim, cut and to keep clear of
its poles, cables, underground conduits and related equipment the trees in
and along the public rights-of-way, but, in the exercise of that right,
grantee shall not cut trees to any greater extent that is reasonably
necessary for the construction, erection, installation, maintenance and use
of cable system equipment. Except in emergency situations, grantee shall not
remove, trim or cut trees from any public rights-of-way without first
providing reasonable notice to the town of its intention to do so, notice to
be delivered not less than 10 days in advance. The grantee shall compensate
the town or any private owners of trees for any damage proximately caused by
grantee’s negligent conduct.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.084  MOVING FACILITIES.



   Grantee, on the request of the town, or any person holding a building
permit issued by the town, or any permit issued by an appropriate state
agency, shall temporarily move its wires, cables, poles or other cable system
facilities to permit the moving of large objects, vehicles, buildings or
other structures. The expense of temporary moves shall be paid to grantee by
the person requesting the same and grantee shall have the authority to
require payment in advance. Grantee shall be given not less than 30 days
advance notice to arrange for temporary moves.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.085  WORK PERFORMED BY OTHERS.



   To the extent applicable, all provisions of this chapter shall apply to
any subcontractors or others performing any work or services pursuant to the
provisions of a franchise agreement on behalf of a grantee.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.086  RELIEF FROM LIABILITY.



   Nothing contained in this chapter shall relieve any person from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring grantee’s facilities while performing any work connected with
grading, re-grading or changing the line of any public rights-of-way or with
the construction of any sewer or water system or utility system.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99




GENERAL FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE PROVISIONS




§ 115.100  FRANCHISE FEE.



   (A)   The administration of this chapter or the franchise agreement
imposes upon the town additional regulatory responsibility and expense and in
consideration for permission to use the public rights-of-way of the town for
the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system within the
town, a grantee of any franchise hereunder shall pay to the town a franchise
fee in an amount as designated in the franchise agreement, up to the maximum
amount allowed by applicable law. To the extent that applicable law changes
the maximum authorized franchise fee, the town reserves the right to change
the franchise fee as stated the franchise agreement by adopting a chapter
establishing the new franchise fee rate and allowing reasonable notice to the
grantee for administration of the change. The town shall hold a public
hearing prior to adopting any change in the franchise fee.



   (B)   Payments due grantor under this section shall be computed
quarterly for the preceding quarter. Each quarterly payment shall be due and
payable no later than 45 days after the end of the preceding quarter. Each
payment shall be accompanied by a brief report by a grantee showing the basis
for the computation and a Franchise Fee Worksheet listing all of the sources
of revenues attributable to the operation of grantee’s system in the town.
All payments shall be certified as correct by an officer of the grantee.



   (C)   No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord
that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall acceptance of
payment be construed as a release of any claim grantor may have for further
sums payable under the provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement.
All amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by grantor or
its designee at any time during any calendar year (but not more than once per
calendar year) upon 20 calendar days’ notice, which shall include a request
for any documents sought to be reviewed. Audits shall be at the expense of
the grantee if the additional amount due is greater than 2% of the amount
paid. Any additional amount due to the town as a result of the audit shall be
paid within 60 days following written notice to the grantee by the town which
notice shall include a copy of the audit report. Grantor's right to audit and
grantee's obligation to retain records related to the franchise fee audit,
shall expire 3 years from the date on which the most recent franchise fee
payment by the grantee was due from the time of written notice.



   (D)   In the event that any franchise payment or recomputed amount
is not made on or before the dates specified herein, grantee shall pay as
additional compensation an interest charge, computed from the due date, at
the annual rate equal to the commercial prime interest rate of the town’s
primary depository bank during the period that the unpaid amount is owed.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.101  PERFORMANCE BOND.



   Each grantee shall maintain a performance bond with the town to ensure
compliance with this chapter and the applicable franchise agreement, in an
amount and in a manner as set forth in the grantee's franchise agreement.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 115.102  PENALTIES PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Whenever grantor has reason to believe that a grantee has
violated any material provision of a franchise agreement or this chapter,
grantor shall first notify the grantee of the material violation and demand
correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than 20 days in
the case of the failure of a grantee to pay any sum or other amount due the
grantor under a franchise agreement, and 30 days in all other cases. If a
grantee fails to correct the violation within the time prescribed, or if a
grantee is unable to correct the violation and fails to commence corrective
action within the time prescribed and to diligently remedy the violation
thereafter, the grantee shall then be given written notice of not less than
20 days for public comment. The notice shall indicate with reasonable
specificity the violation alleged to have occurred.



   (B)   At the public hearing, the Board shall hear and consider all
relevant evidence and thereafter render findings and a decision based upon
the evidence. Any hearing must, at a minimum, provide the grantee a full and
fair opportunity to be heard by the Board.



   (C)   In the event the Board finds that a grantee has corrected the
violation or promptly commenced correction of the violation after notice
thereof from grantor and is diligently proceeding to fully remedy the
violation, or that no violation has occurred, the proceedings shall terminate
and no penalty or other sanction shall be imposed.



   (D)   In the event the Board finds that a violation exists and that
a grantee has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or did not
promptly commence and diligently proceed to correct the violation, the Board
may impose liquidated damages to be collected from the performance bond, as
set out in the franchise agreement.



   (E)   If the Board elects to assess liquidated damages, then the
election shall constitute grantor's exclusive remedy for a period of 60 days.
Thereafter, if a grantee remains in non-compliance, the grantor may pursue
any other available remedy.



   (F)   In the event that a franchise is cancelled or terminated by
reason of the default of a grantee, the performance bond deposited pursuant
to a franchise agreement shall remain in effect and available to the grantor
until all pending claims or penalties are resolved or settled, after which
point any remaining amounts in the performance bond shall revert to the
grantee.



   (G)   The rights reserved to grantor with respect to the security
fund are in addition to all other rights of grantor, whether reserved by a
franchise agreement, this chapter or authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the performance bond shall
affect any other right grantor may have.



   (H)   In instances of repeated violations, whether remedied or not,
the grantor shall serve special notice outlining additional remediation
requirements. Failure to cure, as measured by repeated instances of the same
violation, is evidence of an evasive practice and may lead to revocation
under § 115.115.



   (I)   Grantee acknowledges that non-compliance with the provisions
of the franchise agreement and the master ordinance will harm subscribers and
the town and the amounts of actual damages will be difficult or impossible to
ascertain. The town may therefore assess the following liquidated damages
against grantee for unexcused non-compliance with the requirement of the
franchise agreement and master ordinance. Grantee acknowledges that the
liquidated damages set forth below are a reasonable approximation of actual
damages and that this provision is intended to provide compensation and is
not a penalty. All damages provided shall be cumulative, unless expressly
stated.



      (1)   For failure to materially complete construction or
extend service in accordance with the chapter and the franchise agreement:
$250/calendar day for each day the violation continues;



      (2)   For failure to materially comply with requirements for
access channels: $250/calendar day for each day the violation continues;



      (3)   For failure to comply with the material requirements of
the I-Net provisions of the chapter/franchise agreement: $250/calendar day
for each day the violation continues;



      (4)   For repeated, willful or continuing failure to submit
reports, maintain records, provide documents or information: $250/calendar
day for each day the violation continues;



      (5)   For failure to comply with the material requirements of
the customer service standards: $250/calendar day for each day the violation
continues;



      (6)   For failure to comply with the transfer provisions:
$250/calendar day for each day the violation continues; and



      (7)   For violation of other material provisions of the
chapter and the franchise agreement: up to $250/day for each day the
violation continues.



   (J)   For the purposes of calculating the amount of liquidated
damages, time periods shall be tolled for time as grantee is found to be
diligently working to remedy the violation.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.103  BONDS, INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE.



   Each grantee shall maintain bonds and insurance with the town in
amounts and in a manner as set forth in the grantee’s franchise agreement.
Each grantee also shall be required to indemnify the town in a manner as set
forth in the grantee’s franchise agreement.



(Ord. passed - -)




REVOCATION AND FORECLOSURE; RECEIVERSHIP AND ABANDONMENT




§ 115.115  GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.



   Grantor reserves the right to revoke the franchise, and all rights and
privileges pertaining thereto, in the event that:



   (A)   A grantee substantially violates any material provision of
this chapter or a franchise agreement;



   (B)   A grantee attempts to evade any of the material provisions of
this chapter or a franchise agreement;



   (C)   A grantee practices an act of fraud or deceit upon the grantor;



   (D)   A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its
debts, or is adjudged bankrupt;



   (E)   A grantee fails to provide or maintain in full force and
effect the liability and indemnification coverage or the performance bond as
required pursuant to its franchise; or



   (F)   A grantee violates any orders or rulings of any regulatory
body having jurisdiction over the grantee relative to this chapter or the
franchise and after notice thereof, shall continue the violation and not
remedy the same within 60 days.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.116  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Whenever grantor has reason to believe that there may be
grounds for revocation of a franchise, grantor shall first notify the grantee
in writing of its basis for believing grounds for revocation exist. That
notice shall indicate with reasonable specificity the grounds for revocation
that are believed to exist so that the grantee may have a reasonable
opportunity to cure or otherwise address the same. If a grantee fails to
adequately cure or address the purported grounds for revocation within 30
days of the notice, then the grantor may, upon 30-days’ written notice to
the grantee, commence a public administrative hearing to determine whether
there exists any ground for revocation.



   (B)   The administrative hearing shall be conducted so as to protect
the full due process rights of the parties and provide for, at a minimum, the
right to have counsel, the right to call and cross-examine witnesses, and the
right to a full transcript of the proceedings.



   (C)   After the close of the hearing, grantor or the designated
hearing officer shall issue a written decision based on the record of the
proceedings, stating with specificity the findings and reasons supporting the
decision.



   (D)   Upon revocation, a grantee shall have a period of 120 days
subsequent to the date of the formal adoption of a revocation of the
franchise by the town within which to file an appeal with a court of
competent jurisdiction.



   (E)   During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full
force and effect.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.117  FORECLOSURE.



   Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a part of a
system, a grantee shall notify grantor of that fact and notification shall be
treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken
place, and the provisions of this chapter governing the consent to transfer
or change in ownership shall apply without regard to how transfer or change
in ownership occurred.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.118  RECEIVERSHIP.



   Apart from and supplemental to the right to revoke a franchise, grantor
shall have the right to cancel a franchise agreement 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of
a grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
action or proceeding, unless receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of 120 days, or unless:



   (A)   Within 120 days after its election or appointment, the
receiver or trustee has fully complied with all the provisions of grantee’s
franchise agreement and this chapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and



   (B)   The receiver or trustee within 120 days has executed an
agreement, duly approved by a court having jurisdiction, whereby receiver or
trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this
chapter and the applicable franchise agreement.



(Ord. passed - -)




PURCHASE OF SYSTEM; SALE OR TRANSFER




§ 115.130  UPON TERMINATION OF FRANCHISE TERM OR REVOCATION OF FRANCHISE.



   The grantor may, in accordance with and to the extent permitted by 47
U.S.C. § 547, upon the payment of a fair valuation, purchase, condemn,
acquire, take over and hold the property and plant of a grantee, in whole or
in part, on the following conditions:



   (A)   Upon revocation of a franchise, a fair valuation shall be an
equitable value that shall not include any sum attributable to the value of
the franchise itself, and plant and property shall be valued according to its
book value at the time of revocation, or the system’s initial cost less
depreciation and salvage.



   (B)   At the expiration of a franchise agreement and following a
denial of renewal of the franchise agreement, a fair valuation shall be the
fair market value of the plant and property, exclusive of the value
attributed to the franchise itself.



   (C)   In the event grantor shall acquire a franchise pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter or a franchise agreement, and commence operation
of the system, grantor shall reimburse the grantee for the fair market value
of the system.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.131  SALE OR TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   No grantee shall sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or
dispose of, in whole or in part, an interest in or control of a franchise or
cable system or any of the rights or privileges granted by a franchise
agreement without the prior consent of the grantor, which consent shall not
be unreasonably denied or delayed and may be denied only upon a good faith
finding by the grantor that the proposed transferee lacks the legal,
technical or financial qualifications to consummate the transaction and
operate the system so as to perform its obligations under this chapter and
the applicable franchise agreement. This section shall not apply to sales of
property or equipment in the normal course of business. Consent from the
grantor shall not be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other
instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness,
or for a transfer to a corporation, partnership or other entity controlling,
controlled by or under common control with a grantee.



   (B)   The following additional events shall be deemed to be a sale,
assignment or other transfer of an interest in or control of a grantee or its
franchise or cable system requiring compliance with this section:



      (1)   The sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a
majority of a grantee’s assets;



      (2)   The sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock
or partnership, membership or other equity interests in a grantee by 1 or
more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners
so as to create a new controlling interest in a grantee;



      (3)   The issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interest by a grantee so as to create a new
controlling interest in a grantee; and



      (4)   A grantee’s agreement to transfer management or
operation of the grantee or the system. The term controlling interest as used
herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working
control in whatever manner exercised.



   (C)   In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of an
interest in or control of a grantee or its franchise or cable system, the
town shall have 120 days to act upon any request for approval of sale or
transfer that contains or is accompanied by information as is required in
accordance with FCC regulations and the requirements chapter and the
applicable franchise agreement, including  information related to the legal,
technical and financial qualifications, and the proposed transferee’s
ability to operate the system in accord with this chapter and the franchise
agreement. Failure to provide all information reasonably requested by the
town as part of its review may be grounds for a denial of the proposed
transfer. If the town fails to render a final decision on the request within
120 days after receipt by the town of all required information, request shall
be deemed granted unless the grantee and the town agree to an extension of
the 120-day period.



   (D)   The consent or approval of the town to any transfer of the
grantee shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the town in
and to the public rights-of-way, and any transfer shall, by its terms, be
expressly subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the
franchise agreement.



   (E)   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the town will
not approve any transfer or assignment of the franchise prior to completion
of construction of the proposed initial system.



   (F)   Any approval by the town of a transfer shall be contingent
upon the prospective new grantee becoming a signatory to the franchise
agreement.



(Ord. passed - -)




RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS PROTECTED




§ 115.145  DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICES PROHIBITED.



   No grantee shall deny service, deny access or otherwise discriminate
against subscribers, programmers or general citizens on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, disability or age. Every grantee shall
strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of state and
federal law. Each grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable
federal, state and local laws, and all executive and administrative orders
relating to non-discrimination.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.146  SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.



   Grantees shall at all times comply with the federal subscriber privacy
requirements codified at 47 U.S.C. § 551.



(Ord. passed - -)




MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS




§ 115.160  RATE REGULATION.



   (A)   The town reserves the right to regulate rates for all services
offered over the cable system, to the extent permitted by federal or state
law. Grantee shall be subject to the rate regulation provisions provided for
herein, and those of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) at 47 C.F.R.
part 76.900, subpart N. The town shall follow the rules relating to cable
rate regulation promulgated by the FCC at 47 C.F.R. part 76.900, subpart N.
To the extent required by applicable federal or state law, grantee shall
establish rates that are nondiscriminatory within the same general class of
subscribers and which must be applied fairly and uniformly to all subscribers
in the franchise area for all services



   (B)   Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the grantee from
offering:



      (1)   Discounts to commercial and multiple family dwelling
subscribers billed on a bulk basis;



      (2)   Promotional discounts;



      (3)   Reduced installation rates for subscribers who have
multiple services;



      (4)   Discounts for senior citizens and/or low income
residents; or



      (5)   Reduced rates to subscribers who receive non-cable
services in addition to cable services.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.161  RIGHTS RESERVED TO GRANTOR.



   (A)   Upon either the expiration or revocation of a franchise,
grantor may permit and/or require a grantee to continue to operate the cable
system for an extended period of time not to exceed 3 months from the date of
expiration or revocation. A grantee shall continue to operate the system
under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the applicable franchise
agreement and to provide cable service and any and all other services which
grantee had been providing.



   (B)   The grantor shall have the right to compel continued operation
of the cable system whether by the grantee or a trustee or receiver or by the
grantor, and to ensure that the operation is consistent with  public
interest as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. The grantee may
not remove equipment or documents necessary for continued operation of the
system.



   (C)   At all reasonable times, grantee shall permit examination by
the town of the system, together with any appurtenant property of grantee
situated within or without the town when necessary to ascertain the
grantee’s compliance with this chapter, the franchise agreement and all
applicable laws.



   (D)   The town shall have the right of intervention in any suit or
proceeding to which the grantee is a party relative to grantee’s operations
in the town, and the grantee shall not oppose intervention by the town.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided by applicable law, the grantee
shall have no recourse whatsoever against the town or its officials, boards,
commissions, agents or employees for any loss, cost, expense or damage
arising out of any provision or requirements of this chapter or the franchise
agreement or of their enforcement.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.162  NON-ENFORCEMENT BY THE TOWN.



   Grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or the franchise agreement by reason of any
failure of the town to enforce prompt compliance.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.163  GOVERNING LAW AND CHOICE OF FORUM.



   Any dispute arising with respect to this chapter or a franchise
agreement granted pursuant to it shall be subject to review by the state and
federal courts having primary jurisdiction in the Town of Wilkesboro, North
Carolina.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.164  SEVERABILITY.



   If any material portion of this chapter or a franchise agreement
adopted pursuant to it, is held by an authority of competent jurisdiction, to
be invalid or unlawful as conflicting with applicable laws now or hereafter
in effect, or is held by a court or competent governmental authority to be
modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any applicable
laws, provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part
of this chapter or franchise agreement, and, to the extent possible, the
holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other
provisions thereof.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.165  PUBLICATION OF NOTICES.



   All public notices required to be published by grantor under this
chapter or any franchise agreement shall be published in a manner consistent
with the public notice laws of the State of North Carolina.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 115.166  SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION CAPABILITIES AND SCHEDULE.



   (A)   The cable system shall generally conform to the system design
and channel capacity specifications set forth by the grantee in its
application for a franchise submitted to the town. At a minimum, the grantee
shall construct a system with equivalent technical capabilities to a hybrid
fiber coax [HFC] 750 MHz cable system. The grantee is permitted to modify its
design and implementation plan pursuant to the conditions provided herein to
accommodate technological innovations and refinements that enhance system
reliability and capacity.



   (B)   The initial construction required under initial franchise
agreement shall be completed in compliance with a schedule specified therein.
If the grantee shows that, notwithstanding its due diligence, that it has
been unable to extend service to a specified area because the acts or
omissions of a third party (excluding the grantee’s subcontractors or
agents) or other factors have caused a delay in construction beyond that
reasonably expected during the course of construction, and the grantee
proposes a reasonable alternative deadline for extension of service to that
area, the town shall grant reasonable extensions of time to complete
construction.



(Ord. passed - -)



APPENDIX A.  CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.



   Customer service standards: Grantee shall at all times comply with the
more stringent of the customer service and consumer protection provisions of
the Town of Wilkesboro’s master cable services regulatory chapter, the
franchise agreement or the FCC.



   (A)   Grantee will at all times comply with the town’s customer
service standards in addition to compliance with the FCC standards (Title 47
C.F.R. part 76 (cable television service), Subpart H (general  operating,
requirements) as amended.



   (B)   The town’s customer service standards are:



      (1)   The customer service standards as set forth below are
the standards set for all affected cable operators. This provision is the
town’s notice of its intent to enforce the standards.



      (2)   Effective with adoption of this chapter, a cable
operator shall be subject to the following customer service standards:



         (a)   The cable operator will maintain a local,
toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to
its subscribers 24 hours a day, 7 days a week;



         (b)   Trained company representatives will be available
to respond to customer telephone inquiries during normal business hours;



         (c)   After normal operating conditions, the access line
may be answered by a service or an automated response system, including an
answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business hours must be
responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day;



         (d)   Under normal operating conditions, telephone
answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not
exceed 30 seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be
transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall
be met no less than 90% of the time under normal operating conditions,
measured on a quarterly basis;



         (e)   The operator is required to have equipment or
perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards
above;



         (f)   Under normal operating conditions, the customer
will receive a busy signal less than 3% of the time; and



         (g)   Customer service center and bill payment locations
will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently
located.



      (3)   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following
4 standards will be met no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly
basis:



         (a)   Standard installations will be performed within 7
business days after an order has been placed;



         (b)   Excluding conditions beyond the control of the
operator, the cable operator will begin working on service interruptions
promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes
known. The cable operator must begin actions to correct other service
problems the next business day after notification of the service problem;



         (c)   The appointment window alternatives for
installations, service calls and other installation activities will be either
a specific time or, at maximum, a 4-hour time block during normal business
hours (The operator may schedule service calls and other installation
activities outside of normal operating hours);



         (d)   An operator may not cancel an appointment with a
customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the
scheduled appointment;



         (e)   If a cable operator representative is running late
for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the
appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment
will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time that is convenient for the
customer; and



         (f)   The cable operator shall establish a complaint
log. The log will be provided to the town, upon reasonable request for the
purpose of ascertaining compliance with the chapter or franchise agreement.
The complaint log shall be available for review for the current and past 2
years and be in a format convenient to the grantee. The log shall have
sufficient information to indicate the date of the complaint, nature of the
complaint and the grantee’s resolution of the complaint.



   (C)   Communications between cable operators and cable subscribers
are as follows:



      (1)   Notifications to subscribers. The cable operator shall
provide written information on each of the following areas at the time of
installation of service, at least annually to all subscribers, and at any
time upon request:



         (a)   Products and services offered;



         (b)   Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other services;



         (c)   Installation and service maintenance policies;



         (d)   Instruction on how to use the cable service;



         (e)   Channel positions of programming carried on the
system; and



         (f)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the
address and telephone number of the local franchise authority's cable office.



         (g)   Customers will be notified of any changes in
rates, programming service or channel positions as soon as possible through
announcements on the cable system and in writing. Notice must be given to
subscribers a minimum of 30 days in advance of changes if the change is
within the control of the cable operator. In addition, the cable operator
shall notify subscribes 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the
other information required by this division.



      (2)   Billing. Bills will be clear, concise and
understandable. Bills must be fully itemized, with itemizations, including,
but not limited to, basic and premium service charges and equipment charges.
Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing period,
including optional charges, rebates and credits. In case of a billing
dispute, the cable operator must respond to a written complaint from a
subscriber within 30 days.



      (3)   Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no
later than either:



         (a)   The customer’s next billing cycle following
resolution of the request of 30 days, whichever is earlier; or



         (b)   The return of the equipment supplied by the cable
operator if service is terminated.



      (4)   Credits. In the case of an outage, multiple or single,
in excess of 24 hours, the grantee shall make every effort to credit the
subscriber’s account based on the period of outage, reasons for outage and
general good business practices. Credits for service will be issued no later
than the customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a
credit is warranted.



      (5)   Late payment for cable service. If grantee assesses
processing fee for late payments, each bill shall specify on its face in a
fashion emphasizing same, such as bold face type, underlined type or a larger
font: For payments received after [date] a processing fee as referenced in
the town’s schedule of fees, which is updated annually, for late payment
may be charged. No processing fees for late payment, however denominated,
shall be added to a subscriber’s bill less than 15 calendar days after the
date printed on mailing of the bill to the subscriber, and shall not exceed
the amount permitted under applicable law.



(Ord. passed - -)



CHAPTER 116:  ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   116.01   Definitions



   116.02   Alarm user permits required



   116.03   Prohibited alarm systems



   116.04   False alarms; permit revocation



   116.05   Allocation of revenue



§ 116.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESS.  Any person, firm, association or corporation
which installs, services or responds to electrical, electronic or mechanical
alarms, signal devices, burglar alarms, television cameras or still cameras
used to detect burglary, breaking and entering or intrusion, shoplifting,
pilferage, theft, fire or any emergency situation, for a fee or other
valuable consideration. Provided, however, it shall not include a business
which merely sells or manufactures alarm systems unless business services,
installs or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. Provided
further, this definition does not include a person, firm, association or
corporation which owns and installs an alarm system on property owned or
leased by itself. Provided further this definition of ALARM SYSTEM BUSINESSES
shall not include the installation or servicing of local alarm systems.



   ALARM SYSTEMS.  Any mechanism, equipment or device which is designed
to operate automatically to transmit to the Police Department or Fire
Communications or other receiving station, or communications center a signal,
message or warning of an occurrence requiring urgent attention and to which
emergency personnel are expected to respond. This definition shall not
include local ALARM SYSTEMS.



   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, association or corporation of any kind in
control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm system is
installed, operated and maintained.



   FALSE ALARM.  Activation of an alarm system eliciting a response by
emergency personnel when a situation requiring a due response does not in
fact exist. This includes accidental, avoidable and unnecessary alarm
activation due to user error, equipment malfunction/or improper or unsuited
equipment, but does not include alarm activation caused by violent conditions
of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to
control by the alarm user or alarm system business.



   FALSE ALARM DAY.  Any 24-hour period that begins with the occurrence
of a false alarm.



   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM.  A signaling system which when activated, causes
an audible and/or visual signaling device to be activated only in or on the
premises wherein the system is installed, operated and maintained.



   SPECIAL TRUNKLINES.  A telephone line leading into the Town of
Wilkesboro Police or Fire Department or other communications center having
the primary purpose of receiving alarm signals or messages.



   TOWN COUNCIL.  The Board of Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro.



(Ord. passed 2-3-1992)



§ 116.02  ALARM USER PERMITS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Within 60 days after the effective date of this chapter every
alarm user shall obtain an alarm user permit for each alarm system he or she
operates within the Town of Wilkesboro from the office of the Chief of Police
or Fire Chief. This does not require that a licensed alarm system business
obtain a permit under this section when it leases or provides services to
alarm system users. If a licensed alarm business does, however, use an alarm
system to protect its own premises, it shall obtain a permit for systems as
required in this section. Local alarm system users are not required to obtain
user permits required under this section.



   (B)   (1)   The alarm user applying for the permit required in
division (A) of this section shall state on the permit application form: his
or her name, the address of the residence or business in or upon which the
alarm system has been or will be installed, his or her telephone number, the
type of alarm system, the alarm system business selling, monitoring,
inspecting, responding to and/or maintaining the alarm system and the name,
address and telephone number of at least 2 other persons who can be reached
at any time, day or night, and who are authorized by the alarm user to
respond to and open the premises in which the system is installed.



      (2)   At the time any information required as provided in
division (B)(1) of this section is revised, modified, updated or in any
manner changed, the alarm user shall make changes known by applying for a
renewal application obtained and completed in the manner as provided in
divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this section.



      (3)   A $10 fee shall be charged for each initial permit
application approved by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or his or her
designee. No charge shall be levied for any subsequent renewal application
unless renewal is the result of a permit revoked from an alarm user as
provided in § 116.04 of this chapter. A renewal fee of $25 shall be charged
for any renewal of a revoked users permit.



   (4)   The information contained in alarm user permit applications
required by the section shall be securely maintained and restricted to
inspection only by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or his or her delegate
assigned the responsibility for handling and processing alarm user permits in
the course of official duties.



   (C)   The Chief of Police or Fire Chief or his or her designees
shall approve alarm user permit applications if he or she finds that:



      (1)   The alarm system will not interfere with the orderly
conduct of the Town of Wilkesboro business;



      (2)   The installer of the alarm system maintains a service
organization capable of making necessary repairs within a reasonable period
of time after notice of equipment malfunctions; and



      (3)   The installer of the alarm system is licensed by the
State of North Carolina under G.S. Chapter 74C and subsequent revisions,
rules and regulations adopted thereto.



   (D)   Each permit shall be physically placed upon the premises
wherein the alarm system is installed and shall be available for inspection
by the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or his or her delegate during normal
business hours;



   (E)   Any alarm system user who operates an alarm system without a
permit as required by this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as
provided in G.S. § 14-4.



(Ord. passed 2-3-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.03  PROHIBITED ALARM SYSTEMS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any alarm user to install, operate or
maintain an alarm system that transmits to the Police Department a signal,
message or warning of an occurrence requiring urgent attention and to which
police or fire are expected to respond with the exceptions of alarm system
user required by federal,  state, county or Town of Wilkesboro, ordinance,
regulation or rule to install, maintain and operate an alarm system: an alarm
system user which is a federal, state, county or Town of Wilkesboro
government agency or organization; and an alarm system business whose purpose
is to relay to the Police Department notification of activation of an alarm
system for which a current permit has been issued by the Chief of Police;
provided that signals, messages or warnings are received by the Police
Department Communications Center via a special trunkline designated for that
purpose or a direct connection alarm system approved by the Police Chief or
Fire Chief.



   (B)   The recording of 2 or more responses to an alarm system during
any False Alarm Day shall incur upon the alarm user a response fee of $100
per response for all false alarms recorded during the False Alarm Day.



(Ord. passed 2-3-1992)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 116.04  FALSE ALARMS; PERMIT REVOCATION.



   (A)   More than 4 false alarm days in a 4-month period from any
alarm system for which a user permit has been obtained shall constitute
grounds for revocation of permit.



   (B)   If the Wilkesboro Police Department Fire Department or
Communications Center records 4 or more false alarm days within a 4-month
period:



      (1)   The Chief of Police or Fire Chief shall notify the alarm
user and the alarm system business providing service to the user by certified
mail of the fact and direct that the user submit a report to the Chief of
Police or Fire Chief within 10 days of receipt of the notice describing
actions taken or to be taken to discover and eliminate the cause of the false
alarms.



      (2)   If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the
Chief of Police or Fire Chief shall determine if the actions taken or to be
taken will prevent the occurrence of false alarms.  If he or she determines
that the action will prevent the occurrence of false alarms, he or she shall
notify the alarm user and the relevant alarm system business in writing that
the permit will not be revoked at that time, and, that if 2 more false alarm
days occur within the next 4-month period, the permit may be revoked as
herein provided.



      (3)   If no report is submitted or if the Chief of Police or
Fire Chief determines that the actions taken or to be taken will not prevent
the occurrence of false alarms, or if 2 or more false alarm days are recorded
by police as provided in division (B)(2) above, the Chief of Police shall
give notice by certified mail to the user that the permit will be revoked
without further notice on the tenth day after the date of this notice if the
user does not file within that period a written request for a hearing
delivered by certified mail to the Chief of Police.



      (4)   If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time
and place of the hearing shall be served on the user by the Chief of Police
by certified mail at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing,
which date shall not be more than 21 nor less than 10 days after filing of
the request for hearing.



      (5)   The hearing shall be before the Town Manager. The alarm
user shall have the right to present written and oral evidence. If the Town
Manager determines that 4 or more false alarms have occurred in a 4-month
period, and that the user has not taken actions which will prevent the
occurrence of false alarms, and that 2 or more have occurred in a 4-month
period, and that the user has not taken actions which will prevent the
occurrence of false alarms, or that 2 or more have occurred as provided in
division (B)(2) above, the Town Manager shall order revocation of the
user’s permit.



      (6)   An alarm system business shall immediately discontinue
the relay of alarm signals to the police or fire communications upon being
notified by certified mail of the revocation of a permit pursuant to division
(B)(3) or (B)(5) above.



      (7)   An alarm user whose permit has been  revoked may apply
for a revoked user’s permit as provided in § 116.02. The Chief of Police
shall not be  required to issue a revoked user’s permit, unless he or she
is satisfied that the user’s system has been properly serviced and its
deficiencies corrected. The Chief of Police may impose reasonable
restrictions and conditions upon the user before issuing a revoked user’s
permit.



   (C)   An alarm user as identified in § 116.03 as an alarm user
required by federal, state, county or Town of Wilkesboro statute, ordinance,
regulation or rule to install, maintain and operate an alarm system shall not
be subject to permit revocation as provided under this section, but the
holder of the permit shall pay a fee of $50 in lieu thereof.



   (D)   An alarm user as identified in § 116.03 as an alarm user
which is a federal, state, county or Town of Wilkesboro government agency
shall not be subject to revocation or payment of fees as provided herein.



(Ord. passed 2-3-1992)



§ 116.05  ALLOCATION OF REVENUE.



   All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be general fund
revenue of the Town of Wilkesboro.



(Ord. passed 2-3-1992)



CHAPTER 117:  INSTALLATION OF MATERIALS AND EQUIPMENT



Section



   117.01   Required license



   117.02   Applications



   117.03   Procedure for issuance



   117.04   Bond required



   117.05   Termination and renewal of licenses



   117.06   Suspension; revocation



   117.07   Change of location



   117.08   Required permit; fee



 



   117.99   Penalties



§ 117.01  REQUIRED LICENSE.



   On and after January 1, 1978, no person, firm or corporation may for a
consideration install, alter or restore within the town any insulation or
other materials or energy utilization equipment designed or intended to meet
the State Building Code requirements for insulation and energy utilization
standards who is not either:



   (A)   Licensed as a contractor to do the proposed work under G.S.
Chapter 87;



   (B)   Working under the supervision of a registered architect or
professional engineer;



   (C)   An owner working upon his or her own building; or



   (D)   Licensed under this chapter.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1977)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 117.02  APPLICATIONS.



   Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall submit an
application for a license to the Town Manager conforming to the following
requirements:



   (A)   Form of application. Each application shall be a written
statement upon forms provided by the Town Manager.



   (B)   Contents of application. Each application shall contain the
following information:



      (1)   Name and home address of the applicant, if an
individual, or home office address, if a corporation or partnership;



      (2)   Names and home addresses of the partners, if a
partnership;



      (3)   Names and home addresses of the officers and directors,
if a corporation;



      (4)   Place where the proposed business is to be located;



      (5)   Complete record of all convictions of felonies or acts
involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit by the applicant or any employee,
partner, officer or director of the applicant, whether in this or any other
state or jurisdiction;



      (6)   Complete record of all licenses held by the applicant or
any employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant authorizing
activities of the type authorized herein or other activities involving
construction, alteration or modification of building and structures;



      (7)   Information as to the circumstances in which any local,
state or federal government or agency has refused, suspended or revoked a
license of the type described in division (A)(6) above to the applicant or
any employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant.



   (C)   Fees. Each applicant shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount of $10 for a license, the amount to be for the calendar year and
prorated by quarters to the end of the year.



   (D)   False statements. False statements on any applications for a
license shall be grounds for immediate revocation or denial of license.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1977)



§ 117.03  PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Review by town officers. Each application received by the Town
Clerk shall be promptly forwarded to the Town Manager and the Town Manager
shall then promptly make any comments and recommendations pertaining to the
application and forward the same to the Clerk of the Town Board.



   (B)   Licensing Agency. The application and any comments and
recommendations relating thereto shall be considered by the Town Governing
Board, which Board shall then order the Town Clerk to issue or deny the
license pursuant to the following standards.



   (C)   Standards. The Clerk of the Town Board shall issue the
license, unless the Town Board shall find that the application or any
employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant:



      (1)   Has been convicted within the last 3 years of a felony
or an act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit, whether in this or any other
state or jurisdiction;



      (2)   Has been refused a license to do the type of work
authorized herein or has had a license suspended or revoked by any local,
state or federal government or agency and government or agency has not
subsequently granted or restored license;



      (3)   Has knowingly made a false statement in the
applications; or



      (4)   Has failed to post the bond or other security required
by § 117.04.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1977)



§ 117.04  BOND REQUIRED.



   (A)   Prior to the issuance of the license the applicant shall file
with the Town Clerk a bond as referenced in the town’s schedule of fees,
which is updated annually, or in lieu thereof, the applicant may deposit a
cashier’s check or cash in the same amount.



   (B)   The security required by division (A) shall be available to
indemnify any person for any damage which may accrue by reason of the
applicant's failure to properly provide or install insulation, energy
utilization equipment or other materials designed or intended to meet the
State Building Code standards for the insulation and energy utilization.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1977)



§ 117.05  TERMINATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   All licenses issued hereunder shall terminate on the last day of the
calendar year for which issued. Renewal of licenses shall be pursuant to the
same procedures and requirements as set forth for initial issuance.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1977)



§ 117.06  SUSPENSION; REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Town Governing Board may suspend or revoke any license
issued hereunder at any time upon a showing that the applicant or any
employee, partner, officer or director of the applicant has:



      (1)   Knowingly made a false statement in the application for
a license;



      (2)   Violated the State Building Code requirements as to
insulation or energy utilization equipment or materials, whether in this or
any other jurisdiction; or



      (3)   Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud or
deceit with respect to any contract entered into for work requiring this
license.



   (B)   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked may appeal
the suspension or revocation to the Town Governing Body. After reasonable
notice to the licensee, the Town Governing Body shall afford the licensee an
opportunity to show why its license should not be suspended or revoked.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1977)



§ 117.07  CHANGE OF LOCATION.



   The location of any licensed business may be changed, provided
10-days’ notice thereof is given to the Town Governing Body and operation
at the new location does not violate any applicable state or local law,
ordinance or regulation.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1977)



§ 117.08  REQUIRED PERMIT; FEE.



   On and after January 1, 1978, no person, firm or corporation licensed
under this chapter may for a consideration install, alter or restore any
insulation or other materials or energy utilization equipment designed or
intended to meet the State Building Code requirements for insulation and
energy utilization without first securing a permit from the Town Clerk for
each item of work. There shall be a fee of $10 for each permit issued.



(Ord. passed 12-12-1977)



§ 117.99  PENALTIES.



   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to all the applicable punishment, penalties and
equitable relief provided for by G.S. § 160A-175 and Chapter 703, North
Carolina Session Laws of 1977.



(Ord. passed 2-12-1977)



CHAPTER 118:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE



Section



   118.01   Definitions



   118.02   Purpose



   118.03   Compliance with chapter



   118.04   Proof of financial responsibility



   118.05   General prohibited practices



   118.06   Rates and changes



   118.07   Hours of operation



   118.08   Taxi stand designation



   118.09   Taxi service permit required



   118.10   Driver’s permit required



   118.11   Proof of license



   118.12   Suspension or revocation of permits



   118.13   Fees



   118.14   Taxi inspection and approval



   118.15   Daily manifest



 



   118.99   Penalty



§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD.  The Town Council of the Town of Wilkesboro.



   CHIEF.  The Chief of Police of the Town of Wilkesboro and his or her
designee(s). The CHIEF is responsible for the administration of this chapter.



   DAILY MANIFEST.  A written accounting of each trip, including the
following information:



      (1)   Place of origin of trip;



      (2)   Place of destination of trip;



      (3)   Odometer mileage reading at start of trip;



      (4)   Odometer reading at the end of trip;



      (5)   Time at start of trip;



      (6)   Time at end of trip;



      (7)   Number of passengers carried; and



      (8)   Fare charged.



   DRIVER.  Any person who actually drives a taxicab on the streets of
the town for hire. "Drive" or "driving a taxicab" means driving a taxicab for
hire on such streets.



   DRIVER'S PERMIT.  The permit issued by the Chief under which a person
may drive a taxicab for hire.



   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. A certificate of any insurance
carrier duly authorized to do business in the State of North Carolina
certifying that there in effect a policy of liability insurance insuring the
owner and the driver of the taxicab, his or her agents and employees, while
in the performance of their duties, against loss from any liability imposed
by law for damages including damages for care and loss of services because of
bodily injury to or death of any person and injury to or destruction of
property caused by accident and arising out of the ownership, use or
operation, including driving, of such taxicabs in and amount equal to the
greater of:



      (1)   One hundred thousand dollars because of bodily injury to
or death of 1 person in any 1 accident and, subject to said limit for 1
person, $300,000 because of the bodily injury to or death of 2 or more
persons in any 1 accident, and $50,000 because of injury to or destruction of
property of others in any 1 accident; or



      (2)   The limits required by state law (G.S. §20-280(b)), as
amended from time to time.



   TAXI OR TAXICAB.  A passenger motor vehicle plying for hire for which
public patronage is accepted or solicited and which is designed as to seat
comfortably not more than 9 persons but shall not include motor vehicles or
motor vehicle carriers as defined in G.S. Ch. 20, Art. 17.



   TAXICAB SERVICE. Any person, business, company, corporation, or other
legal entity who owns 1 or more taxicabs or who engages in the operation of 1
or more taxicabs under a trade or service name.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.02  PURPOSE.



   For the better protection of the public interest, health, safety, and
welfare or convenience, the following rules and regulations are hereby
adopted setting forth the conditions, requirements, and limitations under
which the owner may operate a taxi service and engage in the business of
providing taxi service within the town.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.03  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.



   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating
one or more taxicabs, or to drive any taxicab within the corporate limits of
the town or within one mile beyond the corporate limits in every direction,
unless said person shall have complied, and shall continue to comply, with
the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the preceding, taxicab
drivers and operators who are duly licensed in another jurisdiction may come
into the town to pickup or deliver persons if their services were requested
by the passenger, provided they do not solicit fares within town limits. The
term "solicit fares" shall include directing advertisement of their services
toward town residents, such as advertising in the town phone directory.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.04  PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   The owner and driver of every taxicab shall furnish and keep in effect
for each taxicab proof of financial responsibility. The insurance policy
shall contain a clause obligating the insurance company to give 15 days
written notice to the Chief prior to the cancellation of coverage or
reduction in coverage or other material change in the policy of such
insurance on any taxicab. The operating permit for any permit for any taxicab
shall be automatically revoked upon the lapse, cancellation or termination of
the insurance on that vehicle unless the same has been renewed or replaced
and a new certificate filed with the Chief.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.05  GENERAL PROHIBITED PRACTICES.



   In addition to the practices prohibited elsewhere in this chapter, it
shall be unlawful:



   (A)   Illegal rates. For a driver to charge or attempt to charge a
passenger a greater rate or fare than that which is posted in the vehicle as
required by this chapter.



   (B)   Deviating from direct route. For a driver to fail, refuse or
neglect to proceed with all reasonable dispatch by the nearest practicable
route to the destination of the first person applying to him for
transportation unless the person has granted permission to take on or wait
for additional passengers.



   (C)   Illegal use of a cab.  For a driver, on or off duty, to
knowingly permit a taxicab to be used for any illegal act or to acquire and
transport in a taxicab any alcoholic beverage for another, or to transport
any person to any place where alcoholic beverages or drugs are illegally
dispensed or stored.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.06  RATES AND CHARGES.



   (A)   The rates of fares to be charged for taxicab services by any
person owning, operating, or controlling any taxicab shall not be in excess
of the rates established by resolution of the Board from time to time.  The
schedule of rates for fares for taxicab shall be maintained on file in the
office of the Town Clerk. Until provided otherwise by resolution of the
Board, the following rates shall continue in effect:



      (1)   Mileage.  Not greater than $2 per mile, which may be
measured in increments of 1/10 mile at the rate of $0.20 per 1/10 mile.



      (2)   Waiting time.  Not greater than $12 per hour.



      (3)   Hand baggage/groceries and other bulky items.  A
maximum of $1 per person per trip may be charged.



      (4)   Maximum initial fee upon entering taxicab. $2.



   (B)   A sign setting forth these maximum rates shall be posted
inside the taxicab at a conspicuous place where it will be visible to
passengers.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.07  HOURS OF OPERATION.



   The Wilkesboro Town Council may establish by resolution minimum hours
of operation by taxicabs, which shall be on file in the office of the Town
Clerk.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.08  TAXI STAND DESIGNATION.



   The Council may from time to time designate stands for taxicabs
throughout the town.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.09  TAXI SERVICE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall engage in or otherwise participate in the
operation of taxi service within the town unless such person shall have first
obtained a permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Any person seeking issuance of a taxi service permit shall
file a written application with the Chief on a form supplied by the town.
Submission of any false or misleading information to obtain or renew a permit
shall be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of such permit. At a
minimum, the application shall include:



      (1)   A list of all motor vehicles that applicant proposes to
use in the taxi service; and



      (2)   A list of all drivers applicant proposes to use in the
taxi service.



   (C)   The Chief will conduct an investigation to determine
applicant's qualifications. Submissions of an applicant for a taxi service
permit shall constitute a waiver of any privileges and rights of privacy with
respect to any document in existence reasonably related to the determination
of the applicant's qualifications and shall serve as an authorization to the
Chief to make inquiry of any person or entity, regarding any facts, evidence
or information reasonably related to the determination of the applicant's
qualifications. If needed, the applicant shall sign a separate written
authorization for the release of documents or information concerning the
applicant.



   (D)   No taxi service permit will be issued unless the applicant
meets the following requirements:



      (1)   The applicant is at least 18 years of age or is
otherwise legally emancipated and is a U.S. citizen or possesses
documentation of eligibility to work in the United States;



      (2)   The applicant has not been convicted within the last 10
years of any of the following:



         (a)   Any felony against the state or any offense
against another state which would have been a felony committed in North
Carolina;



         (b)   Any federal or state law relating to the use,
possessions, or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs;



         (c)   Any federal law relating to prostitution;



         (d)   The Chief upon completion of a permit
investigation shall make a report with recommendations to the Town Manager
regarding approval or denial of a permit or a renewal based on an
investigation.



         (e)   A Permit shall be nonexclusive and shall be
granted for a term of 3 years from effective date of the permit. The permit
may be renewed for terms of 3 years.  Renewal requests must be forwarded to
the Chief at least 30 days prior to permit expiration.



         (f)   A permit shall not be sold, transferred, leased,
assigned, or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by voluntary,
involuntary, or forced sale, or by merger or consolidation or otherwise.



         (g)   If the permit holder, for any reason, is no longer
able to provide the taxi service as applied for, the taxi service permit
shall immediately terminate.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.10  DRIVER'S PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every person who transports passengers for a taxi service
shall obtain a driver's permit from the Chief.  The Chief will conduct an
investigation to determine applicant's qualifications, submissions of an
applicant for a driver's permit shall constitute a waiver of any privileges
and rights of privacy with respect to any document in existence reasonably
related to the determination of the applicant's qualifications and shall
serve as an authorizations to the Chief to make inquiry of any person or
entity, and to receive any oral or written reports from any person or entity,
regarding any facts, evidence or information reasonably related to the
determination of the applicant's qualifications. If needed, the applicant
shall sign a separate written authorization for the release of documents or
information concerning the applicant.



   (B)   No driver's permit shall be issued unless the applicant meets
the following criteria;



      (1)   The applicant is at least 18 years of age or is
otherwise legally emancipated and is a U.S. citizen or possesses
documentation of eligibility to work in the United States;



      (2)   The applicant has not been convicted within the last 10
years of any of the following:



         (a)   Any felony against the state or any offense
against another state which would have been a felony committed in North
Carolina;



         (b)   Violation of the provisions of G.S.§ 14-204 in
regard to prostitution or assignation.



         (c)   Assault with an automobile.



         (d)   Any 3 convictions of violating any traffic laws or
regulations.



   (C)   If at any time a driver is criminally charged with any traffic
or criminal violation, the driver shall notify Chief within 10 days of such
violations.



   (D)   The driver's permit shall be displayed in such a manner as to
be in full view of all passengers at all times while the driver in on duty.



   (E)   Driver's permits are not transferable from one person to
another. Driver's permits shall expire on June 30 of each year. Requests for
renewal shall be made at least 30 days prior to the expiration date.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.11  PROOF OF LICENSE.



   All licensed taxicabs are required to display a town sticker in the
right corner of the back glass to demonstrate recognizable proof of vehicle's
certification.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.12 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.



   The Chief may suspend or revoke any permit previously granted upon a
showing that the taxi service or driver has violated any provision of this
chapter.  The Chief shall notify the permittee in writing that a permit is
suspended or revoked. Upon receipt of such notice, the permittee shall
immediately suspend operations allowed under the permit. The permittee shall
have 10 days from the receipt of such notice to appeal the determination.
Appeal will be filed with Town Manager. The Council shall conduct a hearing
on suspension and shall have final authority on suspension or revocation.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.13  FEES.



   (A)   Each taxi service and every driver shall pay to the town an
annual fee in an amount as set forth time to time by the Council in its
annual budget, said fees to be set in the schedule of fees adopted in
conjunction with the schedule of fees.



   (B)   By resolution, the Council shall establish fees for
applications for taxi service permits and driver permits.



   (C)   Until changed by adoption of a new schedule of fees or by
resolution of the Council, the following fees shall be in effect:



      (1)   Taxi service application fee: $50.



      (2)   Taxi service annual fee (privilege license) $15 per
taxicab.



      (3)   Taxicab driver permit application fee (exclusive of
drivers listed on taxi service application) $25.



      (4)   Taxicab driver permit annual fee: $3 per driver.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.14  TAXI INSPECTION AND APPROVAL.



   All vehicles must pass the annual safety and inspection required by the
state of North Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles and be maintained in a
manner that would meet the requirements established by that inspection. In
addition, at any time, the Chief shall have the right to inspect, approve or
disapprove the various taxicabs and all equipment thereon operated in
connection with the taxi service, and such inspections shall not be limited
to the requirements of the annual Department of Motor Vehicles inspections.
The Chief shall have the right to order removal from service of any vehicle
reasonably deemed to be a safety hazard.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.15  DAILY MANIFEST.



   (A)   The taxi service shall require every driver to maintain a
daily manifest. All such manifests shall be returned to the taxi service by
the driver at the conclusion of his daily tour of duty. The forms for such
records shall be of a character either approved or furnished by the town.



   (B)   The daily manifests shall be maintained for inspection by the
town and shall be retained and preserved in a safe place for at least 90 days.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



§ 118.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each offense by a
fine not exceeding $500. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense.



(Ord. passed 7-10-2006)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY





         131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS





         132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS




CHAPTER 130:  OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   130.01   Advertising matter, posters and the like



   130.02   Tampering with town or personal property



   130.03   Trees; certain planting restricted; injuring



   130.04   Jail; damage and defacement



§ 130.01  ADVERTISING MATTER, POSTERS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person shall paint, print, post or in any manner affix any
picture, bill or advertising matter of any kind upon any post, hydrant, curb,
sidewalk or other public building, structure or erection of any kind
belonging to the town, nor upon any mast or pole in any street erected or
used for supporting or conducting any wire or cable incidental thereto, or
any structure or erection of any kind within the limits of any public street
or ground in the town, unless express written consent therefor shall have
first been granted by authority of the Mayor and Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 12-1)



   (B)   No person shall post or emplace any bill or advertisement
containing pictures, illustrations of printed or written matter of any
obscene or immoral character at any place so that it can be seen from any
street or other public place.



(Prior Code, § 12-2)



   (C)   No person shall scatter, daub or leave any paste, glue or
other adhesive substance used for affixing bills upon any sidewalk or
pavement; nor scatter or throw any old bills or waste material removed from
billboards, on the surface of any public or private grounds within the town.



(Prior Code, § 12-38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Unlawful defacing of public buildings and monuments in public places,
see G.S. § 14-132



§ 130.02  TAMPERING WITH TOWN OR PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly use,
tamper with, render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest or
otherwise interfere with any books, records, furniture, equipment, gear,
apparatus, tools or other items of personal property belonging to, leased to
or used by the town or any agency thereof.



(Prior Code, § 12-39)



   (B)   No person shall, without proper authority, knowingly trespass
upon or damage, deface, molest or otherwise interfere with any real property
belonging to, leased to or used by the town or any agency thereof.



(Prior Code, § 12-40)



   (C)   Any person who shall violate any provision of divisions (A) or
(B) above shall, in addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the
violation, be required to pay for the damages inflicted by him or her.



(Prior Code, § 12-41)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Resisting or obstructing public officers, see G.S. § 14-223



§ 130.03  TREES; CERTAIN PLANTING RESTRICTED; INJURING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant either Carolina
poplar trees or maple trees between the sidewalk and the street at any place
in the town.



(Prior Code, § 12-42)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person wantonly or recklessly to
injure any shade, fruit or ornamental tree lawfully standing on any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the town.



(Prior Code, § 12-43)



§ 130.04  JAIL; DAMAGE AND DEFACEMENT.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way mutilate, damage,
deface, injure or render the town jail or place of detention insecure or
insufficient for the purpose for which it is intended; and in addition to any
penalty which may be imposed for violation of this section, the offender
shall also be required to pay for the damages inflicted by him or her.



(Prior Code, § 12-19)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 131:  OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   131.01   Arrests; resisting and assisting



   131.02   Attempts to commit or avoid; aiding or abetting



   131.03   Interference with and impersonation of town officers and
employees; courtesy



   131.04   Weapons and explosives



   131.05   Slingshots and rubber guns as weapons



§ 131.01  ARRESTS; RESISTING AND ASSISTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any officer of
the town in making any arrest, or to rescue or attempt or threaten to rescue
any person who has been arrested, or to incite or attempt to incite others to
oppose or resist an officer in making an arrest or to rescue any person who
has been arrested.



(Prior Code, § 12-4)



   (B)   Any able-bodied person who, being called upon by a town
officer to aid in the arrest of another person, who shall fail and refuse to
render assistance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Prior Code, § 12-5)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.02  ATTEMPTS TO COMMIT OR AVOID; AIDING OR ABETTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to commit any
act which is prohibited by this code or other ordinance or by any rule,
regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to authority
thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet the
commission or attempted commission of any act which is prohibited by this
code or other ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order or notice duly
promulgated or given pursuant to authority thereof.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to avoid the
doing of any act which is required by this code or other ordinance or by any
rule, regulation, order or notice duly promulgated or given pursuant to
authority thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any person to aid or abet the
avoidance or attempted avoidance of any act which is required by this code or
other ordinance or by any rule, regulation, order or notice duly promulgated
or given pursuant to authority thereof.



(Prior Code, § 12-6)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.03  INTERFERENCE WITH AND IMPERSONATION OF TOWN OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES; COURTESY.



   (A)   No person shall negligently or wilfully interfere with, hinder
or obstruct any officer or employee of the town who is engaged in, en route
to or returning from, the performance of official duty, whether interference,
hindrance or obstruction be by threat, assault or otherwise.



(Prior Code, § 12-36)



   (B)   No person shall falsely represent him or herself to be an
officer or employee of the town, or without proper authority wear or display
any uniform, insignia or credential which identifies any town officer or
employee; nor shall any person without proper authority assume to act as an
officer or employee of the town, whether to gain access to premises, obtain
information, perpetrate a fraud or for any other purpose; provided, that
nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a private citizen from
making a lawful citizen's arrest for felony or breach of the peace committed
in his or her presence.



(Prior Code, § 12-37)



   (C)   Town officers and employees shall be courteous in their
official transactions with the public, and they shall conduct themselves in
the performance of their official duties so as to not knowingly deprive any
person, at the time and under the circumstances then and there existing, of
any lawful right or benefit to which the person may be entitled. Any person
who feels aggrieved by the conduct of any town officer or employee in
violation of this subsection is hereby invited to bring the matter to the
attention of the officer’s or employee’s department head or to the Mayor,
without prejudice to any other recourse to which the aggrieved person may be
entitled.



(Prior Code, § 12-38)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Resisting public officers, see G.S. § 14-223



§ 131.04  WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or shoot any gun,
pistol, match pistol or explosive material upon any street, sidewalk or lot
within the town (except in defense of person or property) without permission
first obtained from the Chief of Police in writing; and the Chief of Police
shall have power to grant any permit under this section for 1 day only, and
that only upon good reason shown therefor; provided, that this section shall
not apply to the operation of any shooting gallery, rifle range, skeet range
or other controlled type of shooting for which a license or permit to operate
a controlled shooting has been first obtained from the Board of Commissioners.



(Prior Code, § 12-45)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 131.05  SLINGSHOTS AND RUBBER GUNS AS WEAPONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or propel any missile from
a sling-shot or by means of a rubber gun upon any street, sidewalk or lot
within the town.



(Prior Code, § 12-46)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Carrying concealed weapons, see G.S. § 14-169



   Confiscation and disposition of deadly weapons upon conviction of
possession, see G.S. § 14-169



   Permitting young children to use dangerous firearms, see G.S. § 14-316



   Providing weapons to minors, see G.S. § 14-315



   Sale, purchase and use of certain weapons and ammunition, see G.S. §§
14-402 to 14-409



CHAPTER 132:  OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS



Section



   132.01   Bowling and billiard hours



   132.02   Fund raising and soliciting alms; permits and applications



   132.03   Curfew for minors under 15



   132.04   Disorderly conduct



   132.05   Drainage ditches



   132.06   False alarms



   132.07   Gambling



   132.08   Halloween visitations; trick or treat



   132.09   Interference with pipes, drains, wiring and the like



   132.10   Mask-wearing



   132.11   Noise; trucks, horns, radios and the like



   132.12   Sanitation, health and public nuisances



   132.13   Playing in public places



   132.14   Property; real and personal



   132.15   Prostitution; disorderly houses



   132.16   Railroad tracks and property



   132.17   Riots, routs and unlawful assemblies



   132.18   Public transportation and taxis; solicitation and loafing



§ 132.01  BOWLING AND BILLIARD HOURS.



   It shall be unlawful to open to the public any poolroom, billiard room,
bowling alley or alley of like kind within the town before 7:00 a.m., and the
closing hour shall be 12:00 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 12-7)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.02  FUND RAISING AND SOLICITING ALMS; PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   In accordance with G.S. § 20-175(e), the Town of Wilkesboro
hereby has the authority to grant authorization for a person to stand in, on
or near a street or state roadway within the Town of Wilkesboro’s municipal
corporate limits, to solicit a charitable contribution if the following
requirements are met.



      (1)   A person seeking authorization pursuant to this section
to solicit charitable contributions shall file a written application with the
local government, specifically with the Chief of Police or his or her
designee of the Wilkesboro Police Department.  This application shall be
filed not later than seven days before the date the solicitation event is to
occur.  If there are multiple events or one event occurring on more than one
day, each event shall be subject to application and permit requirements of
this division for each day the event is to be held to include the application
fee.



      (2)   The application must include:



         (a)   The date and time when the solicitation is to
occur;



         (b)   Each location at which the solicitation is to
occur; and



         (c)   The number of solicitors to be involved in the
solicitation at each location.



   (B)   The fee for the permit shall be $25 per day per event.



   (C)   The applicant shall also furnish to the Town of Wilkesboro,
specifically to the Chief of Police of the Wilkesboro Police Department or
his or her designee, proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least
$2,000,000 to cover damages that may arise from the solicitation.  The
insurance coverage must provide coverage for claims against any solicitor and
agree to hold the local government, the Town of Wilkesboro, harmless.  The
town, by acting under G.S. § 20-175(e), does not waive or limit any immunity
or create any liability for the town.  The issuance of an authorization
under this section and the conducting of the solicitation authorized are not
considered governmental functions of the town.  In the event the
solicitation event or the solicitor shall create a nuisance, delay traffic,
create threatening or hostile situations, any law enforcement officer with
proper jurisdiction may order the solicitation to cease.  Any individual
failing to follow a law enforcement officer’s lawful order to cease the
solicitation shall be guilty of a class II misdemeanor.



(Ord. passed 5-5-2008)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.03  CURFEW FOR MINORS UNDER 15.



   (A)   No person under 15 years of age shall be on the streets of the
town after 9:00 p.m., unless in the company of a parent or person having the
guardianship and control over him or her, or unless engaged or employed in
business pursuits requiring his or her presence at the place of business
where engaged to a later hour, or unless by written permission of a parent or
guardian of the person, which permission shall state the purpose for which
the minor is sent out, or in case of sickness or unusual emergency requiring
the sending of a minor out hurriedly.



(Prior Code, § 12-11)



   (B)   This section does not apply to a minor who is:



      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;



      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or
guardian, without any detour or stop;



      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;



      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity; or going to or
returning home form an employment activity, without any detour or stop;



      (5)   Involved in an emergency;



      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence OR
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not
complain to the police department about the minor’s presence;



      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic
organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar
entity that takes responsibility for the minor;



      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
Unites States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly, or;



      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of
minority removed in accordance with state law.



  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   Disorderly conduct within the town is hereby prohibited.



   (B)   Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following
shall be guilty of disorderly conduct:



      (1)   Any person who shall act in violent or tumultuous manner
toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his or her
life, limb or health;



      (2)   Any person who shall act in violent or tumultuous manner
toward another whereby property of any person is placed in danger of being
destroyed or damaged;



      (3)   Any person who shall endanger lawful pursuits of another
by acts of violence, angry threats or abusive conduct;



      (4)   Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any
fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger life, limb, health or
property of another;



      (5)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another
or others for purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl;



      (6)   Any person who shall be found jostling or roughly
crowding or pushing any person in any public place;



      (7)   Any person who shall be in a group or crowd for unlawful
purposes, as defined by state law, this code or other ordinances;



      (8)   Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another
or others for purpose or with intent to engage in gaining;



      (9)   Any person who shall frequent any public place with
intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes,
tricks, artifices or devices;



      (10)   Any person who assembles with others for the purpose of
engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable
thing in any place or from any person in the town, or who shall aid or abet
therein;



      (11)   Any male person who shall accost or attempt to force
his company upon any female person or attempts to pick up any female person;



      (12)   Any person who frequents any place where gaming or
illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous
drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated;



      (13)   Any person who shall use language reasonably calculated
to incite violence, directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus
creates turmoil;



      (14)   Any person who shall assemble with another for the
purpose of trouncing upon another;



      (15)   Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with
another’s pursuit of a lawful occupation; and/or



      (16)   Any person who shall congregate with another or others
in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic and refuses to clear public way when ordered by town police or other
lawful authority.



(Prior Code, § 12-12)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Disorderly conduct generally, see G.S. §  14-288.4



   Disorderly conduct in or near public buildings, see G.S. § 14-132



   Disturbing picnics, meetings and the like, see G.S. § 14-288.4



   Disturbing religious congregations, see G.S. § 14-288.4



   Disturbing schools and the like, see G.S. § 14-288.3



§ 132.05  DRAINAGE DITCHES.



   It shall be the duty of any person owning or having charge of a lot or
tract of land within the town, across, over or upon which there is a ditch or
other natural or artificial channel, to keep the ditch or channel cleaned out
so as to permit at all times a free flow of water that collects therein. Upon
notice from the Town Manager, Chief of Police or Board of Health that any
ditch or channel, either natural or artificial, is a menace to the health of
the people of the town, it shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge
of the lot or tract to clean out the ditch or channel within 5 days. Any
owner or person in charge who shall fail to comply with that notice shall,
upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty for each day or part of day that the
ditch or channel remains uncleaned.



(Prior Code, § 12-13)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.06  FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false
alarm of fire.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly give or cause to be given any false
alarm of explosion or impending danger of explosion.



   (C)   No person shall give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for police protection or assistance.



   (D)   No person shall give or cause to be given any false alarm of
the need for an ambulance or medical assistance.



(Prior Code, § 12-15)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Statutory reference:



   Abatement of nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-19



   False alarm of fire, see G.S. § 14-286



   False ambulance request, see G.S. § 14-286



   False report to police radio broadcasting station, see G.S. § 14-225



§ 132.07  GAMBLING.



   No person within the town shall bet money, property or other thing of
value, whether the same be in stake or not, at any game of cards or other
game of chance or skill. BEACH BINGO as defined by G.S. § 14-309.14 shall
not constitute gambling and shall not constitute a violation of this section.



(Am. Ord. passed 12-2-1996)



Statutory reference:



   Lotteries and gaming, see G.S. §§ 14-289 et seq.



§ 132.08  HALLOWEEN VISITATIONS; TRICK OR TREAT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on or in any
public place in the town for the purpose of making trick or treat
visitations, or to go on or in any private premises for that purpose, except
as provided in division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section shall not apply to children 12
years of age and under between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on each
Halloween night.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit his or
her minor child or ward to violate the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 12-17)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.09  INTERFERENCE WITH PIPES, DRAINS, WIRING AND THE LIKE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere in any way with any
pipe line or drain, or any ditch connected with any pipe line or drain, or
with any electric light pole or wiring, or any work being done by the town
employees or by contract for the town.



(Prior Code, § 12-18)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.10  MASK-WEARING.



   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the terms MASK and PUBLIC
PLACE shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:



      MASK.  Any mask, device or hood whereby any portion of the face
is so hidden or covered as to conceal the identity of the wearer.



      PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, highway, alley, sidewalk, walk, lane,
boulevard or other way dedicated to public use or owned or maintained by
public authority; and any ground or building owned, leased, maintained or
operated by public authority.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on or in any
public place in the town while masked, except that this division shall not
apply to:



      (1)   Children under the age of 13;



      (2)   Workers while engaged in a work wherein a covering is
worn for physical safety and protection against occupational hazards, or
because of the nature of the occupation, trade or profession;



      (3)   Persons while wearing traditional holiday costumes;



      (4)   Persons while engaged in theatrical productions or
masquerade balls; and/or



      (5)   Persons while wearing gas masks prescribed in civil
defense drills and exercises, or in emergencies.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit his or
her minor child or ward to violate the provisions of this section.



(Prior Code, § 12-20)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.11  NOISE; TRUCKS, HORNS, RADIOS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   The creation and continuation of any loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in the town is hereby prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any person to cause, make or contribute to creating any loud or disturbing
noise of the character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the
life or health of any individual, or noises as disturb the quiet and peace of
any citizen of the town. The following acts among others, are declared to be
loud, disturbing, annoying and unnecessary noises in violation of this
section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:



      (1)   Blowing horns and the like. The sounding or blowing of
any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, motor bus or other
vehicle, except as a danger signal; the creation by means of any signal
device of any loud or harsh noise, and the sounding of the device for any
unnecessary or unreasonable period of time, or racing of motors or creating
undue friction of tires so as to make noises; and



      (2)   Radios, phonographs and the like. The playing of any
radio, television, phonograph, piccolo or any musical instrument in a manner
or with  volume as to annoy or disturb any person, or the playing of an
instrument in a manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of
any person in any dwelling, hotel or other residence.



(Prior Code, § 12-21)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in any café, restaurant,
poolroom, recreation hall or dance hall to operate a music machine at any
time during the period 10:30 p.m. to the next succeeding 7:00 a.m., except
that on Saturdays music machines may be operated until 12:00 a.m.



(Prior Code, § 12-22)



   (C)   No person shall operate any sound amplification or
dissemination device mounted upon a vehicle without a permit from the town to
do so. Each application for a permit shall be on a form provided by the town,
and shall state the name and address of the applicant, the name and address
of the person who will operate the sound amplification or dissemination
device, the type and characteristics of the device, the purpose for which the
device is intended to be used, the nature of the words and music to be
amplified or disseminated, the route over which the vehicle will travel, the
days and hours of operation, and other information as may be required by the
Board of Commissioners. Applications shall be filed with the Town Clerk, who
shall present them to the Board of Commissioners at the next meeting thereof
after filing.



   (D)   The Board of Commissioners may approve an application and
direct the Town Clerk to issue a permit for the operation within the town of
a sound amplification or dissemination device mounted upon a vehicle between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, Sundays excepted, when, in
the opinion of the Board, approval of an application would not be contrary to
the public interest.



   (E)   Permits granted under this section shall be subject to the
following fees:



      (1)   Five dollars per day;



      (2)   Twenty dollars per week; and



      (3)   One hundred dollars per year.



   (F)   The provisions of division (E) of this section shall not be
applicable to religious, charitable, educational, patriotic, civic or other
nonprofit organizations.



   (G)   In approving an application and granting a permit under this
section, the Board of Commissioners may require compliance with stipulations
as the Board may see fit to impose, and the application and stipulations
shall be deemed to be a part of the permit, and any violation thereof shall
be unlawful and shall ipso facto render the permit null and void.



(Prior Code, § 12-23)



Statutory reference:



   Authorizing the town to regulate loud noises, see G.S. § 160A-184



§ 132.12  SANITATION, HEALTH AND PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (A)   Administration. For the purpose of this chapter, the term
NUISANCE shall mean or refer to any condition or any use of property or any
act or omission affecting the condition or use of property which threatens or
is likely to threaten the safety of the public; adversely affects the general
health, happiness, security or welfare of others; or, is detrimental to the
rights of others to the full use of their own property and their own comfort,
happiness and emotional stability because of decreased property values and
the unsightliness and decreased livability of neighborhoods.



   (B)   Declaration of public nuisance. The following enumerated and
described conditions, or any combination thereof, are hereby found, deemed,
and declared to constitute a detriment, danger and hazard to the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town. They are
hereby found, deemed and declared to be public nuisances wherever the
conditions may exist within the corporate limits as now or hereafter
established. The creation, maintenance or failure to abate any nuisances is
hereby declared unlawful:



      (1)   Any weeds or other vegetation having an overall height
of more than 18 inches above the surrounding ground provided that the
following shall not be considered to be a part of this condition; trees and
ornamental shrubs; cultured plants; natural vegetation on undeveloped
property that is not a threat to the character of surrounding properties; and
flowers and growing and producing vegetable plants. It shall be the duty of
every person occupying, owning or having control of property abutting on a
street or highway that utilizes a portion of the unused street or highway
right-of-way as a yard or any other use to maintain said right-of-way in the
same character and manner as the abutting use.



      (2)   Any accumulation of trash, garbage, food waste and other
trash which is the result of the absence of, or overflowing of, or improperly
closed trash or garbage containers, that attracts or is likely to attract
mice and rats, flies and mosquitoes or other pests.



      (3)   An open or unsecured storage or collection place for
chemicals, acids, oils, gasoline, flammable or combustible materials or
flammable or combustible liquids, poisonous materials or other similar
harmful or dangerous substances, gasses or vapors.



      (4)   An open place, collection, storage place or
concentration of combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper,
automobile tires and tubes, garbage, trash, refuse, brash, old clothes, rags,
or any other combustible materials collection.



      (5)   An open storage place for old worn out, broken or
discarded machinery, car parts, junk, tire rims, furniture, stoves,
refrigerators, appliances, cans and containers, household goods, plumbing or
electrical fixtures, old rusty metal, fencing materials or other similar
materials.



      (6)   Any accumulation of garbage, rubbish, trash, or junk
causing or threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to
cause the accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause
the inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes, mosquitoes, or vermin
prejudicial to the public health.



      (7)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is
offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitancy therein of rats,
mice, snakes, or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health.



      (8)   The open storage of any discarded ice box, furniture,
refrigerator, stove, glass, building materials, building rubbish or similar
items. The use of carports, open porches, decks, open garages and other
outdoor areas that are visible from the street as a storage or collection
place for boxes, appliances, furniture (not typical outdoor or yard
furniture), tools, equipment, junk, garbage, old worn out broken or discarded
machinery and equipment, cans, containers, household goods or other similar
condition that increase the likelihood of a fire; may conceal dangerous
conditions; may be a breeding place or habitat for mice, rats or other pests;
or, create an unattractive condition or visually blighted property.



      (9)   A collection place for lumber, bricks, blocks, nails,
building hardware, roofing materials, scaffolding, masonry materials,
electrical supplies or materials, plumbing supplies or materials, heating and
air conditioning supplies or materials or any other type of old or unusable
building supplies (especially those with nails, staples or sharp objects and
edges) unless such conditions are temporary in nature and caused by a current
construction project in progress pursuant to a lawfully issued building
permit.



      (10)   Any building or other structure which has been burned,
partially burned or otherwise partially destroyed and which is unsightly or
hazardous to the safety of any person, is a continuing fire hazard or which
is structurally unsound to the extent that the Code Adrninistrator or his/her
designee can reasonably determine that there is a likelihood of personal or
property injury to any person or property entering the premises.



      (11)   The placement, storage or use of upholstered sofas,
couches, chairs or other indoor type furniture, appliances, seats removed
from motor vehicles or other furniture not intended for outdoor use by the
manufacturer, use on any open porch, carport, stoop, deck, veranda, terrace,
patio or other outdoor area that is visible from nearby streets and sidewalks.



      (12)   A collection place, pool or pond of stagnant or foul
water or persistent dampness caused by overflowing septic tanks, manmade
dams, open ditches, overflowing pipes, foundation trenches or other
impoundments of any kind.



      (13)   Barns or farm animal pens, pastures or enclosures for
farm animals which are not kept sanitary and clean or otherwise become a
collection place for animal waste and which because of the conditions
associated therewith attract rats, mice, flies or other pests or emit foul
odors that can be detected or noticed on adjacent properties or are otherwise
not kept in a sanitary condition.



      (14)   Dog lots, pens, pet enclosures of all kinds, outdoor
areas where dogs or other pets are chained or kept or areas where dogs and
cats are permitted to roam which become a collection place for dog, cat or
pet waste and excrement and which attract flies or other pests, emit foul
odors which can be detected or noticed on adjacent property or are not kept
in a sanitary condition.



      (15)   A collection place for sewage and sewage drainage or
the seepage from septic tanks, broken or malfunctioning plumbing and sewer
pipes or any other seepage of dangerous, hazardous or poisonous liquids.



      (16)   A collection place for tree limbs, dried brush, dead
vegetation, stumps or other decayed wood and materials or other similar
rubbish.



      (17)   Any discharge into or polluting of any stream, creek,
river or other body of water or the discharge of any dangerous substance or
any other material likely to harm the water or any vegetation, fish or
wildlife in or along the water or the storage of such harmful materials and
substances in a manner so that it is likely that such streams, creeks, rivers
or other bodies of water will become polluted or adversely affected in any
manner.



      (18)   Any condition which blocks, hinders, or obstructs in
any way the natural flow of branches, streams, creeks, surface waters,
ditches, or drains, to the extent that the premises is not free from standing
water.



      (19)   Any conditions or use of property, which results in the
emission of pollutants and particles into the atmosphere or causes noxious
odors, vapors and stenches to be discharged into the air.



      (20)   Nuisance vehicle. A vehicle on public or private
property that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a
public nuisance, and unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:



         (a)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other
insects, rats or other pests;



         (b)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious
vegetation which exceeds 8 inches in height;



         (c)   In a condition allowing the collection of pools or
ponds of water;



         (d)   A concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil, or
other flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;



         (e)   An area of confinement which cannot be operated
from the inside, such as, but not limited to, trunks or hoods;



         (f)   So situated or located that there is a danger of
it falling or turning over;



         (g)   A collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste,
or any other rotten or putrescent matter of any kind;



         (h)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged
or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or



         (i)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health
and safety hazard and a public nuisance by the Town Council.



      (21)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which
violates the rules and regulations of the County Health Departments.



   (C)   Complaint; investigation of public nuisance. When any
condition in violation of this section is found to exist, the Code
Administrator or such persons as may be designated by the Town Council shall
give notice to the owner of the premises to abate or remove such conditions
within 10 days. Such notice shall be in writing, shall include a description
of the premises sufficient for identification and shall set forth the
violation and state that, if the violation is not corrected within 10 days,
the city may proceed to correct the same as authorized by this section.
Service of such notice shall be by any 1 of the following methods.



      (1)   By delivery to any owner personally or by leaving the
notice at the usual place of abode of the owner with a person who is over the
age of 16 years and a member of the family of the owner.



      (2)   By depositing the notice in the United States Post
Office addressed to the owner at his last known address with regular mail
postage prepaid thereon.



      (3)   By posting and keeping posted, for 10 days, a copy of
the notice, in placard form, in a conspicuous place on the premises on which
the violation exists, when notice cannot be served by divisions (1) and (2).



   (D)   Abatement procedure. If the owner of any property fails to
comply with a notice given pursuant to this section, within 10 days after the
service of such notice, he/she shall be subject to prosecution for violation
of this chapter in accordance with law and each day that such failure
continues shall be a separate offense. In addition, the town may have the
condition described in the notice abated, removed or otherwise corrected and
all expenses incurred thereby shall be chargeable to and paid by the owner of
the property and shall be collected as taxes and levies are collected. All
such expenses shall constitute a lien against the property on which the work
was done.



   (E)   Procedure is alternative. The procedure set forth in this
chapter shall be in addition to any other remedies that may now or hereafter
exist under law for the abatement of public nuisances. In addition to the
remedies provided for herein, any violation of the terms of this chapter
shall subject the violator to the penalties and remedies as set forth in §
10.99.



(Ord. 2013-01, passed 9-9-2013)



§ 132.13  PLAYING IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall play at any game upon any street or use any
street for the purpose of recreation, except upon a play street designated by
authority of the Board of Commissioners.



   (B)   No person shall engage in any game or recreational activity
upon any sidewalk or public place in the town in any manner so as to:



      (1)   Impede pedestrian traffic;



      (2)   Endanger property;



      (3)   Endanger the life, limb or health of any person;



      (4)   Prevent the full and complete use of a sidewalk or
public place by other persons for the intended purposes thereof;



      (5)   Constitute a breach of the peace; or



      (6)   Constitute unreasonable annoyance to persons of ordinary
susceptibilities.



(Prior Code, § 12-25)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of town to prohibit, abate or suppress all things detrimental
to health, morals, comfort,  safety and welfare of the people and to abate 
nuisances and the cause thereof, see G.S. § 160A-174



§ 132.14  PROPERTY; REAL AND PERSONAL.



   (A)   No person shall, knowingly and without proper authority, use,
tamper with, render inoperative, destroy, damage, remove, deface, molest or
otherwise interfere with any personal property of another.



(Prior Code, § 12-26)



   (B)   No person shall, knowingly and without proper authority,
destroy, damage, deface, molest or otherwise interfere with any real property
of another, or knowingly trespass upon the real property of another.



(Prior Code, § 12-27)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.15  PROSTITUTION; DISORDERLY HOUSES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a house of prostitution or
disorderly house within the town, or to rent any property to another for use
as a house of prostitution or disorderly house; and all adult persons living
in the houses shall be considered keepers thereof. All owners of leased or
rented houses that are being used for the purposes herein set forth shall, on
being made aware of the purpose for which those premises are being used, and
after being notified by the Chief of Police of the town that any house or
premises is being used for immoral purposes, take immediate steps to abate
the nuisance or eject disorderly and immoral tenants.



(Prior Code, § 12-29)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 132.16  RAILROAD TRACKS AND PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall use the tracks, yards or other real property
of any railroad company within the town as a public highway; no person shall
pass through or loiter around any shop, car or depot of any railroad company
except for the bona fide purpose of transacting business with the company or
with its agents; provided, that the provisions of this section shall in no
way abridge, limit or affect the right of the public to use the tracks or
other property of any railway company, in cases where tracks or other
property are in or upon the streets or other public places of the town.



(Prior Code, § 12-30)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump on or off, or to
cling to or hang on any railroad car or engine in the town while the car or
engine is in motion, a person not being a passenger or an employee or officer
of the railroad company.



(Prior Code, § 12-31)



Statutory reference:



   Bawdy houses, see G.S. §§ 14-188



   Hunting or fishing on posted property, see G.S. §§ 14-159.6 to
14-159.9



   Prostitution, see G.S. §§ 14-303 et seq.



   Trespass on land after being forbidden, see G.S. § 14-134



   Wilful and wanton injury to personal property, see G.S. § 14-160



§ 132.17  RIOTS, ROUTS AND UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLIES.



   Riots, routs and unlawful assemblies shall be dispersed forthwith by
the town police and other law enforcement officers, and all persons present
at the scene of any riot, rout or unlawful assembly shall, upon command of
any law enforcement officer to disperse, forthwith obey the command and
peacefully disengage themselves from the riot, rout or unlawful assembly and
leave the scene thereof, and persons who fail to obey that command shall be
subject to immediate arrest.



(Prior Code, § 12-32)



§ 132.18  PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION AND TAXIS; SOLICITATION AND LOAFING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver, porter or other
person to solicit patronage for any hotel, motel or other establishment
catering to transients while within any railroad or bus station or while
within 300 feet of any station.



(Prior Code, § 12-33)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loaf or lounge in or
about the passenger station of any railroad or bus company in the town
without having some business thereat.



(Prior Code, § 12-34)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Vehicles for hire, see Chapter 118



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter




         150.   BUILDING CODES; GENERAL





         151.   INSPECTION DEPARTMENT





         152.   REGULATORY CODES





         153.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS





         154.   NORTH CAROLINA MODEL HOUSING CODE (MINIMUM
HOUSING STANDARDS)





         155.   NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE STANDARDS





         156.   ZONING CODE




CHAPTER 150:  BUILDING CODES; GENERAL



Section




General Provisions




   150.01   Permits; general provisions



   150.02   Application for permits



   150.03   Limitations regarding issuance of permit



   150.04   Issuance and revocation of permit



   150.05   Permits and period of validity



   150.06   Fees regarding permits



   150.07   Changes in work after issuance of permit



   150.08   Contractors; requirements regarding Inspection Department



   150.09   Registered contractors required to give bond



   150.10   Wiring in commercial and industrial buildings




Public Housing




   150.20   Applications required



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipal governing bodies to regulate construction of
buildings, see G.S. §§ 160A-411 to 160A-438



   Several building permits, see G.S. §§ 160A-417, 160A-418




GENERAL PROVISIONS




§ 150.01  PERMITS; GENERAL PROVISIONS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall commence or proceed with the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or demolition of
any building or other structure, or any part thereof, without a written
permit therefor from the Building Inspector; provided that no building permit
shall be required for work the total cost of which does not exceed $100 and
which does not involve any change of the structural parts or the stairways,
elevators, fire escapes or other means of egress from the building or the
structure in question.



      (2)   In all cases of removal or demolition of a building or
structure, a good and sufficient bond in the sum of $500 shall be posted by
the property owner or by his or her contractor at the time of application for
a permit, to insure complete removal or demolition, including all rubble and
debris. Failure on the part of the property owner or his or her contractor to
completely demolish, remove and clear the premises, after 30-days’ notice
by the Building Inspector, shall be cause for forfeiture of the bond.



   (B)   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation,
extension or general repair of any plumbing system without a written permit
therefor from the Plumbing Inspector; provided, that no permit shall be
required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of a trap to an
installed system of plumbing if repairs or replacements do not disrupt the
original water supply or the waste or ventilating systems.



   (C)   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation,
extension, alteration or general repair of any heating or cooling equipment
system without a written permit from the Heating-Air Conditioning Inspector;
provided that no permit shall be required for minor repairs or minor burner
services or filter replacements of warm air furnaces or cooling system.



   (D)   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation,
extension, alteration or general repair of any electrical wiring, device,
appliance or equipment without a written permit therefor from the Electrical
Inspector; provided, that no permit shall be required for minor repair work,
such as the replacement of lamps or the connection of portable devices to
suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed; provided,
further, that no permit shall be required for the installation, alteration or
repair of the electrical wiring, devices, appliances and equipment installed
by or for an electrical public utility corporation for the use of a
corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of
electrical energy, or for the use of a corporation in the operation of
signals or the transmission of intelligence.



(Prior Code, § 5-1)



§ 150.02  APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.



   (A)   Written application shall be made for all permits required by
this chapter, and shall be made on forms provided by the Inspection
Department. An application shall be made by the owner of the building or
structure affected or by his or her authorized agent or representative, and
in addition to other information as may be required by the appropriate
inspector to enable him or her to determine whether the permit applied for
should be issued, shall show the following:



      (1)   Name, residence and business address of owner; and



      (2)   Name, residence and business address of authorized
representative or agent, if any;



      (3)   Name and address of the contractor, if any, together
with evidence that he or she has obtained a certificate from the appropriate
state licensing board for contractors, if it be required for the work
involved in the permit for which application is made.



(Prior Code, § 5-2)



   (B)   Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each
application for permit when the estimated total cost of the building or
structure is in excess of $20,000, and for any other building or structure
where plans and specifications are deemed necessary by the appropriate
inspector in order for him or her to determine whether the proposed work
complies with the appropriate regulatory codes. Plans shall be drawn to scale
with sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work
proposed, and the plans and specifications together shall contain information
sufficient to indicate that the work proposed will conform to the provisions
of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes. Where plans and
specifications are required, a copy thereof shall be kept at the work until
all authorized operations have been completed and approved by the appropriate
inspector.



(Prior Code, § 5-3)



§ 150.03  LIMITATIONS REGARDING ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   (A)   (1)   No building permit shall be issued for any building
or structure the estimated total cost of which is more than $20,000 unless
the work is to be performed by a licensed general contractor.



      (2)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or
structure, other than a 1 or 2 family dwelling, the estimated total cost of
which is more than $20,000, unless the plans bear the North Carolina seal of
a registered architect or a registered engineer.



      (3)   Where any provision of the General Statutes of North
Carolina, this code or any other ordinance requires that work be done by a
licensed specialty contractor of any kind, no permit for work shall be issued
unless it is to be performed by a licensed specialty contractor.



      (4)   Where detailed plans and specifications are required
under this chapter, no building permit shall be issued unless the plans and
specifications have been provided.



      (5)   No permit for alteration, repair or construction of any
building or structure shall be issued unless the plans and specifications
show that the building or structure, and its proposed use, will be in
compliance with applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.



(Prior Code, § 5-4)



   (B)   The Town of Wilkesboro's Building Code is hereby amended to
require notice to be given to all persons constructing a new building that
they shall be advised by the Building Inspector at the time they obtain a
building permit that they are required to provide on the site of the building
a temporary sanitary toilet for the use of the persons engaged to the
construction of the building and any person, firm or corporation failing to
make arrangements for a sanitary toilet during the construction shall be in
violation of the Building Code. Any person, firm or corporation in violation
of this code shall pay a penalty of $10 and the cost for each day that he or
she fails to provide a facility for the use of the employees.



   (C)   The Building Inspector is given the authority to enforce this
chapter and shall so advise the person, firm or corporation making an
application for a permit of this requirement at the time of the issuance of
the building permit.



(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)



§ 150.04  ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   (A)   When proper application for a permit has been made, and the
appropriate inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work
comply with the provisions of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory
codes, he or she shall issue a permit upon payment of the proper fee or fees
as hereinafter provided in § 150.06.



(Prior Code, § 5-5)



   (B)   The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of
any permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the
approved application, plans or specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with proper orders of the inspector; for refusal or failure to comply
with requirements of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes; or
for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit.



(Prior Code, § 5-6)



§ 150.05  PERMITS AND PERIOD OF VALIDITY.



   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire by limitation 6
months after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has
not been commenced. If, after commencement, the work is discontinued for a
period of 12 months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire. No work
authorized by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed
until a new permit therefor has been secured.



(Prior Code, § 5-7)



§ 150.06  FEES REGARDING PERMITS.



   There is hereby established the following fee schedule for permits and
inspections required by this chapter and the regulatory codes adopted in this
chapter:



   (A)   Building permit and inspection fees.



      (1)   On the first $100: See Wilkes County building permit
schedule.



      (2)   On the next $900 (or any part thereof): See Wilkes
County building permit schedule.



      (3)   On the next $24,000: See Wilkes County building permit
schedule.



      (4)   On the next $75,000: See Wilkes County building permit
schedule.



      (5)   All over $100,000: See Wilkes County building permit
schedule.



      (6)   Fire Escapes: See Wilkes County building permit schedule.



      (7)   Elevators: See Wilkes County building permit schedule.



      (8)   Ground, roof, wall or projecting display signs (Adv.):
See Wilkes County building permit schedule.



      (9)   Awnings, collapsible or fixed: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



      (10)   Moving or wrecking frame buildings: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



      (11)   Moving or wrecking major buildings: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



   (B)   Plumbing permit and inspection fees.



      (1)   One to 6 fixtures: See Wilkes County building permit
schedule.



      (2)   Seven and above plumbing fixtures: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



   (C)   Heating and/or air conditioning permit and inspection fees.



      (1)   Residential:



         (a)   Heating: See Wilkes County building permit
schedule.



         (b)   Air conditioning: See Wilkes County building
permit schedule.



         (c)   Combination unit: See Wilkes County building
permit schedule.



      (2)   Commercial or manufacturing:



         (a)   Heating: See Wilkes County building permit
schedule.



         (b)   Air conditioning: See Wilkes County building
permit schedule.



         (c)   Combination unit: See Wilkes County building
permit schedule.



   (D)   Electrical permit and inspection fees.



      (1)   Lighting - 120/240 Volts



         (a)   Three wire – 30- or 60-amp service: See Wilkes
County building permit schedule.



         (b)   Three wire – 100-amp service: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



         (c)   Above 100-amp service: See Wilkes County building
permit schedule.



         (d)   Electric ranges, water heaters, dryers, furnaces,
air conditioners or other electrical equipment when inspected at the time of
original inspection, for each device: See Wilkes County building permit
schedule.



         (e)   For each device if inspected separately: See
Wilkes County building permit schedule.



         (f)   Temporary meter and service for construction work:
See Wilkes County building permit schedule.



         (g)   Signs if inspected separate from original
inspection: See Wilkes County building permit schedule.



      (2)   Power service:



         (a)   Sixty-amp or less: See Wilkes County building
permit schedule.



         (b)   One-hundred-amp service: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



         (c)   Two-hundred-amp service: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



         (d)   Four-hundred-amp service: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



         (e)   Six-hundred-amp service: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



         (f)   For each 200-amp additional: See Wilkes County
building permit schedule.



         (g)   Minimum fee for all unclassified installations:
See Wilkes County building permit schedule.



         (h)   All extra inspection trips of either building,
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and/or electrical made necessary by
non-compliance with codes on part of owner or contractor per trip: See Wilkes
County building permit schedule.



(Prior Code, § 5-8)



§ 150.07  CHANGES IN WORK AFTER ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   After a permit has been issued, changes or deviations from the terms of
the application and permit, or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter or
of any regulatory code adopted therein, shall not be made until specific
written approval of the changes or deviations has been obtained from the
appropriate inspector.



(Prior Code, § 5-9)



§ 150.08  CONTRACTORS; REQUIREMENTS REGARDING INSPECTION DEPARTMENT.



   Every person carrying on the business of building contractor, plumbing
contractor, heating-air conditioning contractor or electrical contractor
within the town shall register at the office of the Inspection Department,
giving name, place of business and type of work and business in which he or
she is engaged.



(Prior Code, § 5-10)



§ 150.09  REGISTERED CONTRACTORS REQUIRED TO GIVE BOND.



   Every person required to register at the office of the Inspection
Department under the preceding section shall also give a good and sufficient
bond in the sum of $1,000, to be approved by the Town Attorney, conditioned
upon faithful performance of duty in doing any work which he or she may have
contracted to do, and to indemnify the town against loss in any manner
whatsoever for any unskillful or negligent work or conduct in the performance
of the duties imposed by the provisions of this chapter or any regulatory
code therein adopted, or any damage to any utility lines, streets or
sidewalks in the town, or for the use of defective or improper material in
the work, or for any damage which may accrue to any person by reason of any
default of the contract, or for the payment of any inspection or other fees
required by this chapter.



(Prior Code, § 5-11)



§ 150.10  WIRING IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS.



   (A)   On and after the date of approval of the North Carolina
Builders Code Commission or its authorized representative, the wiring in all
commercial and industrial buildings built or rewired within the Town of
Wilkesboro shall be placed in metal conduit, and



   (B)   All parts of the code in conflict with this resolution and
amendment are hereby repealed and except as herein modified, the Building
Code for the Town of Wilkesboro remains in full force and effect.



(Ord. passed 8-3-1981)




PUBLIC HOUSING




§ 150.20  APPLICATIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Public housing shall be considered as where any individual
person, firm or corporation or other entity shall undertake to acquire by
purchase, lease or control of 3 or more houses or combination of houses with
2 or more families residing in any house, complex or combination of houses
under the control of any 1 person, firm or corporation; for the purpose of
leasing or renting same.



   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity seeking to build or
acquire through lease, purchase or otherwise, 3 or more units within the
corporate jurisdiction of the Town of Wilkesboro, shall first make
application to the Planning Board for approval of the project, purchase or
ownership by management of any complex or combination of complex, and shall
submit the application to the Planning Board for the Town of Wilkesboro for
its action and subsequent to its action the request shall go to the Town
Board for the action of the Town Board to approve or reject.



   (C)   Prior to the petition being passed on by the Town Board, it
shall be required that the town will require a public hearing and notice
thereof shall be published in the local newspaper, once a week for 4
consecutive weeks prior to the hearing, and after the public hearing the Town
Board by majority vote shall approve or reject the application.



   (D)   The expense of the notice and hearing shall be at the expense
of the applicant which will be required to be paid in advance to the Town
Clerk.



   (E)   No permit for water, sewer or any other permits as required by
the Building Code of the Town of Wilkesboro shall be issued until the final
approval of the Board of Commissioners.



   (F)   This chapter shall not affect any previously issued permits,
prior to the adoption of the chapter. If any portion of this chapter or
clause herein is declared void, it shall not affect any other portions.



(Ord. passed 3-5-1984)



CHAPTER 151:  INSPECTION DEPARTMENT



Section



   151.01   Composition of department



   151.02   Conflicts of interest



   151.03   Department and inspectors; general powers and duties



   151.04   Right-of-entry; stop orders



   151.05   Records and reports



   151.06   Inspection procedure; certificates of occupancy



   151.07   Oversight, neglect by inspector



§ 151.01  COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT.



   The Inspection Department shall consist of a Building Inspector, a
Plumbing Inspector, a Heating-Air Conditioning Inspector, an Electrical
Inspector and other inspectors or deputy or assistant inspectors as may be
authorized by the Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners may, in
its discretion, designate 1 person to fill any 1 or more or all of these
positions. If more than 1 person is employed as an inspector the Board may
designate a member of the department as the Department Head.



(Prior Code, § 5-12)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of municipal governing bodies to create Inspection
Departments and relating to powers and duties of inspectors, see G.S. §§
160A-411 et seq.



§ 151.02  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   No officer or employee of the Inspection Department shall be
financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances for
the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building or any part
thereof, or in the making of plans or specifications thereof unless he or she
is the owner of the building. No officer or employee of the Inspection
Department shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his or her
duties or with the interests of the town.



(Prior Code, § 5-13)



§ 151.03  DEPARTMENT AND INSPECTORS; GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise in this chapter, it shall
be the duty of the Inspection Department to enforce all of the provisions of
this chapter and of the regulatory codes adopted therein, and to make all
inspections necessary to determine whether or not the provisions of this
chapter and the codes are being met, and for those purposes the department
and the inspectors thereof shall have all powers and authority provided by
state law, including the North Carolina State Building Code, the Town
Charter, this code and other ordinances.



   (B)   The North Carolina State Building Code, volume II, General
Construction and the North Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code shall
be enforced by the Building Inspector. The North Carolina Plumbing Code shall
be enforced by the Plumbing Inspector. The North Carolina Heating Code shall
be enforced by the Heating-Air Conditioning Inspector. The North Carolina
State Electrical Code shall be enforced by the Electrical Inspector.



(Prior Code, § 5-14)



§ 151.04  RIGHT-OF-ENTRY; STOP ORDERS.



   (A)   Inspectors shall have the right-of-entry on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes adopted in this chapter, at
reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the
requirements of this chapter and the regulatory codes, upon presentation of
proper credentials.



   (B)   Whenever any building or structure or part thereof is being
demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in a hazardous
manner, or in violation of any provision of this chapter or any other town
ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory code herein
adopted, or in violation of the terms of the permit or permits issued
therefor, or in a manner as to endanger life or property, the appropriate
inspector may order work to be immediately stopped. The order shall be in
writing to the owner of the property or to his or her agent, or to the person
doing the work, and shall state the reasons therefor and the conditions under
which the work may be resumed.



(Prior Code, § 5-15)



§ 151.05  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   The Inspection Department, and each inspector, shall keep complete,
permanent and accurate records in convenient form of all applications
received, permits issued, inspections and re-inspections made, and all other
work and activities of the Inspection Department. Periodic reports shall be
submitted to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners and to other agencies, as
required.



(Prior Code, § 5-16)



§ 151.06  INSPECTION PROCEDURE; CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY. 



   (A)   The Inspection Department shall inspect all buildings and
structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind has been issued,
as often as necessary in order to determine whether the work complies with
this chapter and the appropriate codes.



   (B)   When deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector, materials
and assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication,
or inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection
organizations; provided, that no approval shall be based upon reports of
organizations unless reports are in writing and certified by a responsible
officer of an organization.



   (C)   All holders of permits, or their agents, shall notify the
Inspection Department and the appropriate inspector at each of the following
stages of construction so that approval may be given before work is continued:



      (1)   Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are
excavated and the necessary reinforcement and forms are in place, and before
concrete is placed. Drilled footings, piles and similar types of foundations
shall be inspected as installed.



      (2)   Framing inspection. To be made after all structural
framing is in place and all roughing-in of plumbing and electrical and
heating has been installed, after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing and
vents are installed but before any of the structure is enclosed or covered.
Poured in place concrete structural elements shall be inspected before each
pour of any structural member.



      (3)   Fireproofing inspection. To be made after all areas
required to be protected by fireproofing are lathed, but before the
plastering or other fireproofing is applied.



      (4)   Final inspection. To be made after building or structure
has all doors hung, fixtures set, and ready for occupancy, but before the
building is occupied.



   (D)   Requests for inspections may be made to the office of the
Inspection Department or to the appropriate inspector. The Inspection
Department shall make inspections as soon as practicable after request is
made therefor, provided the work is ready for inspection at the time the
request is made.



   (E)   Re-inspections may be made at the convenience of the
inspector. No work shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed
condition ready for inspection. All work which has been concealed before the
inspection and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the inspector
and placed in condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the
work shall be furnished by the appropriate inspector in the form of a notice
posted on the building or given to the permit holder or his or her agent.
Failure to call for inspections or proceeding without approval at each stage
of construction shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.



   (F)   Where the applicant for a permit proposes to erect any
building or structure on the line of any street or other public place, he or
she shall secure a survey of the line of the street or other public place,
adjacent to the property upon which building or structure is to be erected,
before proceeding with construction of the building or structure. It shall be
the duty of the Building Inspector to see that the building does not encroach
upon the street or other public place.



   (G)   No new building or part thereof shall be occupied, and no
addition or enlargement of any existing building shall be occupied, and no
existing building after being altered or moved shall be occupied, and no
change of occupancy shall be made in any existing building or part thereof,
until the Inspection Department has issued a certificate of occupancy
therefor. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or
portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion
and occupancy of the entire building. Application for a certificate of
occupancy may be made by the building owner or his or her agent after all
final inspections have been made for new buildings, or, in the case of
existing buildings, after supplying the information and data necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter, the appropriate regulatory codes and
the Zoning Ordinance for the occupancy intended. The Inspection Department
shall issue a certificate of occupancy when, after examination and
inspection, it is found that the building in all respects conforms to the
provisions of this chapter, the regulatory codes and the Zoning Ordinance for
the occupancy intended.



(Prior Code, § 5-17)



Statutory reference:



   Stop orders, see G.S. § 160A-421



§ 151.07  OVERSIGHT, NEGLECT BY INSPECTOR.



   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or
other official or employee of the Inspection Department shall be deemed to
legalize the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any regulatory code therein adopted.



(Prior Code, § 5-18)



CHAPTER 152:  REGULATORY CODES



Section



   152.01   Applicability of chapter and regulatory codes herein adopted



   152.02   Building Code adopted



   152.03   Plumbing Code adopted



   152.04   Energy Code adopted



   152.05   Electrical Code adopted



   152.06   Residential Code adopted



   152.07   Mechanical Code adopted



   152.08   Accessibility Code adopted



   152.09   Fuel Gas Code adopted



   152.10   Fire Prevention Code adopted



   152.11   Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted



   152.12   Administration and Enforcement Requirements Code adopted



   152.13   Amendments to codes herein adopted



   152.14   Required compliance with codes



   152.15   Copies of codes to be on file in Town Clerk’s office



§ 152.01  APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER AND REGULATORY CODES HEREIN ADOPTED.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter and of the regulatory codes
herein adopted shall apply to the following:



      (1)   The location, design, materials, equipment,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving,
demolition, removal, use and occupancy of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to a building or structure;



      (2)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains,
waste and vent systems, hot and cold water supply systems and all fixtures
and appurtenances thereof;



      (3)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and
appurtenances thereof; and



      (4)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and
maintenance of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.



   (B)   The adoption of this chapter and the codes herein adopted by
reference shall constitute a resolution within the meaning of G.S. §
143-138(b), as to making the regulatory codes herein adopted applicable to
dwellings and outbuildings used in connection therewith and to apartment
buildings used exclusively as the residence of not more than 2 families.



(Prior Code, § 5-19)



Statutory reference:



   Applicability of North Carolina State Building Code within all
municipalities, see G.S. § 143-138, subset. (e)



§ 152.02  BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.



   The Building Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices, as
adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the Building Code
of the town, to the extent that the code is applicable for safe and stable
design, methods of construction, minimum standards and use of materials in
building of structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or
otherwise constructed or reconstructed.



(Prior Code, § 5-20)



§ 152.03  PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.



   The Plumbing Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices, (North
Carolina State Building Code, Plumbing Code, 2002 edition), as adopted and
published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is
hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the
Plumbing Code for the town.



(Prior Code, § 5-21)



§ 152.04  ENERGY CODE ADOPTED.



   The Energy Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices, (North
Carolina State Building Code, Energy Code, 2002 edition) as adopted and
published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is
hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the Energy
Code for the town.



(Prior Code, § 5-22)



§ 152.05  ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The Electrical Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices, (North
Carolina State Building Code, Electrical Code, 2002 edition), as adopted by
the North Carolina Building Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by
reference as fully as though set forth herein as the Electrical Code for the
town.



(Prior Code, § 5-23)



§ 152.06  RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The Residential Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices, as
adopted and as published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein
as the Residential Code in the town.



(Prior Code, § 5-24)



§ 152.07  MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.



   The Mechanical Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices, as
adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein
as the Mechanical Code for the town.



§ 152.08  ACCESSIBILITY CODE ADOPTED.



   The Accessibility Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices, as
adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein
as the Accessibility Code for the town.



§ 152.09  FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED.



   The Fuel Gas Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices,, as
adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein
as the Fuel Gas Code for the town.



§ 152.10  FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED.



   The Fire Prevention Code, 2002 edition, and all relevant appendices, as
adopted and published by the North Carolina Building Code Council and as
amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein
as the Fire Prevention Code for the town.



§ 152.11  REGULATIONS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES ADOPTED.



   The State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes, 2004
edition, and all relevant appendices, as adopted and published by the North
Carolina Code Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully
as though set forth herein as the Regulations for Manufactured Homes for the
town.



§ 152.12  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT REQUIREMENTS CODE ADOPTED.



   The Administration and Enforcement Requirements Code, 2002 edition, and
all relevant appendices, as adopted published by the North Carolina Code
Council and as amended, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set
forth herein as the Administration and Enforcement Requirements Code for the
town.



§ 152.13  AMENDMENTS TO CODES HEREIN ADOPTED.



   Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference herein, which
are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations
referred to herein, shall be effective in the town at the time the amendments
are adopted by the Board of Commissioners and filed with the Town Clerk as
provided in § 152.15.



(Prior Code, § 5-25)



§ 152.14  REQUIRED COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.



   (A)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards and other
provisions of either the North Carolina State Building Code, or the North
Carolina Uniform Residential Building Code, whichever is applicable, or of
both, if both are applicable.



   (B)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation,
occupancy or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems or plumbing fixtures
installed, constructed, altered, extended, repaired or reconstructed in
accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of
the North Carolina Plumbing Code.



   (C)   All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements and other
provisions of the North Carolina Heating Code (North Carolina State Building
Code, Volume III, “Heating”).



   (D)   All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall
be erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the
minimum standards, requirements and other provisions of the North Carolina
Electrical Code.



(Prior Code, § 5-26)



§ 152.15  COPIES OF CODES TO BE ON FILE IN TOWN CLERK’S OFFICE.



   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted herein, and official
copies of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the
Town Clerk. The copies shall be the official copies of the codes and the
amendments.



(Prior Code, § 5-27)



Statutory reference:



   Condemnation, and the like, of unsafe buildings, see G.S. §§ 160A-426
et seq.



CHAPTER 153:  UNSAFE BUILDINGS



Section



   153.01   Construction of chapter



   153.02   Building Inspector; order of condemnation



   153.03   Duty of owner to comply with order; procedure; recourse



   153.04   Notice to owner; hearing



   153.05   Order after hearing; remedy or demolish building



   153.06   Right to appeal; procedure and effect



   153.07   Building Inspector report upon noncompliance of owner;
action



   153.08   Order of governing body; assessment of costs



   153.09   When governing body to give notice of hearing



   153.10   Presumption of danger arising from order or action of
governing body



   153.99   Violations and penalties



§ 153.01  CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.



   This chapter is in addition to, and not in substitution for, any other
provision of this code or other ordinance affecting the same subject matter.



(Prior Code, § 5-28)



§ 153.02  BUILDING INSPECTOR; ORDER OF CONDEMNATION.



   (A)   Any building or structure or part thereof, partially destroyed
or otherwise, which is found by the Building Inspector to be in a dilapidated
state of disrepair or other substandard condition as to be dangerous to life,
health or other property, or to constitute a fire or safety hazard or a
public nuisance shall be declared by the Building Inspector to be unsafe.



   (B)   The declaration by the Building Inspector shall constitute an
order of condemnation for the purposes of this chapter.



   (C)   Unsafe condition may be caused by defective construction,
overloaded structural parts, decay, susceptibility to fire or any other
hazardous conditions or circumstances.



   (D)   The Building Inspector shall have authority, and it shall be
his or her duty, to declare all those buildings or structures unsafe and to
take appropriate action to have the conditions corrected or removed.



(Prior Code, § 5-29)



§ 153.03  DUTY OF OWNER TO COMPLY WITH ORDER; PROCEDURE; RECOURSE.



   Whenever any building or structure has been condemned by the Building
Inspector, and the existence of the building or structure in a dilapidated
state of disrepair or other substandard condition is found and determined by
the Building Inspector or, upon appeal from or report by the Building
Inspector as hereafter provided, by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners to
be dangerous to life, health or other property, or is in a condition as to
constitute a fire or safety hazard or a public nuisance, the owner of the
building or structure shall be required to demolish and remove the same and
remedy conditions under the regulations and procedures herein provided; and
in the event the owner fails or refuses so to do within the time directed by
the Building Inspector or by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners, as
hereinafter provided, the Mayor and Board of Commissioners, may, in their
judgment, cause the same to be demolished and removed or other steps taken as
they may find to be necessary to suppress and abate the nuisance and remove
the fire or safety hazard and the danger to life, health or other property
found to exist, and specially assess the cost and expense of doing work
against the lot or parcel of land on which the building or structure is
located.



(Prior Code, § 5-30)



§ 153.04  NOTICE TO OWNER; HEARING.



   Before any building or structure may be ordered to be demolished and
removed as provided in § 153.03, the Building Inspector shall notify the
owner thereof, in writing, by certified or registered mail to the last known
address of the owner, or by personal service of notice by the Building
Inspector or his or her assistant or by posting notice as hereinafter
provided, that the building or structure is in a condition as appears to
constitute a fire or safety hazard or dangerous to life, health or other
property, or to be a public nuisance, and that a hearing will be held before
the Building Inspector at a designated place at a time not less than 10 days
after the date of the written notice, at which time and place the owner shall
be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel upon all legal or factual
questions relating to the matter, and shall be entitled to offer that as he
or she may desire which is relevant or material to the questions sought to be
determined or the remedies sought to be effected. If the name or whereabouts
of the owner cannot, after due diligence, be discovered, the notice herein
referred to shall be considered properly and adequately served if a copy
thereof is posted on the outside of the building or structure in question at
least 10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing and a notice of the
hearing is published 1 time in a newspaper having general circulation in the
town at least 1 week prior to the date fixed for the hearing. The notice
shall state the address or location of the building or structure and the
time, place and purpose of the hearing.



(Prior Code, § 5-31)



§ 153.05  ORDER AFTER HEARING; REMEDY OR DEMOLISH BUILDING.



   If, upon hearing, the Building Inspector shall find that the building
or structure in question is in a dilapidated or substandard state of
disrepair as to constitute a fire or safety hazard or to be dangerous to
life, health or other property, or is a public nuisance, he or she shall make
an order in writing, directed to the owner of the building or structure,
requiring the owner to remedy the conditions so found to exist by demolishing
and removing the building or structure or taking other steps as may be
necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, within a period, not
less than 60 days, as the Building Inspector prescribed.



(Prior Code, § 5-32)



§ 153.06  RIGHT TO APPEAL; PROCEDURE AND EFFECT.



   The owner of any building or structure ordered by the Building
Inspector to be demolished and removed, or who is directed by the Building
Inspector to take any other steps to abate a nuisance or remove hazards found
by the Building Inspector to exist, shall have the right of appeal from
orders to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners; provided, that the owner
gives notice of appeal to the Building Inspector at the time of the hearing
at which the order is made, or within 10 days after the order is made, files
with the Building Inspector a written notice of appeal. Notice of appeal
shall state the grounds therefor. Unless an appeal is taken within the time
and the manner herein prescribed, the action of the Building Inspector shall
be deemed final, subject only to action as the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners may take as herein elsewhere provided. Where an appeal has been
properly taken and notice thereof given in accordance with the provisions of
this section, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to report the
same to the Town Clerk, who shall cause the matter to be placed on the agenda
for action by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners at their next regular
meeting. The Mayor and Board of Commissioners shall have the right to
continue the hearing of the appeal from time to time, in their discretion.



(Prior Code, § 5-33)



§ 153.07  BUILDING INSPECTOR REPORT UPON NON-COMPLIANCE OF OWNER; ACTION.



   In the event the owner does not appeal from the final order or
direction of the Building Inspector requiring that the building or structure
be demolished and removed or the taking of other steps as may be required to
abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, and fails or refuses to comply
with the order and direction, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector
to file a written report thereof with the Town Clerk, who shall cause the
report to be placed on the agenda for action by the Mayor and Board of
Commissioners at their next ensuing regular meeting or to some subsequent
meeting to which they may continue the same. The Building Inspector shall
mail a copy of the report by certified or registered mail to the owner at his
or her last known address, or have a copy thereof delivered to the owner.
This report shall specify the date of the meeting of the Board of
Commissioners for which the matter will be docketed for action.



(Prior Code, § 5-35)



§ 153.08  ORDER OF GOVERNING BODY; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.



   In all cases referred to in this chapter which reach the Mayor and
Board of Commissioners for action, either upon appeal of the owner from the
ruling of the Building Inspector or upon report of the Building Inspector
that the owner fails or refuses to comply with his or her order or direction,
they shall hear the matter, and if they find and determine that the building
or structure in question is in a dilapidated or substandard state of
disrepair as to constitute a fire or safety hazard, or to be dangerous to
life, health or other property, or is a public nuisance, and that the owner
of the building or structure has failed or refused to abate the nuisance and
has failed or refused to have the building or structure demolished and
removed or has failed or refuse to take other steps as may be necessary to
abate the nuisance and remove the hazards found to exist, they may cause the
demolition and removal of the building or structure to be done, or effect
other remedies as may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the
hazards, and specially assess the cost of the work against the lot or parcel
of land on which the building or structure was situated; and the assessment
shall constitute a specific lien upon the lot or parcel of land, which may be
enforced by an action instituted in the name of the town in the nature of an
action to foreclose a mortgage as provided by G.S. §§ 105-374 or 105-375 in
the case of ad valorem taxes and local improvement assessments.



(Prior Code, § 5-35)



§ 153.09  WHEN GOVERNING BODY TO GIVE NOTICE OF HEARING.



   In cases in which the Building Inspector has been unable to give to the
owner actual notice of hearing in the manner as provided in this chapter, and
has given notice by posting and publishing the same as authorized in §
153.04, and the owner has failed or refused to comply with the order or
direction of the Building Inspector to demolish and remove the building or
structure, or take other remedial action as will remove the hazards, and the
case is referred to the Mayor and Board of Commissioners for action, they
shall, before taking action, cause to be posted on the outside of the
building or structure in question at least 10 days prior to the date fixed
for the hearing, and published 1 time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town at least 1 week prior to the date fixed for the
hearing, a written notice stating the address or location of the building or
structure involved and the time, place and purpose of the hearing, and other
information as they may deem advisable.



(Prior Code, § 5-36)



§ 153.10  PRESUMPTION OF DANGER ARISING FROM ORDER OR ACTION OF GOVERNING
BODY.



   In all cases in which the Mayor and Board of Commissioners under
authority of this chapter, cause the demolition and removal of any building
or structure to be carried out, or direct other remedial steps to be taken as
may be necessary to abate the nuisance and remove the hazards, it shall be
conclusively presumed that the public nuisance and the fire and safety hazard
and danger to life, health or other property, created and maintained by the
continued presence of the building or structure in a condition as is found to
exist, constitute a clear and present danger amounting to a situation of
emergency involving the public health, safety and general welfare, which
requires entry upon private property for the summary abatement and removal of
danger, in the public interest.



(Prior Code, § 5-37)



§ 153.99  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to
comply with any final order or direction of the Building Inspector or the
Mayor and Board of Commissioners made by virtue and in pursuance of this
chapter, and any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
punished as provided by G.S. § 14-4 for the violation of municipal
ordinances, and every day a person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply
with any final order or direction of the Building Inspector or Mayor and
Board of Commissioners made by virtue and in pursuance of this chapter shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.



(Prior Code, § 5-38)



CHAPTER 154:  NORTH CAROLINA MODEL HOUSING CODE (MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS)



Section




Minimum Housing Standards




   154.01   Findings; purpose; authority



   154.02   Scope



   154.03   Definitions



   154.04   Office of Housing Inspector created; powers and duties



   154.05   Inspections



   154.06   Preliminary investigations; notices; hearings



   154.07   Dwelling unfit for human habitation



   154.08   Structural standards



   154.09   Plumbing standards



   154.10   Heating standards



   154.11   Electrical standards



   154.12   Ventilation standards



   154.13   Space, use and location standards



   154.14   Safe and sanitary maintenance standards



   154.15   Insect, rodent and infestation control standards



   154.16   Rooming house standards




Dwellings Not in Compliance with Standards




   154.30   Dwellings not in compliance; not unfit for human habitation



   154.31   Procedure after hearing; order



   154.32   Failure to comply with order



   154.33   Service of complaints and orders



   154.34   Appeals



   154.35   Alternative remedies



   154.36   Conflict with other provisions



   154.37   Repeal and reenactment of existing housing code



   154.38   Validity



 



   154.98   Violations




MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS




§ 154.01  FINDINGS; PURPOSE; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-441, it is hereby found and declared
that there exist in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation
due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and
other calamities, lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities, and due
to other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe and unsanitary, and
dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise
inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town.



   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the town, it is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
standards of fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings
used for human habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. § 160A-444.



   (C)   In addition, it is hereby found and declared, under the
authority of G.S. § 160A-174, that there exist in the town dwellings which,
although not meeting the classification as unfit for human habitation, fail
to fully comply with all the minimum standards for housing fitness as
established herein and therefore have present 1 or more conditions which are
inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare. These conditions,
if not corrected, can lead to deterioration and dilapidation of dwellings,
which render them unfit for human habitation.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.02  SCOPE.



   (A)   This section is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be
construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are
public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength,
stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and
property from fire and other hazards incident to the construction,
alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings,
apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures or premises used or
intended for use.



   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing
housing and to all housing hereafter constructed within the corporate limits
of the town. Portable, mobile or demountable buildings or structures,
including trailers, manufactured homes and mobile homes when used or intended
for use for housing within the jurisdiction, shall be subject to the
applicable provisions of this section.  This chapter establishes minimum
requirements for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings used
for human habitation and does not replace or modify requirements otherwise
established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of buildings,
equipment or facilities except as provided in this chapter.



   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to abandoned
structures which are found by the Board of Commissioners to be a health or
safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions
creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to
children or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of
sanitary conditions.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.03  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ABANDONED STRUCTURE. Any structure, whether designed and intended
for residential or other uses, which has been vacant or not in active use,
regardless of purpose or reason, for the past 2-year period and which is
determined by the Housing Inspector to be unfit for human habitation or
occupancy based upon the standards as set forth in this chapter.



      BASEMENT. A portion of a building which is located partly
underground, having access to light and air from windows located above the
level of the adjoining ground.



      CELLAR. A portion of a building located partly or wholly
underground having inadequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.



      DETERIORATED DWELLING.  A dwelling that is unfit for human
habitation and can be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the
minimum standards established by this chapter, at a cost not in excess of 50%
of its value, as determined by finding of the Housing Inspector.



      DILAPIDATED DWELLING. A dwelling that is unfit for human
habitation and cannot be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of
the minimum standards established by this chapter, at a cost not in excess of
50% of its value, as determined by finding of the Housing Inspector.



      DWELLING.  Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile
home, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to
be so used, and includes any accessory buildings and structures and
appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it
does not include any manufactured home or mobile home, which is used solely
for a seasonal vacation purpose.



      DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used
or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.



      EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their haborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination
methods approved by the Housing Inspector.



      GARBAGE.  The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



      HABITABLE ROOM.  A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.



      HOUSING INSPECTOR.  The person appointed by the Town Manager to
carry out the administration and enforcement of this chapter.



      INFESTATION.  The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests in a number as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public.



      MANUFACTURED HOME (MOBILE HOME).  A structure as defined in G.S.
§ 143-145(7).



      MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than 2 dwelling
units.



      OCCUPANT.  Any person over 1 year of age living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.



      OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a
building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.



      OWNER.  The holder of the title in fee simple and every
mortgagee of record.



      PARTIES IN INTEREST.  All individuals, associations and
corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in
possession thereof.



      PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Any housing authority or any officer who is
in charge of any department or branch of the government of the town, county
or state relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities
concerning dwellings in the town.



      ROOMING HOUSE.  Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing 1 or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or
operator to 3 or more persons who are not husband and wife, son or daughter,
mother or father or sister or brother of, the owner or operator.



      ROOMING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not
for cooking or eating purposes.



      RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except
garbage and ashes, and the term shall include, but not be limited to: paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.



      SUPPLIED.  Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under the
control of, the owner or operator.



   (B)   Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING HOUSE,
ROOMING UNIT or PREMISES are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof”.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.04  OFFICE OF HOUSING INSPECTOR CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   For the purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions
of this chapter, the office of Housing Inspector is hereby created.



   (B)   The Housing Inspector shall be appointed by the Town Manager,
and shall have powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, in addition to others herein
granted, the following powers:



      (1)   Investigations. To investigate the dwelling and building
conditions in the town in order to determine which dwellings therein are
unfit for human habitation and dangerous, being guided in  examination of
dwellings and buildings by the requirements set forth in this chapter.



      (2)   Oaths, witnesses and the like. To administer oaths and
affirmations and to examine witnesses and receive evidence.



      (3)   Right of entry. To enter upon and within premises and
dwellings for the purpose of making examinations and investigations;
provided  that entries shall be made in a manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.



      (4)   Warrants, citations and the like. To swear criminal
warrants, issue civil citations and to take other actions as may be necessary
to carry out the enforcement procedures of this chapter.



      (5)   Delegation of functions and the like. To delegate any of
his or her functions and powers under this chapter to officers and agents as
he or she may designate.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.05  INSPECTIONS.



   For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter, the Housing
Inspector, upon proper identification, is hereby authorized to enter, examine
and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
houses, rooming units on premises, including abandoned structures. The owners
or occupants of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or rooming house,
or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Housing Inspector free access
to the dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house or rooming unit and its
premises at all reasonable times for the purposes of inspection, examination
and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the
owner thereof, or his or her agent or employee, access to any part of the
dwelling or dwelling unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.06  PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATIONS; NOTICES; HEARINGS.



   Whenever a petition is filed with the Housing Inspector by a public
authority or by at least 5 residents of the town charging that any dwelling
is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the Housing Inspector
(on his or her own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation,
the Housing Inspector shall, if his or her preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for those charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
owner and parties in interest in the dwellings a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the Housing Inspector (or his or her designated agent) at a place
within the town therein fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days
after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest
shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or
equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Housing Inspector.
Upon the issuance of a complaint and notice of hearing pursuant to this
section, the Inspector may cause the filing of a notice of lis pendens, with
a copy of the complaint and notice of hearing attached thereto, in the office
of the Clerk of Superior Court of Wilkes County, to be indexed and
cross-indexed in accordance with the indexing procedures of the North
Carolina General Statutes. The Inspector shall cause a copy of the notice of
lis pendens to be served upon the owners and parties in interest in the
dwelling at the time of filing in accordance with G.S. § 160A-445, as
applicable. Upon compliance with the requirements of any order issued based
upon a complaint and hearing, the Inspector shall direct the Clerk of
Superior Court to cancel the notice of lis pendens.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.07  DWELLING UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.



   The Housing Inspector shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for
human habitation if he or she finds that any 1 of the following conditions
exist in a dwelling:



   (A)   Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list, lean or
buckle to an extent as to render the dwelling unsafe;



   (B)   Supporting member or members which show 33% or more damage or
deterioration, or non-supporting, enclosing or outside walls or covering
which show 50% or more of damage or deterioration;



   (C)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which
are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for
the purpose used;



   (D)   Damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render the dwelling
unsafe;



   (E)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair which
is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or other
people in the town;



   (F)   Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic;



   (G)   Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire, accident
or other calamities;



   (H)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary
facilities to the extent as to endanger the health, safety or general welfare
of the occupants or other residents of the town;



   (I)   Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities
required by this chapter which constitutes a definite health or safety
hazard; and



   (J)   Lack of connection to a potable water supply and/or to the
public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system, the lack of either one
of which renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation. For the purposes of
this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water supply if the
water supply has been cut off because of nonpayment of the water bill or
otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a flow of potable
water to the tap.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.08  STRUCTURAL STANDARDS.



   In addition to the 10 conditions stated in § 154.07, any 1 of which
renders a dwelling unfit for human habitation, the Housing Inspector shall
determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if he or she finds
that a dwelling fails to fully comply with 7 or more of the following
enumerated standards of dwelling fitness:



   (A)   Structural integrity. Walls, partitions, supporting members,
sills, joists, rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or
buckle, shall not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have
holes or cracks which might admit rodents.



   (B)   Supports. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting
members and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.



   (C)   Foundations. Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other
foundation supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged.



   (D)   Steps. Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in a condition that they will not fail or
collapse.



   (E)   Egress. Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic shall be provided.



   (F)   Interior materials. Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms,
closets and hallways shall be furnished of suitable materials which will, by
use of reasonable household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and
shall be maintained in a manner so as to enable the occupants to maintain
reasonable privacy between various spaces.



   (G)   Weatherization. The roof, flashings, exterior walls, basement
walls, floors and all doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be weather and watertight.



   (H)   Chimneys. There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which
are defective, deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in a condition or
location as to constitute a fire hazard.



   (I)   Floors. There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or
wood floors on the ground.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.09  PLUMBING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Facilities. Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a
kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and an adequate supply
of both cold water and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an
approved pipe distribution system connected to a potable water supply. For
the purposes of this standard, a dwelling is not connected to a potable water
supply if the water supply has been cut off because of non-payment of the
water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a
flow of potable water to the tap.



   (B)   Maintenance. All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of
the Town Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and
in good working order.



   (C)   Accessible. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located
within the dwelling and be accessible to the occupants of the same. The water
closet and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording
privacy to the user.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.10  HEATING STANDARDS.



   (A)   Every dwelling shall have facilities for providing heat in
accordance with either division (B) or (C) below. The facilities shall be
maintained in a state of good repair and good working order.



   (B)   Every central or electric heating system shall be of
sufficient capacity so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water
closet compartments in every dwelling to which it is connected with a minimum
temperature of 70° F measured at a point 3 feet above the floor during
average winter conditions.



   (C)   Where a central or electric heating system is not provided,
each dwelling shall be provided with sufficient electrical receptacles,
fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be
connected so as to heat all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments with a minimum temperature of 70°F measured 3 feet above the
floor during average winter conditions.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.11 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Wiring. Every dwelling shall be wired for electric lights and
convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least 2 floor
or wall type electrical convenience receptacles, connected in a manner as
determined by the Town Electric Code. There shall be installed in every
bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least 1
supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. In the event wall or
ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, then each
habitable room shall contain at least 3 floor or wall type electric
convenience receptacles.



   (B)   Hall lights. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple
dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when
natural light is not sufficient.



   (C)   Maintenance. All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring
shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used,
and installed in accordance with the Town Electric Code.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.12  VENTILATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Every habitable room shall have at least 1 window or skylight
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of a
room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any
room and light obstructions are located less than 5 feet from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, a window shall not
be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as
contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only
window in a room is a skylight type window in the top of a room, the total
window area of skylight shall equal at least 15% of the total floor area of
the room.



   (B)   Every habitable room shall have at least 1 window or skylight
which can easily be opened, or  another device as will adequately ventilate
the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room, shall be
equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight
type window size as required, or shall have other approved equivalent
ventilation.



   (C)   Every bathroom equipped with more than 1 water closet
compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for
habitable rooms.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.13  SPACE, USE AND LOCATION STANDARDS.



   (A)   Room sizes. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the
minimum room size in each habitable room as required by the Town Residential
Building Code. (Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room
area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling may count for
not more than 10% of the required habitable floor area. The floor area of any
part of any room where the ceiling height is less than 4½ feet shall not be
considered as a part of the floor area in computing the total area of the
room to determine maximum permissible occupancy.) Every dwelling unit shall
contain at least 150 square feet of habitable floor area for the first
occupant, at least 100 square feet of additional habitable area for each of
the next 3 occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional habitable
floor area for each additional occupant. In every dwelling unit and in every
rooming unit, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by 1 occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than 1 occupant shall contain at least 50 square
feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over, and at least
35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.



   (B)   Ceiling height. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every
habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet and 6
inches.



   (C)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes unless:



      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;



      (2)   The total window area, total openable window area and
ceiling height are equal to those required for a habitable room; and



      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room
is entirely above the grade adjoining the window area, except where the
windows face a stairwell, window well or access way.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.14  SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.



   (A)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall,
exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weather tight and
rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be
capable of affording privacy; shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall
shall be protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the
entrance of penetration of moisture or the weather.



   (B)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior
wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.



   (C)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or
cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weather tight, water tight
and rodent proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good
repair.



   (D)   Stairs porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside
stair, porch and any appurtenances thereto shall be safe to use and capable
of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (E)   Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every bathroom and kitchen floor
surface and water closet compartment floor surface shall be constructed and
maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit the
floor to be easily kept in sound condition and good repair.



   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter shall be so
constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and
shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (G)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain
thorough drainage and so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.



   (H)   Smoke detector systems. Every dwelling unit shall be provided
with an approved listed smoke detector installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations and listing. When activated, the detector
shall provide an audible alarm. The detector shall be tested in accordance
with and meet the requirements of UL 217, Single and Multiple Station Smoke
Detectors.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.15  INSECT, RODENT AND INFESTATION CONTROL STANDARDS.



   (A)   Screens. For protection against mosquitoes, flies and other
insects every dwelling shall have:



      (1)   Supplied and installed screens on every door opening
leading directly from the dwelling to outdoor space, except that sliding
doors, doors with self closing devices, doors on mobile homes with self
closing devices and doors that open into rooms of living spaces that are
artificially ventilated or air conditioned are exempt from this provision.



      (2)   Supplied and installed screens on every window or other
device with an opening to outdoor space, except that this requirement shall
not apply for any room or rooms of a dwelling that are ventilated year round
with an operable and installed heating and air conditioning system.



   (B)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or
intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement
which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with screens
installed or other approved device as will effectively prevent their entrance.



   (C)   Infestation. Every dwelling shall be maintained in a manner to
be free of any infestations of insects, rodents or other pests. Every
occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible
for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on
the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing
more than 1 dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination whenever
his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever infestation
exists in 2 or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or
public parts of any dwelling containing 2 or more dwelling units,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.



   (D)   Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling shall be supplied
with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as required by
town ordinances, and the owner, operator or agent in control of the dwelling
or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.



   (E)   Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling shall be supplied
with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an adequate
mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling
unit or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the Inspector, in the
structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved
outside garbage container as required by town ordinances.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.16  ROOMING HOUSE STANDARDS.



   (A)   All of the provisions of this chapter, and all of the minimum
standards and requirements of this chapter, shall be applicable to rooming
houses, and to every person who operates a rooming house or who occupies or
lets to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except
as provided in the following divisions:



      (1)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At
least 1 water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly
connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each 4 rooms within a rooming house wherever
the facilities are shared. All facilities shall be located within the
residence building served, shall be directly accessible from a common hall or
passageway and shall not be more than 1 story removed from any of the persons
sharing the facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied with hot and cold water at all times. The required facilities shall
not be located in a cellar.



      (2)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by 1 occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than 1 occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area
for each occupant under 12 years of age.



      (3)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house
shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and
ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the rooming
house; and shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the
entire premises where the entire structure or building within which the
rooming house is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.



      (4)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal,
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required by division (A) above shall be
located within the rooming house and within a room or rooms which afford
privacy and are separate from the habitable rooms, and which are accessible
from a common hall and without going outside the rooming house or through any
other room therein.



   (B)   Full compliance with a standard means that if any part of the
stated standard is not complied with by a particular dwelling then that
dwelling has failed to fully comply with the enumerated standard. For
example, in regard to § 154.09(A), if all standards are met in a dwelling
except that a supply of hot water is not provided then the dwelling fails to
fully comply with § 154.09(A).



(Ord. passed - -)



DWELLINGS NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS



§ 154.30  DWELLINGS NOT IN COMPLIANCE; NOT UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.



   (A)   In any case where the Housing Inspector determines that a
dwelling fails to fully comply with 1 or more but less than 7 of the above
enumerated standards of dwelling fitness, the dwelling shall not be found to
be unfit for human habitation and shall not be subject to the procedures and
remedies as provided for in this chapter for dwellings unfit for human
habitation. Each failure of noncompliance, however, shall constitute a
violation of the terms of this chapter and shall subject the violator to the
penalties and enforcement procedures, civil or criminal or both, of § 10.99.



   (B)   In making the determination as described in this section, the
Housing Inspector shall not be required to make notice and hold the hearing
as called for in § 154.06, but the Housing Inspector may do so if the
determination of the severity and classification of dwelling fitness is not
clear to the Housing Inspector upon preliminary investigation.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.31  PROCEDURE AFTER HEARING; ORDER.



   (A)   If, after notice and hearing, the Housing Inspector determines
that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation in
accordance with the standards set forth above, he or she shall state in
writing his or her findings of fact in support of that determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order:



      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
can be made at a cost of less than 50% of the value of the dwelling,
requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter or improve
the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation or to vacate and
close the dwelling as a human habitation, based upon the Housing
Inspector’s standards for closing dwellings; or



      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling
cannot be made at a cost of less than 50% of the value of the dwelling,
requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to remove or
demolish the dwelling.  If, after notice and hearing, the Housing Inspector
determines that the dwelling under consideration is not unfit for human
habitation but is not in full compliance with 1 or more standards of dwelling
fitness as set forth above, he may proceed with the enforcement procedures of
§ 10.99 of the Town Code of Ordinances, civil or criminal or both.



   (B)   Whenever a determination is made pursuant to divisions (A) or
(A)(2) above that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or
demolished, under the provisions of the section, notice of the order shall be
given by first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or
restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request
for those notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of notice
shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the Inspector, to
allow the opportunity for any organization to negotiate with the owner to
make repairs, lease or purchase the property for the purpose of providing
affordable housing. The Inspector shall certify the mailing of the notices,
and the certifications shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an
organization that has filed a written request for notices may raise the issue
of failure to mail notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring
the Inspector to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.32  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER.



   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the Housing Inspector may:



      (1)   Cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved
or to be vacated and closed; or



      (2)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling,
a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the dwelling, the Housing Inspector may:



      (1)   Cause the dwelling to be vacated and removed or
demolished; or



      (2)   Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling,
a placard with the following words: “This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful.” Occupation of a building so posted shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.



   (C)   The duties of the Housing Inspector set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) shall not be exercised until the Board of Commissioners shall have,
by ordinance, ordered the Housing Inspector to proceed to effectuate the
purpose of this chapter with respect to the particular property or properties
which the Housing Inspector shall have found to be unfit for human habitation
and which property or properties shall be described in the chapter. No
ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the
owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into
conformity with the Housing Code. For the purposes of this subsection, a
period of 90 days following the date of the Housing Inspector's order shall
constitute a reasonable opportunity. This chapter shall be recorded in the
Office of the Register of Deeds in the county wherein the property or
properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner
in the grantor index.



   (D)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the
Housing Inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which the
cost was incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be
collected as the lien for special assessment provided in G.S. § 160A-443. If
the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Housing Inspector, he or she
shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixture
or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the
proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Housing
Inspector, shall be secured in a manner directed by the Court, and shall be
disbursed by the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final
order of the decree of the Court.



   (E)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate
dwelling, the Housing Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the
town to remove the occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in
the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint
naming as parties-defendant any persons occupying the dwelling. The Clerk of
Superior Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before
a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed 10 days from the
issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint
shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be returned
according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly
served, and if at the hearing the Housing Inspector produces the certified
copy of an ordinance adopted by the Board of Commissioners pursuant to
division (B) authorizing the Housing Inspector to proceed to vacate the
occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the
premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgement ordering
that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the
judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. § 42-30. An appeal from
any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in
G.S. § 7A-228, and the execution of that judgement may be stayed as provided
in G.S. § 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a
tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment
proceeding pursuant to this division, unless the occupant was served with
notice at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding
that the Board of Commissioners has ordered the Housing Inspector to proceed
to exercise his or her duties under divisions (A), (B) and (C) of this
section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.33  SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.



   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by an inspector shall be served
upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail. When
service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or
order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if
the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular
mail is not returned by the post office within 10 days after the mailing. If
regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in
a conspicuous place on the premises affected.



   (B)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons
are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Inspector in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but have refused to accept
service by registered or certified mail, and the inspector makes an affidavit
to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or
other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general
circulation in the town at least not later than the time at which personal
service would be required under the provisions of this chapter. When service
is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.34  APPEALS.



   (A)   The Board of Adjustment is hereby appointed as the Housing
Appeals Board to which appeals from any decision or order of the Housing
Inspector may be taken. Except where this chapter provides for different
rules or procedures, the Board of Adjustment acting as the Housing Appeals
Board shall follow its rules of procedure, which may be amended to provide
specifically for this function.



   (B)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Housing Inspector
may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or
commission of the town. Any appeal from the Housing Inspector shall be in
writing and shall be taken within 10 days from the rendering of the decision
or service of the order by filing with the Housing Inspector and with the
Board a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the
appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Housing
Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting
the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is
from a decision of the Housing Inspector refusing to allow the person
aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her decision shall remain in force
until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the Housing
Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have
the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the Board,
unless the Housing Inspector certifies to the Board after the notice of
appeal is filed with him or her, that because of facts stated in the
certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension
of his or her requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property. In
that case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining
order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than 1 day’s
written notice to the Housing Inspector, by the Board, or by a court of
record upon petition made pursuant to division (E) of this section.



   (C)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for
hearing appeals, shall give due notice to the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision and order that
in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have
all the powers of the Housing Inspector, but the concurring vote of 4/5 of
the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision
or order of the Housing Inspector. The Board shall have power also in passing
upon appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships would
result from carrying out the strict letter of the chapter, to adapt the
application of the chapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the
spirit of the chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured,
and substantial justice done.



   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the Board, but not otherwise.



   (E)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Housing
Inspector or a decision rendered by the Board may petition the Superior Court
for an injunction, restraining the Housing Inspector from carrying out the
order or decision and the Court may, upon the petition, issue a temporary
injunction restraining the Housing Inspector pending a final disposition of
the cause. The petition shall be filed within 30 days after issuance of the
order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be had by the Court on a
petition within 20 days, and shall be given preference over other matters on
the Court's calendar. The Court shall hear and determine the issues raised
and shall enter the final order or decree as law and justice may require. It
shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a
temporary injunction under this division.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.35  ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   Nothing in this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be
construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and
declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary
proceedings or otherwise nor shall enforcement of 1 remedy provided herein
prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided herein or in
other ordinances or laws. In addition to the remedies provided for herein,
any violation of the terms of this chapter shall subject the violator to the
penalties and remedies, either criminal or civil or both, as set forth in §
10.99 of the Code of the Town of Wilkesboro.



   (B)   No dwelling shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or
changed in occupancy without a Certificate of Occupancy. In any case where
the Housing Inspector, after notice and hearing as required herein, finds
that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he or she
shall withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the dwelling or
dwelling unit until the time that he or she determines that it is fit for
human habitation. In addition, in any case where the Housing Inspector, after
preliminary investigation as provided for herein, concludes, based upon that
investigation, that a dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation
and believes that the occupancy of the dwelling or dwelling unit could cause
imminent peril to life or property from fire or other hazards, he or she
shall withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the dwelling or
dwelling unit until a time that he or she determines that it is fit for human
habitation.



   (C)   If any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired,
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter or of any valid
order or decision of the Housing Inspector or Board made pursuant to any
ordinance or code adopted under authority of this chapter, the Housing
Inspector may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or occupancy, to
restrain, correct or abate the violation, to prevent the occupancy of the
dwellings, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the
premises of the dwelling.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.36  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this chapter is
found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of
the town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more
stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the town's jurisdiction shall prevail. The North
Carolina Building Code, current edition, shall serve as the standard for all
alterations, repairs, additions, removals, demolitions and other acts of
building made or required pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.37  REPEAL AND REENACTMENT OF EXISTING HOUSING CODE.



   The rewriting of this chapter in part carries forth by reenactment some
of the provisions of the existing Housing Code of the Town of Wilkesboro and
it is not intended to repeal but rather to reenact and continue in force
existing provisions so that all rights and liabilities that have been accrued
are preserved and may be enforced. All provisions of the Housing Code which
are not reenacted herein are hereby repealed. All suits at law or in equity
and/or all prosecutions resulting from the violation of the Housing Code in
effect, which are now pending in any of the courts of this state or of the
United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption of
this chapter, but shall be prosecuted to their finality the same as if this
chapter had not been adopted; any and all violations of the existing chapter,
prosecutions for which have not been instituted may be filed and prosecuted;
nothing in this chapter shall be so construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss
any litigation or prosecution now pending and/or which may have been
instituted or prosecuted.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.38  VALIDITY.



   (A)   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, the decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Board of
Commissioners hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each
section, subsection, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any 1 or more sections, divisions, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared
invalid.



   (B)   All ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this chapter
are hereby repealed to the extent of conflict.



   (C)   This chapter shall become effective upon its adoption by the
Board of Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina.



(Ord. passed - -)



§ 154.98  VIOLATIONS.



   In addition to the conditions, acts or failures to act that constitute
violations specified in this chapter above, it shall be unlawful for the
owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to fail, neglect or refuse to repair,
alter or improve the same, or to vacate and close or vacate and remove or
demolish the same, upon order of the Inspector duly made and served as herein
provided, within the time specified in the order. It shall be unlawful for
the owner of any dwelling, with respect to which an order has been issued
pursuant to § 154.31, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after
the time prescribed in  the order for its repair, alteration or improvement
or its vacation and closing, or vacation and removal or demolition.



(Ord. passed - -)  Penalty, see § 10.99



CHAPTER 155:  NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE STANDARDS



Section



   155.01   Title



   155.02   Purpose



   155.03   Findings; authority



   155.04   Scope; jurisdiction



   155.05   General definitions and interpretations



   155.06   Special definitions and interpretations



   155.07   Office of non-residential building or structure standards
inspector created; powers and duties



   155.08   Duties and responsibilities of the owner



   155.09   Duties and responsibilities of the occupant



   155.10   Relationship of duties and responsibilities to occupancy



   155.11   Validity



   155.12   Conflict with other provisions



   155.13   Amendments



   155.14   Unlawful to own unsafe buildings and structures



   155.15   Buildings and premises not declared unsafe but which are
not in compliance with all standards



   155.16   Investigation



   155.17   Complaint and notice of hearing



   155.18   Order to take corrective action; contents; issuance



   155.19   Service of complaints and orders of inspector



   155.20   Appeal of order of inspector; finality if not appealed



   155.21   Failure to comply with order of inspector



   155.22   Remedies; lien for cost of demolition and removal



   155.23   Failure of occupant to comply with order to vacate



   155.24   Action by Council upon abandonment of intent to repair



   155.25   Demolition of non-residential buildings by owner



   155.26   Inspections



   155.27   Defects in buildings to be corrected



   155.28   Violations



   155.29   Procedure is alternative



§ 155.01  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the "Non-Residential Building or
Structure Standards" for the town, and may be cited as such, and will be
referred to hereinafter as "this chapter."



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.02  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of the provisions of this chapter to provide a just,
equitable and practicable method to evaluate whether non-residential
buildings or structures fail to meet minimum standards of maintenance,
sanitation, and safety established by the town. The minimum standards address
conditions that are dangerous and injurious to public health, safety, and
welfare and identify circumstances under which a public necessity exists for
the repair, closing, or demolition of such buildings or structures. The
provisions of this chapter are cumulative with and in addition to any other
remedy provided by law including the current editions of standard codes
adopted by the town.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.03  FINDINGS; AUTHORITY.



   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160A-439, it is hereby found and
declared that there exist in the town non-residential buildings or structures
which are unsafe and especially dangerous to life because of liability to
fire or because of bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective
construction, decay, unsafe wiring or heating systems, inadequate means of
egress and other causes.



   (B)   In addition, it is hereby found and declared, that there exist
in the town non-residential buildings or structures which, although not
meeting the classification of unsafe and especially dangerous to life, fail
to fully comply with all the minimum standards for non-residential buildings
or structures fitness as established herein and, therefore, have present 1 or
more conditions which are inimical to thepublic health, safety and general
welfare. Such conditions, if not corrected, can lead to deterioration and
dilapidation of non-residential buildings or structures which render them
unsafe and especially dangerous to life.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.04  SCOPE; JURISDICTION.



   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing
non-residential buildings or structures and to all non-residential buildings
or structures hereafter constructed within the corporate town limits as now
or hereafter established.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.05  GENERAL DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.



   (A)   Unless specifically defined in § 155.06, words used in the
non-residential building or structure standards shall have their respective
customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of these regulations
certain words, terms or phrases used herein are interpreted and defined as
follows:



   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.



   (C)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural and words
used in the plural shall include the singular.



   (D)   The words "shall" and "will" always indicate MANDATORY. The
words "should" and "may" always indicate OPTIONAL.



   (E)   The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and/or "parcel".



   (F)   The word "building" includes the word "structure". The word
"person" includes a "firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company, corporation and/or individual". The word "use" includes the terms
"arranged, designed, and/or intended" for a use, activity and/or purpose.



   (G)   The term "Board of Adjustment" shall always indicate the BOARD
OF ADJUSTMENT OF THE TOWN OF WILKESBORO, NORTH CAROLINA as created and
appointed by the Town Council of the Town of Wilkesboro.



   (H)   The term "Town Council" shall always indicate the TOWN COUNCIL
OF THE TOWN OF WILKESBORO, NORTH CAROLINA.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.06  SPECIAL DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter:



   BUILDING. Any covered structure intended for shelter, housing or
enclosure of persons, animals, facilities, equipment or chattels; the term
BUILDING shall be construed to include the term STRUCTURE; furthermore, it
shall be construed as if followed by the term or part thereof.



   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A detached subordinate building located on a lot,
parcel or tract whose use is incidental to that of the principal building. A
building cannot be considered accessory unless it accompanies a principal
building on the same lot, parcel or tract.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which the principal use of the lot,
parcel or tract is conducted. Building Code: The North Carolina State
Building Code.



   DETERIORATION. The condition of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, rusting, peeling paint or
other evidence of physical decay or loss of structural integrity.



   FIRE HAZARD  (Seealso NUISANCE). Any thing or act which increases, or
may cause an increase of, the hazard, likelihood or menace of fire to a
greater degree than reasonable for the conduct of the non-residential use on
the premises, or which may unreasonably obstruct, delay, or hinder, or may
unreasonably become the cause of an obstruction, a delay, a hazard or an
unreasonable hindrance to the prevention, suppression or extinguishment of
fire.



   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



   INFESTATION. The haunting or overrunning by rats, snakes, birds,
insects or other destructive vermin or animals that endanger the public
health and safety. Non-Residential Building or Structures Standards
Inspector: The person delegated as such by the Town Council of the town.
(Hereinafter referred to as "the inspector".)



   NUISANCE.



      (1)   Any public nuisance known as common law or in equity
jurisprudence, or as provided by the statutes of the State of North Carolina,
or the ordinances of the town; or



      (2)   Any condition including an attractive nuisance which may
prove detrimental to human health or safety whether in a building, on the
premises of a building, or part of a building or upon an occupied lot; or



      (3)   Physical conditions dangerous to human life or
detrimental to health of persons in, on or near the premises where the
condition exists; or



      (4)   Unsanitary conditions or conditions that are dangerous
to public health, well-being or the general welfare; or



      (5)   Fire hazards or other safety hazards.



   OCCUPANT. Any person who has charge, care or control of a
non-residential building or structure or a part thereof, whether with or
without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or any person, individually
or jointly, entitled to possession regardless of whether the building or
structure is actually occupied or not.



   OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of
record of a property.



   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations, and corporations
who have interests of record in a nonresidential building or structure and
any who are in possession thereof.



   PHYSICAL VALUATION. The estimated cost to replace a building in kind.



   PLUMBING. All of the following supplies, facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, water heaters, garbage disposal
units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins,
vents and other similar fixtures, together with all connections to water,
sewer or gas lines, and water pipes and lines utilized in conjunction with
HVAC equipment.



   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon, under control by the same owner or occupant, devoted to
or zoned for non-residential use.



   PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER. Any sanitary sewer owned, operated and
maintained by the town and available for public use for the disposal of
sewage.



   RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except
garbage and ashes, including, but not limited to, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin
cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.



   SEWAGE. Waste from a flush toilet, bathtub, sink, lavatory, dishwashing
or laundry machine, or water-carried waste from any other fixture, equipment
or machine.



   STRUCTURALLY SOUND. Substantially free from flaw, defect, decay or
deterioration to the extent that such structure or structural member is
capable of adequately or safely accomplishing the purpose for which it was
intended or designed.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on
the ground. (Refer to the definition of BUILDING herein.)



   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under control of, the
owner or occupant.



   VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE. Any building or structure designed for the
storage of goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing processes,
which has not been used for that purpose for at least 1 year and has not been
converted to another use.



   VACANT MANUFACTURING FACILITY. Any building or structure previously
used for the lawful production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been
used for that purpose for at least 1 year and has not been converted to
another use.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.07  OFFICE OF NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE STANDARDS
INSPECTOR CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   For the purposes of administering and enforcing the provisions
of this chapter the office of Non-Residential Building or Structures
Standards Inspector, (herein called "inspector"), is hereby created.



   (B)   The inspector shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall
have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provision of this chapter, including without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, in addition to others herein
granted, the following powers:



      (1)   To investigate the non-residential building conditions
in the jurisdiction in order to determine which buildings therein are unsafe,
being guided in such examinations of buildings by the requirements set forth
in this chapter and for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this
chapter with respect to such non-residential buildings or structures.



      (2)   To administer oaths and affirmations and to examine
witnesses and receive evidence.



      (3)   To enter upon and within premises and buildings for the
purpose of making examinations and investigations; provided, that such
entries shall be made at reasonable hours in such a manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.



      (4)   To delegate any of his functions and powers under this
chapter to such officers and agents as he may designate.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.08  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OWNER.



   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner to maintain all
non-residential buildings or structures in accordance with all standards for
non-residential buildings or structures fitness as stated in this chapter.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.09  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OCCUPANT.



   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the occupant to ensure that:



   (A)   All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant
shall be kept in a safe, clean and sanitary condition consistent with the
non-residential use and the occupant shall refrain from performing any acts
which would render any part of the building or premises unsafe or unsanitary
or which would obstruct any adjacent owner/occupant from performing any duty
required, or from maintaining his building or premises in a safe and sanitary
condition.



   (B)   Every occupant shall be responsible for the elimination of
infestation in and on the premises, subject to his control.



   (C)   Every occupant shall maintain all supplied plumbing fixtures
in a safe and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use and operation of same.



   (D)   No garbage or solid waste shall be stored or allowed by the
occupant to accumulate on the premises unless contained in a trash
receptacle(s) which is in accordance with the ordinances of the town.



   (E)   Damage to public sidewalks and/or curb and gutter located in
the public right-of-way shall be repaired or replaced at no expense to the
town when such damage is caused by vehicles making deliveries to the
non-residential use under the control of the occupant.



   (F)   Where the owner would not otherwise know of a defect of any
facility, utility or equipment required to be furnished hereunder and the
same is found to be defective or inoperable, the occupant affected thereby
shall, upon learning of such defect, provide notice to the owner.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.10  RELATIONSHIP OF DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES TO OCCUPANCY.



   The provisions of this chapter that apply to the exterior or exterior
components of a structure or building or to the premises shall be complied
with whether the structure or building or premises is occupied or vacant. All
unoccupied or vacant structures or buildings shall be secured by their owners
to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons or the formation of nuisance
conditions such as infestation.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.11  VALIDITY.



   If any section, division, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Town Council hereby
declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section, division,
clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any 1 or more
sections, divisions sentences, clauses or phrases be declared invalid.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.12  CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.



   In the event any provision, standard or requirement of this chapter is
found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of
the town, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more
stringent requirement for thepromotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the jurisdiction shall prevail. The North Carolina
State Building Code, current edition, shall serve as the standard for all
alterations, repairs, additions, removals, demolitions and other acts of
building made or required pursuant to this chapter.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.13  AMENDMENTS.



   The Town Council may, from time to time amend, supplement, or change
the provisions and requirements of this chapter. Any such amendment shall be
by ordinance of the Council.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.14  UNLAWFUL TO OWN UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any firm, person or corporation to
own a building or a structure situated in the jurisdiction of the town which
is in such a defective or hazardous condition that it is unsafe and
especially dangerous to life. The Town Council has determined that unsafe and
especially dangerous buildings and structures are detrimental to the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of Wilkesboro, that such unsafe and
especially dangerous buildings and structures shall be condemned, and that
the owners of such unsafe and especially dangerous buildings and structures
shall immediately remedy the unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or unlawful
conditions or demolish such buildings or structures.



   (B)   A building or structure shall be found to be especially
dangerous to life and held unsafe by the inspector if the inspector finds
that any 1 of the following conditions exists in such building or structure:



      (1)   Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list,
lean or buckle to an extent as to render the building unsafe.



      (2)   Supporting member or members which show 33% or more
damage or deterioration, or non-supporting, enclosing or outside walls or
covering which shows 50% or more of damage or deterioration.



      (3)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads,
which are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably
safe for the purpose used.



      (4)   Such damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render
the building unsafe.



      (5)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair
which is dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or other
people of the jurisdiction.



      (6)    Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or
panic.



      (7)   Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire,
accident or other calamities.



      (8)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary
facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety or general
welfare of the occupants or other residents of the jurisdiction.



      (9)   Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing
facilities required by this chapter which constitutes a health or a definite
safety hazard.



      (10)   For any building whose occupancy classification
requires it, lack of connection to a potable water supply and/or to the
public sanitary sewer or other approved sewage disposal system. For the
purposes of this standard, a building is not connected to a potable water
supply if the water supply has been cut off because of nonpayment of the
water bill or otherwise or if the system for any reason is not receiving a
flow of potable water to the tap.



      (11)   Any violation of the State Fire Prevention Code which
constitutes a condition which is unsafe and especially dangerous to life.



      (12)   Any abandoned non-residential building or structure
which is found to be a health or safety hazard by the inspector as a result
of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard,
dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children, or frequent use by
vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities.



   (C)   In addition to conditions 1-12 enumerated in division (B)
above, any one of which renders a building or structure unsafe, the inspector
shall determine that a non-residential building or structure is unsafe if he
finds that a building or structure fails to fully comply with any 5 or more
of the following enumerated standards of building and premises fitness. Full
compliance with a standard means that if any part of the stated standard is
not complied with by a particular building and premises, then that building
and premises has failed to fully comply with the enumerated standard.



   (D)   General.



      (1)   Buildings and premises shall be kept clear of
accumulations of garbage, trash, or rubbish which create health and
sanitation problems. All garbage and solid waste shall be in approved
containers or stored in a safe and sanitary way.



      (2)   Flammable, combustible, explosive or other dangerous or
hazardous materials shall be stored in a manner approved for such materials
and consistent with the State Fire Prevention Code.



      (3)   Buildings and premises shall be kept free of loose and
insufficiently anchored overhanging objects which constitute a danger of
falling on persons or property.



      (4)   The premises shall be kept free of insufficiently
protected holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions and other
such dangerous impediments on and around fences, walls, walks, driveways,
parking lots and other areas which are accessible to and generally used by
persons on the premises.



      (5)   Building and premise surfaces shall be kept clear of
cracked or broken glass, loose shingles, loose wood, crumbling stone or
brick, loose or broken plastic or other dangerous objects or similar
hazardous conditions. Exterior surfaces shall be maintained in such material
or treated in such a manner as to prevent deterioration.



      (6)   Buildings and premises shall be kept free of objects and
elements protruding from building walls, roof or premises which are unsafe or
not properly secured or which can create a hazard such as abandoned
electrical boxes and conduits, wires, sign brackets and other brackets, and
similar objects.



   (E)   Appurtenances.



      (1)   All chimneys, flues and vent attachments thereto shall
be maintained structurally sound. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other
draft-producing equipment which are in use shall provide sufficient draft to
develop the rated output of the connected equipment, shall be structurally
safe, durable, smoke-tight and capable of withstanding the action of flue
gases.



      (2)   All exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and
fire escapes shall be provided with banisters or railings properly designed
and maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept
structurally sound, in good repair, and free of defects.



      (3)   All cornices shall be made structurally sound. Rotten or
weakened portions shall be removed and/or replaced. All exposed wood shall be
treated or painted.



      (4)   Gutters and down spouts shall be replaced or repaired as
necessary and shall be appropriately located and securely installed so as not
to cause a hazard to pedestrians, vehicular traffic or property.



      (5)   Attached and unattached accessory structures shall be
maintained in a state of good repair.



      (6)   Advertising sign structures, attached or freestanding,
awnings, marquees and their supporting members and other similar attachments
and structures shall be maintained in good repair and shall not cause a
nuisance or safety hazard.



   (F)   Structural.



      (1)   Walls, partitions, supporting members, sills, joists,
rafters or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, shall not
be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks which
might admit rodents.



      (2)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members
and strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.



      (3)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation
supports shall not be deteriorated or damaged.



      (4)   Interior and exterior steps, railings, landings, porches
or other parts or appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that
they will not fall or collapse.



      (5)   Where a wall of a building has become exposed as a
result of demolition of an adjacent building said wall must have all doors,
windows, vents or other similar openings closed with material of the type
comprising the wall unless such doors, windows, vents or other similar
openings are to be maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. No protrusions or loose material shall be in the wall. The exposed
wall shall be painted, stuccoed or bricked and weatherproofed if necessary to
prevent deterioration of the wall.



   (G)   Plumbing, electrical and supplied facilities.



      (1)   All plumbing fixtures and pipes shall meet the standards
of the State Plumbing Code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair
and in good working order.



      (2)   All electrical fixtures, receptacles, equipment and
wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being
used, and installed in accordance with the State Electric Code.



      (3)   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility
which is required under this chapter or the State Building Code for occupancy
or use shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and
effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition.



   (H)   Egress.



      (1)   Facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be
adequate and shall remain clear for such purposes.



      (2)   All windows must be tight-fitting and have sashes of
proper size and design and free from rotten wood, broken joints, or broken or
loose mullions.



      (3)   All windows shall be maintained free of broken glass
that could be dangerous to the public, invitees or third parties ordinarily
expected to use the premises, from falling or shattering.



      (4)   All openings originally designed as windows shall be
maintained as windows, unless specifically approved by the inspector for
enclosure.



   (I)   Drainage. All yards and premises shall be properly graded and
maintained so as to obtain thorough drainage and so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.15  BUILDINGS AND PREMISES NOT DECLARED UNSAFE BUT WHICH ARE NOT IN
COMPLIANCE WITH ALL STANDARDS.



   In any case where the inspector determines that a non-residential
building or structure fails to fully comply with 1 or more but less than 5 of
the standards of non-residential buildings or structures fitness set forth in
§155.14(C), such building or structure shall not be found to be unsafe and
shall not be subject to the procedures and remedies as provided for in this
chapter for unsafe buildings and premises. Each such failure of
non-compliance, however, shall constitute a violation of the terms of this
chapter and shall subject the violator to the penalties and enforcement
procedures, civil or criminal or both, of § 155.29. In such case the
inspector shall notify the owner as provided for in § 155.19.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.16  INVESTIGATION.



   Whenever it appears to the inspector that any nonresidential building
or structure has not been properly maintained so that the safety or health of
its occupants or members of the general public are jeopardized for failure of
the property to meet the minimum standards established by the Town Council,
the inspector shall undertake a preliminary investigation. If entry upon the
premises for purposes of investigation is necessary, such entry shall be made
pursuant to a duly issued administrative search warrant in accordance with
G.S. § 15-27.2 or with permission of the owner, the owner's agent, a tenant,
or other person legally in possession of the premises.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.17  COMPLAINT AND NOTICE OF HEARING.



   If the preliminary investigation discloses evidence of a violation of
the minimum standards, the inspector shall issue and cause to be served upon
the owner of and parties in interest in the nonresidential building or
structure a complaint. The complaint shall state the charges and contain a
notice that a hearing will be held before the inspector (or his or her
designated agent) at a place within the county scheduled not less than 10
days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner
and parties in interest shall be given the right to answer the complaint and
to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts
of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the inspector.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.18  ORDER TO TAKE CORRECTIVE ACTION; CONTENTS; ISSUANCE.



   (A)   If, after notice and hearing, the inspector determines that
the nonresidential building or structure has not been properly maintained so
that the safety or health of its occupants or members of the general public
is jeopardized for failure of the property to meet the minimum standards as
established by the Town Council, the inspector shall state in writing the
findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause
to be served upon the owner thereof an order. The order may require the owner
to take remedial action, within a reasonable time specified, subject to the
procedures and limitations herein.



   (B)   An order may require the owner to repair, alter, or improve
the nonresidential building or structure in order to bring it into compliance
with the minimum standards established by the Council or to vacate and close
the nonresidential building or structure for any use.



   (C)   An order may require the owner to remove or demolish the
nonresidential building or structure if the cost of repair, alteration, or
improvement of the building or structure would exceed 50% of its then current
value. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the nonresidential
building or structure is designated as a local historic landmark, listed in
the National Register of Historic Places, or located in a locally designated
historic district or in a historic district listed in the National Register
of Historic Places and the Town Council determines, after a public hearing as
provided by ordinance, that the nonresidential building or structure is of
individual significance or contributes to maintaining the character of the
district, and the nonresidential building or structure has not been condemned
as unsafe, the order require that the nonresidential building or structure be
vacated and closed until it is brought into compliance with the minimum
standards established by this chapter.



   (D)   An order may not require repairs, alterations, or improvements
to be made to vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse
facilities to preserve the original use. The order may require such building
or structure to be vacated and closed, but repairs may be required only when
necessary to maintain structural integrity or to abate a health or safety
hazard that cannot be remedied by ordering the building or structure closed
for any use.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.19  SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS OF INSPECTOR.



   Complaints or orders issued by the inspector pursuant to this chapter
shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified
mail so long as the means used are reasonably designed to achieve actual
notice. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of the
complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed
sufficient if the registered or certified mail is refused, but the regular
mail is not returned by the post office within 10 days after the mailing. If
regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in
a conspicuous place on the premises affected. If the identities of any owners
or the whereabouts of persons are unknown and cannot be ascertained by the
inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the inspector makes an
affidavit to that effect, the serving of the complaint or order upon the
owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having
general circulation in the town at least once no later than the time that
personal service would be required under this section. When service is made
by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.20  APPEAL OF ORDER OF INSPECTOR; FINALITY IF NOT APPEALED.



   Any owner who has received an order under § 155.18 may appeal from the
order to the Town Board of Adjustment by giving notice of appeal in writing
to the inspector and to the Town Clerk within 10 days following issuance of
the order. In the absence of an appeal to the Board of Adjustment within the
prescribed time, the order of the inspector shall be final. The Board of
Adjustment shall hear appeals within a reasonable time after receipt of the
notice of appeal and it may modify and affirm or revoke the order. Any person
aggrieved by a decision or order of the inspector shall have the remedies
provided in G.S. § 160A-446.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.21  FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH ORDER OF INSPECTOR.



   (A)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter,
or improve or to vacate and close the nonresidential building or structure,
the Town Council may adopt an ordinance ordering the inspector to proceed to
effectuate the purpose of this section with respect to the particular
property or properties that the inspector found to be jeopardizing the health
or safety of its occupants or members of the general public. The property or
properties shall be described in the ordinance. The ordinance shall be
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the
name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index. Following adoption
of an ordinance, the inspector may cause the building or structure to be
repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed. The inspector may
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any nonresidential building or
structure so closed a placard with the following words: "This building is
unfit for any use; the use or occupation of this building for any purpose is
prohibited and unlawful." Any person who occupies or knowingly allows the
occupancy of a building or structure so posted shall be guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor.



   (B)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish the nonresidential building or structure, the Town Council may adopt
an ordinance ordering the inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of
this section with respect to the particular property or properties that the
inspector found to be jeopardizing the health or safety of its occupants or
members of the general public. No ordinance shall be adopted to require
demolition of a nonresidential building or structure until the owner has
first been given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with
the minimum standards established by the Town Council. The property or
properties shall be described in the ordinance. The ordinance shall be
recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the
name of the property owner or owners in the grantor index. Following adoption
of an ordinance, the inspector may cause the building or structure to be
removed or demolished.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.22  REMEDIES; LIEN FOR COST OF DEMOLITION AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations, or
improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the
inspector shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was
incurred, which lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected
as the lien for special assessment provided in G.S. Article 10, Chapter 160A.



   (B)   The amount of the costs is also a lien on any other real
property of the owner located within the town limits except for the owner's
primary residence. The additional lien provided in this subdivision is
inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment.



   (C)   If the nonresidential building or structure is removed or
demolished by the inspector, he or she shall offer for sale the recoverable
materials of the building or structure and any personal property, fixtures,
or appurtenances found in or attached to the building or structure and shall
credit the proceeds of the sale, if any, against the cost of the removal or
demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior
court by the inspector, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court,
and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order or decree of the court. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Town Council to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by
summary proceedings or otherwise.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.23  FAILURE OF OCCUPANT TO COMPLY WITH ORDER TO VACATE.



   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a
nonresidential building or structure, the inspector may file a civil action
in the name of the town to remove the occupant. The action to vacate shall be
in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a
complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying the nonresidential
building or structure. The clerk of superior court shall issue a summons
requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time,
date, and place not to exceed 10 days from the issuance of the summons to
answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided
in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and
if on its return it appears to have been duly served and if at the hearing
the inspector produces a certified copy of an ordinance adopted by the Town
Council pursuant to § 155.21 of this chapter to vacate the occupied
nonresidential building or structure, the magistrate shall enter judgment
ordering that the premises be vacated and all persons be removed. The
judgment ordering that the nonresidential building or structure be vacated
shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgment for summary ejectment
entered under G.S. § 42-30. An appeal from any judgment entered under this
division by the magistrate maybe taken as provided in G.S. § 7A-228, and the
execution of the judgment may be stayed as provided in G.S. § 7A-227. An
action to remove an occupant of a nonresidential building or structure who is
a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment
proceeding pursuant to this division unless the occupant was served with
notice, at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment
proceeding, that the governing body has ordered the inspector to proceed to
exercise his duties under § 155.21 of this chapter to vacate and close or
remove and demolish the nonresidential building or structure.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.24  ACTION BY COUNCIL UPON ABANDONMENT OF INTENT TO REPAIR.



   (A)   If the Town Council has adopted an ordinance or the inspector
has issued an order requiring the building or structure to be repaired or
vacated and closed and the building or structure has been vacated and closed
for a period of 2 years pursuant to the ordinance or order, the Town Council
may make findings that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to
repair, alter, or improve the building or structure and that the continuation
of the building or structure in its vacated and closed status would be
inimical to the health, safety, and welfare of the municipality in that it
would continue to deteriorate, would create a fire or safety hazard, would be
a threat to children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal
activities, or would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of
property values in the area. Upon such findings, the Town Council may, after
the expiration of the 2-year period, enact an ordinance and serve such
ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following:



      (1)   If the cost to repair the nonresidential building or
structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards is less than
or equal to 50%of its then current value, the ordinance shall require that
the owner either repair or demolish and remove the building or structure
within 90 days; or



      (2)   If the cost to repair the nonresidential building or
structure to bring it into compliance with the minimum standards exceeds 50%
of its then current value, the ordinance shall require the owner to demolish
and remove the building or structure within 90 days.



   (B)   In the case of vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant
industrial warehouse facilities, the building or structure must have been
vacated and closed pursuant to an order or ordinance for a period of 5 years
before the Town Council may take action under this division. The ordinance
shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county
wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the
name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply
with the ordinance, the inspector shall effectuate the purpose of the
ordinance.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.25  DEMOLITION OF NON- RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS BY OWNER.



   Where a non-residential building or structure is under the jurisdiction
of this chapter, the building may be demolished by the owner provided that
the following requirements are met:



   (A)   The owner shall obtain a demolition permit from the Building
Inspections Department.



   (B)   All sewer, gas, water and similar taps or connections shall be
properly closed and disconnected.



   (C)   All debris from the building shall be removed from the site.
This requirement is for the removal of all debris that is above the street
level of the building.



   (D)   The lot shall be graded to a smooth, even, finished grade,
free from building material, debris, holes, and/or depressions. Where
building debris remains on the site below street level, the owner must back
fill the lot with 12 inches of clean fill which shall be graded to a smooth,
even finished grade.



   (E)   Where walls of adjacent buildings become exposed as a result
of the demolition, said walls must have all doors, windows, vents or other
similar openings closed with material of the type comprising the wall, unless
such doors, windows, vents, or other similar openings are to be maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No protrusions or loose
material shall be in the wall. The exposed wall shall be painted, stuccoed or
bricked and weatherproofed if necessary to prevent deterioration of the wall.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.26  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this chapter,
the inspector is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all
reasonable times all non-residential buildings and premises, including
abandoned structures. The owner or occupant of every non-residential building
or the person in charge thereof, shall give the inspector free access to such
building and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purposes of such
inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a non-residential
building shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to
any part of such building and its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful order
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   The inspector may make periodic inspections for unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise hazardous and unlawful conditions in non-residential
structures within the jurisdiction. In addition, he may make inspections when
he has reason to believe that such conditions may exist in a particular
structure or premises.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.27  DEFECTS IN BUILDINGS TO BE CORRECTED.



   When the inspector finds any defects in a non-residential building, or
finds that a building has not been constructed in accordance with applicable
state and town laws, or that a building because of its condition is dangerous
or contains fire hazardous conditions, it shall be his duty to notify the
owner or occupant of the building of its defects, hazardous conditions or
failure to comply with law. The owner or occupant shall each immediately
remedy the defects, hazardous conditions or violations of law in the property
he owns. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Each
day any violation of this chapter shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.28  VIOLATIONS.



   In addition to the conditions, acts or failure to act that constitute
violations specified in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for the owner of
any building or structure to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or
improve the same, or to vacate and close or vacate and remove or demolish the
same, upon order of the inspector duly made and served as herein provided,
within the time specified in such order. It shall be unlawful for the owner
of any building, with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to
§ 155.18, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time
prescribed in such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its
vacation and closing, or vacation and removal or demolition.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



§ 155.29  PROCEDURE IS ALTERNATIVE.



   Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this chapter by criminal process, and the enforcement of any remedy
provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or
remedies provided herein or in other ordinance or laws. In addition to the
remedies provided for herein, any violation of the terms of this chapter
shall subject the violator to the penalties and remedies as set forth in §
10.99.



(Ord. 2014-02, passed 4-7-2014)



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING CODE



   Editor’s note:  The Town of Wilkesboro Zoning Code, codified as
Chapter 156 of this code, is kept as a separate volume and is available for
inspection upon request at the Town Clerk’s Office during normal business
hours.



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   STREET CLOSINGS





         II.   FRANCHISES; MISCELLANEOUS




TABLE I:  STREET CLOSINGS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
10-20-1981
 
The alley shown on J.D. Wilson’s map


-
 
11-2-1981
 
A portion of Brook street, a portion of Wilkes Street and the opening of New
Wilkes Street


-
 
4-5-1982
 
A portion of Brook Street, a portion of Wilkes Street and an opening of a
portion of New Wilkes Street


-
 
9-13-1982
 
A portion of North Street and Bridge Street


-
 
8-6-1990
 
A section of Winston Street


-
 
8-6-1990
 
A section of Ridge Street


-
 
6-7-1993
 
A section of South Spruce Street


-
 
1-3-1995
 
An undedicated, unopened and abandoned street in the Forest Hills subdivision


-
 
12-2-1996
 
An unopened section of Bridge Street


-
 
2-2-2004
 
A portion of Shady Lane in the Forest Hills subdivision


-
 
4-5-2004
 
An unopened portion of Shady Lane in the Forest Hills subdivision


Res. 2012-19
 
10-1-2012
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


-
 
11-5-2012
 
A 20-foot unopened alley from Pine Street to Cherry Street


Res. 2013-05
 
4-8-2013
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2013-08
 
5-6-2013
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2014-10
 
3-3-2014
 
Temporarily close South Collegiate Drive


Res. 2014-12
 
4-7-2014
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2014-14
 
4-7-2014
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2014-18
 
7-7-2014
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2014-19
 
8-4-2014
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2014-24
 
9-8-2014
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2015-03
 
2-2-2015
 
Temporarily close South Collegiate Drive


Res. 2015-07
 
4-3-2015
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2015-12
 
7-6-2015
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2015-13
 
7-6-2015
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2015-19
 
9-14-2015
 
Temporarily close Main Street (NC Hwy 268/181) between Corporation Street and
Woodland Boulevard


Res. 2016-14
 
8-1-2016
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


2017-01
 
2-6-2016
 
Closing an unnamed 60 foot right-of-way within the corporate limits of the
town


Res. 2017-03
 
2-6-2017
 
Temporarily close a portion of South Collegiate Drive


Res. 2017-10   
 
3-6-2017
 
Intent to close an unopened alleyway, South Moravian Street between College
Street and Church Street; South Brook Street between college Street and
church Street; and College Street from Wilkes Street to South Brook Street


Res. 2017-15
 
4-3-2017
 
Closing that portion of College Street from Wilkes Street to South Brook
Street


Res. 2017-16
 
4-3-2017
 
Closing South Moravian Street


Res. 2017-17
 
4-3-2017
 
Closing the unopened 20 foot alley


Res. 2017-25
 
8-7-2017
 
Temporarily close Wilkesboro Open Air Market, the town-owned parking lot, a
portion of South Bridge Street, North Bridge Street, Broad Street, and Main
Street


Res. 2017-26
 
8-7-2017
 
Temporarily closing Main Street (NC Hwy 268/18) between Corporation Street
and Woodland Boulevard


Res. 2017-27
 
8-7-2017
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2017-28
 
8-7-2017
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2017-32
 
9-11-2017
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2017-41
 
11-6-2017
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2018-03
 
2-5-2018
 
Temporarily close a portion of South Collegiate Drive


Res. 2018-09
 
3-5-2018
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2018-14
 
4-9-2018
 
Temporarily close Carolina West Wireless Community Commons and Wilkes
Communications Pavilion, and North Bridge Street right-of-way


Res. 2018-15
 
4-9-2018
 
Temporarily close Carolina West Wireless Community Commons and Wilkes
Communications Pavilion, the town-owned parking lot, a portion of South
Bridge Street, North Bridge Street, Broad Street, and Main Street


Res. 2018-16
 
4-9-2018
 
Temporarily close Main Street between Corporation Street and Woodland
Boulevard


Res. 2018-20
 
5-7-2018
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2018-23
 
8-23-2018
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2018-30
 
9-10-2018
 
Temporarily close North Bridge Street


Res. 2018-34
 
11-5-2018
 
Temporarily close the Carolina West Wireless Community Commons and the North
Bridge Street right-of-way


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE II:  FRANCHISES; MISCELLANEOUS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Description




-
 
2-25-1974
 
Granting to WKBC Cablevision, Inc. certain rights regarding a television
antenna service


-
 
2-2-1981
 
Capital Reserve Fund created for the improvement of water system


-
 
4-20-1989
 
Agreement between Wilkes County Medical Service and the Wilkesboro Fire
Department


-
 
6-5-1995
 
Board of Commissioners accepts all real and personal property, any capital
and all other assets of Mountain Park Cemetery Association


Res. -
 
8-6-2012
 
Rezoning a tract of land from R-20A Residential/Agricultural District to B-2
General Business District


Res. -
 
2-4-2013
 
Rezoning a tract of land from R-6 General Residential District to B-2 General
Business District


Res. -
 
5-6-2013
 
Motor vehicle sales and service permitted M2-Limited Industrial Zoning
District


Res. 2013-11
 
6-3-2013
 
Accepting Kennedy Street into the Street Maintenance System from US 421 to
Olive Drive


Res. -
 
3-3-2014
 
Rezoning a tract of land from B-2 General Business District to R06 General
Residential District


Res. 2014-30
 
12-1-2014
 
Allowing manufactured home parks as a conditional use in the R-20A District


 
 




 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to North Carolina General Statutes





References to Prior Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Reference
 
Code Section




1-593
 
10.05


7A-227
 
154.32; 155.23


7A-228
 
154.32; 155.23


14-4
 
10.99; 50.054; 51.99; 96.99, 97.99; 110.57; 116.02; 153.99


14-4(a)
 
93.99


14-132
 
130.01; 132.04


14-134
 
132.16


14-148
 
97.04


14-148(c)
 
97.04


14-159.6–14-159.9
 
132.16


14-160
 
132.16


14-169
 
131.05


14-188
 
132.16


14-204
 
118.10


14-223
 
130.02; 131.03


14-225
 
132.06


14-281.1–14-288.11, 14-288.18
 
35.02


14-286
 
132.06


14-288.3
 
32.04


14-288.4
 
132.04


14-289 et seq.
 
132.07


14-303 et seq.
 
132.16


14-309.14
 
132.07


14-315
 
131.05


14-316
 
131.05


14-399
 
51.14, 51.17


14.399(b)
 
51.19


14-399(k)
 
51.23


14-402–14-409
 
131.05


14-410–14-415
 
91.01


15-27.2
 
155.16


15-54
 
32.025


Chapter 20
 
70.01


Chapter 20, Art. 17
 
118.01


20-37.6
 
73.99


20-37.6(f)(4)
 
73.99


20-114.1
 
91.24


20-115 et seq.
 
70.25


20-138.1–20-171
 
71.05


20-141
 
71.10; 72.05


20-141, subsec.(a)
 
71.10


20-141, subset. (b)
 
73.01


20-142.1
 
72.01


20-158
 
71.10; 72.05


20-158.1
 
72.01


20-161–20-163
 
73.01


20-162
 
73.17


20-162.1
 
73.01


20-168
 
70.06


20-169
 
70.01; 71.10; 72.01; 72.05; 73.01


20-172
 
72.01


20-175(e)
 
132.02


20-219.11
 
94.09


20-280(b)
 
118.01


42-29
 
154.32; 155.23


42-30
 
154.32; 155.23


44A-1
 
94.11


51-81-5
 
91.03


58-79-1 et seq.
 
91.22


58-81-5–51-81-15
 
91.24


58-84-1–58-88-30
 
34.03


Chapter 65, Article 9
 
97.03


66-252
 
111.01


67.2
 
93.23


Ch.69
 
91.01


Chapter 74C
 
116.02


Chapter 87
 
117.01


90-620 et seq.
 
113.01


Chapter 93
 
30.22


Chapter 93B
 
110.35


Chapter 105
 
52.06


Chapter 105, Subchapter I
 
52.01


Chapter 105, Article 3
 
52.01; 52.03; 52.04


Chapter 105, Subchapter 1, Article 5
 
114.08


Chapter 105, Subchapter 1, Article 9
 
52.05; 52.06; 114.07


105-1 et seq.
 
52.02


105-33
 
30.25; Ch. 110 ; 111.01


105-33 et seq.
 
Ch. 110


105-41
 
Ch. 110


105-109
 
110.56; 110.57


105-164.3(17)
 
114.01


105-164.16
 
52.04


105-187.1(3)
 
114.01


105-187.1(7)
 
114.01


105-249
 
110.22


105-249.1
 
110.22


105-349
 
114.01


105-374
 
153.08


105-375
 
153.08


Chapter 118, Article 3
 
34.03


118-6
 
34.03


118-7
 
34.03


121-5
 
110.45; 110.55


Chapter 130A
 
93.23


130A-309.04
 
51.09


Chapter 135 Article 2
 
34.01


135-23
 
34.01


136-27.4
 
90.07


136-32
 
72.01; 72.05


136-33
 
72.01


136-141 et seq.
 
94.14


136-143
 
94.14


Chapter 143 Article 21
 
53.09


143-138
 
91.04


143-138(b)
 
152.01


143-138, subset. (e)
 
152.01


143-145(7)
 
154.03


143-211 et seq.
 
91.01


143-213(18)
 
53.02


143-215.1
 
53.02; 53.05


143-215.1(b)
 
53.05


143-215.1(d)
 
53.02


143-215.1(g)
 
53.05


143-215.3(a)(14)
 
53.01


143-215.3C
 
53.08


143-215.6B
 
53.09


143-215.6B(f)
 
53.09


143-215.6B(g)
 
53.09


143-215.6B(h)
 
53.09


143-215.6B(i)
 
53.09


143B-434.1
 
32.060


Chapter 153A, Article 6
 
50.050


153A-123(d)
 
50.054


153A-123(e)
 
50.054


153A-275
 
53.01


159-29
 
30.07


159-30
 
34.03


159-31
 
34.03


160-400.1 et seq.
 
32.080


Chapter 160A
 
33.01


Chapter 160A, Article 7, Part 2
 
Charter, § 2


Chapter 160A, Article 10
 
155.22


160A-19
 
132.06


160A-60
 
30.03


160A-69
 
31.03


160A-70
 
31.03


160A-71
 
31.03


160A-101(3)
 
Charter, § 2


160A-101(9)b.
 
Charter, § 2


160A-171
 
31.17


160A-174
 
Ch. 92; 132.13; 154.01


160A-175
 
51.99; 96.99; 117.99


160A-175(b)
 
93.99


160A-175(d)
 
93.24; 110.57


160A-175(e)
 
93.24; 93.99


160A-175(f)
 
93.99


160A-175(g)
 
93.99


160A-183
 
91.03


160A-184
 
132.11


160A-186
 
93.02


160A-193
 
90.06


160A-194
 
Ch. 110


160A-207
 
110.56


160A-208.1
 
114.03


160A-211
 
114.02


160A-215.1
 
114.09


160A-215.1(b)
 
114.06


160A-215.1(d)
 
114.08


160A-215.1(e)(1)
 
114.01


160A-215.1(e)(2)
 
114.01


160A-216–160A-236
 
Ch. 90


160A-281 et seq.
 
32.025


160A-282
 
32.031


160A-286
 
32.025


160A-291
 
91.22


160A-292
 
91.22


160A-293
 
91.22


160A-296
 
Ch. 90; Ch. 92


160A-297–160A-307
 
Ch. 90


160A-300
 
70.01; Ch. 92


160A-301
 
73.01; 73.31


160A-303
 
70.25; 73.31; 94.02


160A-303.2
 
94.02


160A-312
 
53.01


160A-361
 
32.004


160A-387
 
32.004


160A-411–160A-438
 
Ch. 150


160A-411 et seq.
 
151.01


160A-417
 
Ch. 150


160A-418
 
Ch. 150


160A-421
 
151.06


160A-426 et seq.
 
152.15


160A-439
 
155.03


160A-441
 
154.01


160A-443
 
154.32


160A-444
 
154.01


160A-445
 
154.06


160A-446
 
155.20


160A-485
 
33.05


163-292
 
31.18


164-7
 
10.14


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE



 

Prior Code
 
2006 Code




1-8
 
10.17


2-1
 
33.01


2-2
 
33.02


2-3
 
33.03


2-4
 
33.04


2-5
 
33.05


2-6
 
33.06


2-7
 
31.01


2-8
 
31.02


2-9
 
31.03


2-10
 
31.04


2-11
 
31.05


2-12
 
31.05


2-13
 
31.06


2-14
 
31.07


2-15
 
31.08


2-16
 
31.09


2-17
 
31.10


2-18
 
31.11


2-19
 
31.12


2-20
 
31.13


2-21
 
31.13


2-23
 
31.14


2-24
 
31.15


2-25
 
31.16


2-26
 
31.17


2-27
 
30.01


2-28
 
30.02


2-29
 
30.03


2-30
 
30.04


2-31
 
30.05


2-32
 
30.06


2-33
 
30.07


2-34
 
30.20


2-35
 
30.21


2-36
 
30.22


2-37
 
30.22


2-38
 
30.23


2-39
 
30.24


2-40
 
30.25


2-41
 
32.001


2-42
 
32.002


2-43
 
32.003


2-44
 
32.004


2-45
 
32.004


2-46
 
32.004


2-47
 
32.004


2-48
 
32.005


2-49
 
32.006


2-50
 
32.007


2-51
 
32.008


2-52
 
32.009


2-53
 
32.010


2-54
 
32.011


2-55
 
32.012


3-1
 
112.01


4-1
 
93.01


4-2
 
93.02


4-3
 
93.03; 93.99


4-4
 
93.04


4-5
 
93.05


4-6
 
93.06


4-7
 
93.07


4-8
 
93.20


4-11
 
93.21


4-12
 
93.22


4-13
 
93.23


5-1
 
150.01


5-2
 
150.02


5-3
 
150.02


5-4
 
150.03


5-5
 
150.04


5-6
 
150.04


5-7
 
150.05


5-8
 
150.06


5-9
 
150.07


5-10
 
150.08


5-11
 
150.09


5-12
 
151.01


5-13
 
151.02


5-14
 
151.03


5-15
 
151.04


5-16
 
151.05


5-17
 
151.06


5-18
 
151.07


5-19
 
152.01


5-20
 
152.02


5-21
 
152.03


5-22
 
152.04


5-23
 
152.05


5-24
 
152.06


5-25
 
152.13


5-26
 
152.14


5-27
 
152.15


5-28
 
153.01


5-29
 
153.02


5-30
 
153.03


5-31
 
153.04


5-32
 
153.05


5-33
 
153.06


5-35
 
153.07; 153.08


5-36
 
153.09


5-37
 
153.10


5-38
 
153.99


6-1
 
35.01


6-2
 
35.02


6-3
 
35.03


6-4
 
35.04


6-5
 
35.05


6-6
 
35.06


6-7
 
35.07


7-1
 
92.01


7-2
 
92.02


7-3
 
92.03


7-4
 
92.04


7-5
 
92.03


7-6
 
92.05


7-7
 
92.06


7-8
 
92.07


7-9
 
92.08


8-1
 
91.01


8-2
 
91.02


8-3
 
91.03


8-4
 
91.04


8-5
 
91.05


8-6
 
91.07


8-7
 
91.07


8-8
 
91.08


8-9
 
91.06


8-10
 
91.09


8-11
 
91.99


8-12
 
91.09


8-13
 
91.20


8-14
 
91.21


8-15
 
91.22


8-16
 
91.23


8-17
 
91.24


10-11
 
111.01


10-12
 
111.02


10-13
 
111.03


10-14
 
111.04


11-2
 
70.01


11-3
 
70.02


11-4
 
70.03


11-5
 
70.04


11-6
 
70.05


11-7
 
70.06


11-8
 
70.07


11-9
 
70.08


11-11
 
70.09


11-12
 
70.10


11-13
 
72.01


11-14
 
72.02


11-15
 
72.02


11-16
 
72.03


11-17
 
72.04


11-18
 
72.05


11-19
 
72.06


11-20
 
72.07


11-21
 
72.08


11-22
 
72.09


11-23
 
72.10


11-24
 
72.11


11-25
 
72.12


11-26
 
72.13


11-27
 
72.14


11-28
 
72.15


11-29
 
71.01


11-30
 
71.02


11-31
 
71.03


11-32
 
71.04


11-33
 
71.05


11-34
 
71.06


11-35
 
71.07


11-36
 
71.08


11-37
 
71.09


11-38
 
71.10


11-39
 
71.10


11-40
 
73.01


11-41
 
73.02


11-42
 
73.03


11-43
 
73.04


11-44
 
73.05


11-45
 
73.06


11-46
 
73.07


11-47
 
73.08


11-48
 
73.09


11-49
 
73.10


11-50
 
73.11


11-51
 
73.12


11-52
 
73.13


11-53
 
73.14


11-54
 
73.15


11-55
 
73.16


11-56
 
73.17


11-58
 
73.99


11-59
 
73.99


11-60
 
73.30


11-61
 
73.31


11-62
 
73.32


11-63
 
73.33


11-64
 
73.34


11-65
 
73.35


11-67
 
73.36


11-68
 
73.37


11-69
 
73.38


11-72
 
73.39


11-81
 
70.25


11-82
 
70.25


11-83
 
70.25


11-84
 
70.25


11-85
 
70.26


11-86
 
70.27


11-87
 
70.28


11-88
 
70.29


11-89
 
70.30


11-90
 
70.31


11-91
 
70.32


11-92
 
70.33


11-93
 
70.34


11-94
 
70.35


12-1
 
130.01


12-2
 
130.01


12-4
 
131.01


12-5
 
131.01


12-6
 
131.02


12-7
 
132.01


12-11
 
132.03


12-12
 
132.04


12-13
 
132.05


12-15
 
132.06


12-17
 
132.08


12-18
 
132.09


12-19
 
130.04


12-20
 
132.10


12-21
 
132.11


12-22
 
132.11


12-23
 
132.11


12-25
 
132.13


12-26
 
132.14


12-27
 
132.14


12-29
 
132.15


12-30
 
132.16


12-31
 
132.16


12-32
 
132.17


12-33
 
132.18


12-34
 
132.18


12-36
 
131.03


12-37
 
131.03


12-38
 
130.01; 131.03


12-39
 
130.02


12-40
 
130.02


12-41
 
130.02


12-42
 
130.03


12-43
 
130.03


12-45
 
131.04


12-46
 
131.05


13-1
 
34.01


13-2
 
34.02


14-1
 
32.025


14-2
 
32.026


14-3
 
32.027


14-4
 
32.028


14-5
 
32.029


14-6
 
32.030


14-7
 
32.031


15-1
 
90.01


15-2
 
90.02


15-3
 
90.03


15-4
 
90.04


15-5
 
90.05


15-6
 
90.05


15-7
 
90.05


15-8
 
90.06


15-9
 
90.20


15-10
 
90.20


15-11
 
90.21


15-12
 
90.22


15-13
 
90.22


15-14
 
90.35


15-15
 
90.36


15-16
 
90.37


15-17
 
90.38


15-18
 
90.39


16-1
 
50.001


16-2
 
50.002


16-3
 
50.003


16-4
 
50.004


16-5
 
50.005


16-6
 
50.015


16-7
 
50.016


16-8
 
50.017


16-9
 
50.018


16-10
 
50.030


16-11
 
50.031


16-12
 
50.032


16-13
 
50.033


16-14
 
50.034


16-15
 
50.034


16-16
 
50.035


16-17
 
50.036


16-18
 
50.037


16-19
 
50.038


 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




-
 
8-6-2012
 
TSO II


2012-19
 
10-1-2012
 
TSO I


-
 
11-5-2012
 
TSO I


-
 
2-4-2013
 
TSO II


2013-05
 
4-8-2013
 
TSO I


2013-08
 
5-6-2013
 
TSO I


2013-11
 
6-3-2013
 
TSO II


2013-16
 
9-9-2013
 
TSO I


-
 
3-3-2014
 
TSO II


2014-10
 
3-3-2014
 
TSO I


2014-12
 
4-7-2014
 
TSO I


2014-14
 
4-7-2014
 
TSO I


2014-18
 
7-7-2014
 
TSO I


2014-19
 
8-4-2014
 
TSO I


2014-24
 
9-8-2014
 
TSO I


2014-30
 
12-1-2014
 
TSO II


2015-03
 
2-2-2015
 
TSO I


2015-07
 
4-13-2015
 
TSO I


2015-12
 
7-6-2015
 
TSO I


2015-13
 
7-6-2015
 
TSO I


2015-19
 
9-14-2015
 
TSO I


2016-14
 
8-1-2016
 
TSO I


2017-03
 
2-6-2017
 
TSO I


2017-14
 
4-3-2017
 
TSO I


2017-15
 
4-3-2017
 
TSO I


2017-16
 
4-3-2017
 
TSO I


2017-17
 
4-3-2017
 
TSO I


2017-25
 
8-7-2017
 
TSO I


2017-26
 
8-7-2017
 
TSO I


2017-27
 
8-7-2017
 
TSO I


2017-28
 
8-7-2017
 
TSO I


2017-32
 
9-11-2017
 
TSO I


2017-37
 
10-2-2017
 
32.062


2017-38
 
11-6-2017
 
30.02


2017-41
 
11-6-2017
 
TSO I


2018-03
 
2-5-2018
 
TSO I


2018-09
 
3-5-2018
 
TSO I


2018-14
 
4-9-2018
 
TSO I


2018-15
 
4-9-2018
 
TSO I


2018-16
 
4-9-2018
 
TSO I


2018-20
 
5-7-2018
 
TSO I


2018-23
 
8-23-2018
 
TSO I


2018-30
 
9-10-2018
 
TSO I


2018-34
 
11-5-2018
 
TSO I


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




–
 
- -
 
32.080–32.092; 50.080–50.086; 51.01–51.23; 51.99; 51.10–51.23;
94.01–94.15; 95.01–95.05; 115.001–115.003; 115.015–115.022;
115.035–115.038; 115.050–115.063; 115.075–115.086; 115.100–115.103;
115.115–115.118; 115.130; 115.131; 115.145; 115.146; 115.160–115.166; Ch.
115, App. A; 154.01–154.16; 154.30–154.38; 154.98


–
 
2-25-1974
 
TSO II


–
 
10-7-1974
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I; Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
2-2-1976
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
9-5-1977
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


–
 
12-12-1977
 
117.01–117.08; 117.99


–
 
11-6-1978
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
3-5-1979
 
150.03


–
 
6-4-1979
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
11-5-1979
 
50.050–50.054


–
 
3-3-1980
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
12-1-1980
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
12-30-1980
 
70.10


–
 
2-2-1981
 
TSO II


–
 
4-6-1981
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
8-3-1981
 
150.10


–
 
8-13-1981
 
Ch. 74, Sch. III


–
 
10-20-1981
 
TSO I


–
 
11-2-1981
 
TSO I


–
 
4-5-1982
 
TSO I


–
 
9-13-1982
 
TSO I


–
 
3-5-1984
 
150.20


–
 
9-4-1984
 
50.037


–
 
12-3-1984
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


–
 
1-7-1985
 
30.08


–
 
6-3-1985
 
73.99


–
 
6-18-1985
 
30.08


–
 
5-6-1986
 
34.03


–
 
7-1-1987
 
50.033


–
 
1-4-1988
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


–
 
9-6-1988
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
10-3-1988
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


–
 
2-6-1989
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
4-3-1989
 
50.001


–
 
4-20-1989
 
91.25; TSO II


–
 
5-1-1989
 
112.02; Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
7-27-1989
 
32.025


–
 
8-7-1989
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
8-6-1990
 
TSO I


–
 
7-16-1991
 
51.09


–
 
9-3-1991
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


–
 
12-2-1991
 
93.24


–
 
2-3-1992
 
116.01–116.05


–
 
9-1-1992
 
51.09


–
 
11-30-1992
 
93.03; 93.99


–
 
6-7-1993
 
51.21; TSO I


–
 
11-1-1993
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


–
 
4-5-1994
 
91.01


–
 
9-6-1994
 
73.05; 73.99


–
 
1-3-1995
 
TSO I


–
 
2-6-1995
 
90.06; Ch. 74, Sch. II


–
 
4-4-1995
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
6-5-1995
 
TSO II


–
 
8-7-1995
 
Ch. 74, Sch. II


–
 
2-2-1996
 
132.07


–
 
6-3-1996
 
32.045–32.048


–
 
12-2-1996
 
132.07; TSO I


–
 
2-2-1998
 
31.18


–
 
7-6-1998
 
Ch. 74, Sch. I


–
 
12-7-1998
 
93.25; Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
6-5-2000
 
114.01–114.09


–
 
3-4-2002
 
32.060–32.067


–
 
6-3-2002
 
52.01–52.08


–
 
3-3-2003
 
113.01


–
 
2-2-2004
 
TSO I


–
 
4-5-2004
 
TSO I


–
 
10-3-2005
 
97.01–97.14; 97.99


–
 
4-4-2006
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


–
 
6-5-2006
 
Charter, § 2


–
 
7-10-2006
 
118.01 - 118.15, 118.99


–
 
9-11-2006
 
96.01 - 96.21; 96.99


-
 
12-11-2006
 
111.05


-
 
7-9-2007
 
34.04


-
 
5-5-2008
 
132.02


2009-01
 
1-12-2009
 
111.06, 111.07


2009-02
 
1-12-2009
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2010-1
 
3-1-2010
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2012-1
 
4-2-2012
 
110.01, 110.02, 110.15 - 110.22, 110.35 - 110.57


2012-2
 
8-6-2012
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I and II


2012-3
 
12-3-2012
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I and II


-
 
12-3-2012
 
53.01 - 53.12


2013-01
 
9-9-2013
 
132.12


2013-02
 
9-9-2013
 
10.99


2014-02
 
4-7-2014
 
155.01 - 155.29


2014-03
 
4-7-2014
 
94.01 - 94.16


2014-04
 
4-7-2014
 
32.001


2014-05
 
6-2-2014
 
Ch. 75, Sch. I


2017-01
 
2-6-2017
 
TSO I


2018-12
 
8-6-2018
 
90.07


2018-13
 
9-10-2018
 
51.01-51.23, 51.99


 
 
 
 
 




 


Wilkesboro, NC Zoning Code


WILKESBORO,NORTH CAROLINA
ZONING CODE




2018 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2018-14, passed 9-10-2018




Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com



CHAPTER 156:  ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   156.001   Purpose and intent



   156.002   Authority



   156.003   Jurisdiction and applicability



   156.004   Severability



   156.005   Conflicting provisions



   156.006   Repeal of existing zoning ordinance



   156.007   Continued violations



   156.008   Interpretation and word usage



   156.009   Effective date



Administration



   156.020   Zoning Enforcement Officer



   156.021   Zoning compliance permit required



   156.022   Enforcement



   156.023   Site plan approval - reserved



   156.024   Legal nonconformities



   156.025   Vested rights



   156.026   Board of Adjustment



Amendments



   156.040   General



   156.041   Planning Board and Town Board



   156.042   Public hearing and notice requirements



   156.043   Protest petitions



   156.044   Withdrawal of application



   156.045   Effect of denial on subsequent petitions



   156.046   Minor changes



Zoning Districts



   156.060   Official Zoning Map



   156.061   Zoning districts - intent and dimensional requirements



   156.062   Permitted uses



   156.063   Conditional uses



   156.064   Special uses



General Development Standards



   156.075   Principal structures



   156.076   Minimum frontage



   156.077   Exceptions to height and setback regulations



   156.078   Visibility at intersections



   156.079   Off-street parking



   156.080   Off-street loading space



   156.081   Signs



   156.082   Addressing - reserved



   156.083   Access - Reserved



   156.084   Exterior lighting - reserved



   156.085   Buffering and screening



   156.086   Landscaping - reserved



   156.087   Utilities - reserved



Development Standards for Specific Uses



   156.100   Accessory uses and structures



   156.101   Adult uses



   156.102   Bed and breakfasts - reserved



   156.103   Cemeteries - reserved



   156.104   Child day care/nursery school facilities



   156.105   Accessory dwelling units



   156.106   Extraction of earth products - reserved



   156.107   Family care home



   156.108   Junkyards, motor vehicle graveyards, and salvage yards



   156.109   Electronic gaming operations



   156.110   Kennels - reserved



   156.111   Manufactured homes on individual lots



   156.112   Manufactured home parks



   156.113   Mini-storage units - reserved



   156.114   Modular units - reserved



   156.115   Motor vehicle body shop - reserved



   156.116   Multi-family dwellings - reserved



   156.117   Precious metals dealer - reserved



   156.118   Public utilities



   156.119   Service stations with fuel sales



   156.120   Wireless Telecommunications Facilities or Complexes



   156.121   Helicopter landing pads



   156.122   Single and multi-tenant retail buildings greater than
30,000 square feet



   156.123   Planned Unit Development



   156.124   RV park and campground standards



Overlay Districts



   156.135   Watershed Protection Overlay



   156.136   Flood Damage Prevention Overlay



   156.137   Airport Overlay



   156.138   Gateway Overlay - Reserved



   156.139   US Hwy 421 Overlay - Reserved



Historic Overlay Districts/Historic Landmarks



   156.150   Purpose



   156.151   Establishment and jurisdiction of Historic Preservation
Commission



   156.152   Membership and organization



   156.153   Commission powers



   156.154   Establishment and amendment procedure - historic districts



   156.155   Historic District Overlay regulations



   156.156   Designation of historic landmarks



   156.157   Certificates of appropriateness



   156.158   Standards for design review



   156.159   Conditions for certain approvals



Definitions



   156.170   Definitions



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.001  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   These regulations are necessary and are adopted in order to promote the
public health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort, amenities, prosperity,
and general welfare of persons within the planning jurisdiction of the Town
of Wilkesboro.  Specifically, the regulations are intended to:



   (A)   Implement relevant land-use plans;



   (B)   Preserve and protect property values;



   (C)   Facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of
transportation, water, sewerage, parks, schools, and other public
requirements;



   (D)   Preserve and protect land, air, and water resources; and



   (E)   Ensure protection from fire, flood, and other dangers.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.002  AUTHORITY.



   These regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority contained in
Article 19 of Chapter 160A, "Planning and Regulation of Development," of the
North Carolina General Statutes.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.003  JURISDICTION AND APPLICABILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all portions of
the Town of Wilkesboro and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined in an
ordinance adopted and recorded in the Wilkes County Register of Deeds.



   (B)   These regulations are applicable to all development, public
and private, throughout said jurisdiction and no land or structures shall be
used or occupied, and no excavation, removal of soil, clearing of a site, or
placing of fill shall take place on lands contemplated for development, and
no structure, or part thereof, shall be constructed, altered, renovated, or
moved, except in compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Bona fide farms not exempt.  Bona fide farms, as defined in
the North Carolina General Statutes and § 156.170 of this chapter, are not
exempt from the provisions of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.004  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, provision, or standard of this chapter is found by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision of the court
shall not affect the validity of any other section, provision, or standard of
these regulations except that which is in question.  The other portions of
these regulations not affected by the decision of the court shall remain in
full force and effect.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.005  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   (A)   If the provisions of this chapter are in conflict with those
of the federal or state governments, or are inconsistent with other
regulations of the town, the more restrictive will control, to the extent
permitted by law.



   (B)   This chapter is not intended to abrogate, annul, or otherwise
interfere with any easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal
relationship otherwise in conformance with it.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.006  REPEAL OF EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCE.



   The existing regulations, entitled Town of Wilkesboro Zoning Ordinance,
are hereby repealed.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.007  CONTINUED VIOLATIONS.



   Any violation of the previous zoning ordinance shall continue to be a
violation under this chapter, unless the circumstances that constituted a
violation under the previous ordinance do not constitute a violation under
this chapter, in which case enforcement action shall cease, except to the
extent of collecting penalties assessed before the effective date of this
chapter.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.008  INTERPRETATION AND WORD USAGE.



   (A)   Meaning and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and
expressions contained in this chapter shall be construed according to this
chapter's stated purpose and intent.



   (B)   Authority for interpretation. The Zoning Enforcement Officer
is responsible for interpreting the text of this chapter in accordance with
the standards set forth in this section and applicable ordinance standards
and requirements.  Interpretations of the Zoning Enforcement Officer may be
appealed to the Board of Adjustment.



   (C)   Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears
requiring an official or an employee of the town to perform an act or duty,
that provision shall be construed as authorizing the official to delegate the
responsibility to subordinates, unless the terms of the provision specify
otherwise.



   (D)   Computation of time. References to days are calendar days
unless otherwise specified.



   (E)   Lists and examples. Unless otherwise specifically indicated,
lists of items or examples that use the terms "such as," "including," or
similar language are intended to provide examples only and should not be
construed as exhaustive lists of all possibilities.



   (F)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall," "will,"
and "must" are mandatory.  The words "may" and "should" are advisory and
discretionary.



   (G)   Conjunctions. Conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:
"and" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or events
apply, while "or" indicates that one or more of the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events apply.



   (H)   Tenses. Words used in one tense (present, past, future)
include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.009  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   This chapter will be effective February 1, 2005.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 156.020  ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   Establishment.  The provisions of this chapter shall be
administered by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, who shall be appointed by the
Town Board.



   (B)   Duties. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the power to
grant zoning compliance permits, to make inspections of buildings or
premises, revoke permits, and to perform other procedures necessary to carry
out the enforcement of this chapter.  In connection with the enforcement of
this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall make all necessary determinations and
interpretations as required by this chapter.  Persons aggrieved by a
decision or a determination made by the Zoning Officer may appeal that action
to the Board of Adjustment.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.021  ZONING COMPLIANCE PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to begin construction, place, or move any
structure (including signs) or to begin to grade or excavate for immediate
construction until the Zoning Officer has issued for such work a zoning
compliance permit which includes a determination that the site plan, building
specifications, and the intended use of such structure conform in all
respects to the provisions of this chapter.  Site plans shall be submitted
in accordance with § 156.023 (reserved for future use) of this chapter.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to change the type of use or type of
occupancy of any building, or to extend any use of any lot on which there is
a non-conforming use, until the Zoning Officer has issued for such intended
use a zoning compliance permit, including a determination that the proposed
use does, in all respects, conform to the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   A zoning compliance permit may be required for, but does not
satisfy the need for, the issuance of a building permit when the proposed
work requires it.  Applicants are responsible for obtaining any additional
permits from other agencies as required by applicable laws.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.022  ENFORCEMENT.



   The following procedures and penalties are pursuant to G.S. 14-4 and
Part II, Chapter 1, Section 1-6 of the Town of Wilkesboro Code of Ordinances:



   (A)   General enforcement procedures.



      (1)   Investigation. Upon the receipt of complaints or other
information suggesting a violation of this chapter, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall investigate the allegations and determine whether a violation
exists.



      (2)   Warning of violation. Upon determination of a violation,
the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall cause a warning citation to be issued to
the violator.  Such warning citation shall set out the nature of the
violation, the section violated, the date of the violation, and shall contain
an order to immediately cease the violation.  The warning citation shall
specify that failure to correct the violation or to appeal the decision to
the Board of Adjustment, within a specified time will incur a civil penalty,
together with costs and attorney fees.



      (3)   Appeal to Board of Adjustment. An appeal from a warning
citation shall be taken within ten days from the date of said warning
citation to the Board of Adjustment.  If a person who receives a warning
citation does not appeal the determination within the time established in
this section, then that person may not later appeal to the Board of
Adjustment the subsequent imposition of any remedy or penalty provided in
this subchapter.



      (4)   Extension of time to correct violation. Where the Zoning
Enforcement Officer determines that the period of time stated in the original
warning citation is not sufficient for abatement based upon the work required
or consent agreement, the enforcement official may amend the warning citation
to provide for additional time, up to but not exceeding 30 days. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer may grant an extension only by written notice of
extension.



      (5)   Enforcement upon failure to correct violation. Upon
failure of the violator to obey the warning citation,  a civil citation
shall be issued by the enforcement official of the Town of Wilkesboro and
either served directly on the violator, his duly designated agent, or
registered agent if a corporation, either in person or posted in the United
States mail service by first class mail addressed to the last known address
of the violator as contained in the records of Wilkes County or obtained from
the violator at the time of issuance of the warning citation.  The violator
shall be deemed to have been served upon the mailing of said citation.  The
citation shall direct the violator to appear before the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, or designee, within 15 days of the date of the citation, or
alternatively to pay the citation by mail.  The violation for which the
citation is issued must have been corrected by the time the citation is paid;
otherwise further citations shall be issued. 



      (6)   Emergency enforcement without notice. If delay in
correcting a violation would seriously threaten the effective enforcement of
this chapter or pose an immediate danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare, then the Zoning Enforcement Officer may order the immediate
cessation of a violation. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may seek immediate
enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or penalty
authorized by this subchapter.



   (B)   Repeat offender.



      (1)   First offense. Any violation occurring once within a
36-month period shall be considered a first offense. A notice of violation
shall be issued by the Administrator or his/her designee to the violator.
Such notice shall set out the nature of the violation, the section violated,
and the date of the violation. The notice of violation shall provide for a
reasonable period of time by which the violation must be abated or otherwise
brought into compliance with this chapter. The notice shall specify that a
second citation shall incur a civil penalty, together with costs and attorney
fees. An appeal of the Administrator's decision shall be allowed. Upon the
expiration of the deadline stated in the notice of violation, the violator
shall be subject to a civil penalty of $50 for each day that the violation
remains on the property without further notice. Should a violation continue
to exist and/or the violator fails to pay the penalties, the Town shall seek
to recover the penalty together with all costs by filing a civil action in
the General Court of Justice in the nature of a suit to collect a debt. The
collection of a penalty pursuant hereto shall not foreclose further
proceedings for penalties coming due subsequent to the date of the filing of
a prior proceeding. The provisions of this section may also be enforced
through any other appropriate remedies as prescribed in this subchapter.



      (2)   Repeat offense. Any violation reoccurring on the same
property by the same violator more than once within a 36-month period shall
be considered a repeat offense provided the reoccurrence is a violation of
the same subchapter of this chapter. A notice of violation shall be issued by
the Administrator or his/her designee and shall have an immediate civil
penalty of $300. No warning period shall be granted since this provision
applies only to violations that occur more than once in a 36-month period and
proper notice was given for the initial violation. For each day the repeat
violation remains, the violator shall be subject to a civil penalty of $300.
Should a violation continue to exist and/or the violator fails to pay the
penalties, the town shall seek to recover the penalty together with all costs
by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice in the nature of a
suit to collect a debt. Procedures for issuance, service, and collection of
non-paid penalties shall be as set forth in this subchapter. The collection
of a penalty pursuant hereto shall not foreclose further proceedings for
penalties coming due subsequent to the date of the filing of a prior
proceeding. The provisions of this section may also be enforced through any
other appropriate remedies as prescribed in this subchapter.



      (3)   Other powers. In addition to the enforcement powers
specified in this section, the Town Council may exercise any and all
enforcement powers granted by North Carolina law.



      (4)   Remedies cumulative. The remedies and enforcement powers
established in this subchapter shall be cumulative, and the town may exercise
them in any order.



   (C)   Remedies and penalties. The town may use any combination of
the following actions and penalties to prevent, correct, stop, abate, or
penalize a violation of this chapter:



      (1)   Civil penalties. Violations of any town ordinance shall
constitute either a misdemeanor or, at the election of the town, shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty upon the issuance of a citation for
said violation as hereinafter provided.  The civil penalty, if not paid to
the Town of Wilkesboro within 15 days of the issuance of a citation, may be
recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt.  Unless
otherwise provided by a specific provision of any town ordinance, said civil
penalties shall be in the amount of $50 for each violation and each day any
single violation continues shall be a separate violation.



      (2)   Criminal penalties. Violation of this chapter shall
constitute a misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine of up to $500, and
imprisonment of up to 30 days, or both.  Notwithstanding the provisions of
this subchapter related to warnings, notices, and time periods, any crime for
the purposes of a criminal penalty occurs and accrues at the time a person
violates this chapter, whether or not a warning or notice is given. Each day
that any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense for the
purpose of assessing criminal penalties.



      (3)   Injunction and abatement order. In addition to the
penalties set out above, this chapter may be enforced by injunction and order
of abatement by the General Court of Justice.  When violations occur, the
town may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice
for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and/or order of abatement
commanding the defendant to correct the violation. The action shall be
governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings,
including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.



      (4)   Permit revocation. If a person fails to comply with the
terms and conditions of a permit or development approval granted under this
chapter, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may revoke the permit or development
approval.



      (5)   Disapproval of subsequent permits and development
approvals. As long as a violation of this chapter continues and remains
uncorrected, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may withhold, and the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and other town boards may disapprove, any request for
permit or development approval or authorization provided for by this chapter
for the land on which the violation occurs.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.023  SITE PLAN APPROVAL - RESERVED.



§ 156.024  LEGAL NONCONFORMITIES.



   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section is to regulate and limit
the continued existence of nonconforming uses, nonconforming lots, and
nonconforming structures and like improvements.  It is the intent of this
section to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed,
but not to encourage their survival except under the limited circumstances
established in this section.



   (B)   Establishment.



      (1)   A legal nonconformity (hereafter referred to as
"nonconformity") is a use, lot, structure or other like improvement that
complied with all applicable requirements when it was created, but which does
not comply with subsequent amendments to these requirements.



      (2)   The burden of establishing that a nonconformity is a
legal nonconformity shall be solely upon the owner.



   (C)   Nonconforming uses.



      (1)   Continuation.



         (a)   A nonconforming use may not be enlarged, extended,
altered, or replaced, unless the change is to a use permitted in the district
in which located, except as provided in (b) below;



         (b)   A non-conforming use may be extended through
portions of a building manifestly arranged or intended for such use, but not
otherwise, and shall not extend to occupy land outside such building, or any
additional building not used for such non-conforming use at the time that
non-conforming status was established;



         (c)   Normal maintenance or repair of a structure
housing a nonconforming use may be performed, provided that the cubic content
of the structure shall not be increased.



      (2)   Discontinuance.



         (a)   If a nonconforming use is abandoned, ceases, or is
discontinued for any reason for a period of more than 180 consecutive days,
the use shall be considered abandoned.  Once abandoned, the use's legal
nonconforming status shall be lost and re-establishment of the use shall be
prohibited.  Any subsequent use of the property shall comply with the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.



         (b)   Evidence of abandonment shall include but not be
limited to: cessation or discontinuance of the particular use, disconnection
of water service to the property, disconnection of electric service to the
property, failure to pay property taxes, or failure to maintain the property.



         (c)   Any conforming structure housing a nonconforming
use that is damaged by any means to an extent exceeding 60 percent shall
comply with the use standards of this chapter when it is re-constructed. 
Any conforming structure housing a nonconforming use that is damaged by any
means to a lesser extent may continue the nonconforming use if it is
reconstructed and used as before within two years of the damage.



   (D)   Nonconforming lots.



      (1)   Nonconforming lots, as defined above, may be built upon
if compliance is achieved with regard to setback dimensions and other
requirements, except lot area or width.



      (2)   Nothing contained herein exempts a lot from meeting the
applicable County Board of Health regulations regarding public facilities
such as water and sewerage.



   (E)   Nonconforming structures.



      (1)   Normal maintenance and repair is permitted.



      (2)   Structural changes shall be permitted if the change does
not increase the extent of nonconformity and complies with other applicable
requirements of this chapter.



      (3)   Any nonconforming structure which has been damaged to an
extent exceeding 60% of its fair market value shall comply with the
dimensional and other applicable standards of this chapter when it is
re-constructed.



      (4)   If a nonconforming structure, or portion thereof, or any
structure or portion thereof containing a nonconforming use becomes
physically unsafe or unlawful due to the lack of repairs or maintenance, and
is declared to be an unsafe structure, it shall thereafter be rebuilt and
repaired in conformance with the standards of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.025  VESTED RIGHTS.



   (A)   Definitions.



      (1)   VESTED RIGHT.  A right pursuant to G.S. 160-385.1 to
undertake and complete the development and use of property under the terms of
and conditions of an approved site-specific or phased development plan.



      (2)   SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.  A plan of land
development which has been submitted to the town by a landowner describing
with



reasonable certainty the type and intensity of use for a specific parcel or
parcels of land.  Approval of the following constitutes approval of a
site-specific development plan:



         (a)   A site plan pursuant to § 156.022 of this chapter;



         (b)   A conditional use permit pursuant to § 156.063 of
this chapter;



   (B)   Establishment.



      (1)   A vested right shall be deemed established with respect
to any property upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, of a
site-specific development plan by the Town Board following notice and public
hearing requirements as provided in G.S. 160A-364.  A site specific
development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of approval
by the approving authority or ordinance relating thereto, and only to the
extent of that approval.



      (2)   Neither a variance, a sketch plan nor any other document
that does not describe with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of
use for a specified parcel or parcels of property shall constitute a site
specific development plan.



      (3)   The establishment of a vested right shall not preclude
the application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but
does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or
regulations that are general in nature and are applicable to all property
subject to land-use regulation by the local jurisdiction, including, but not
limited to, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical codes.
Otherwise applicable new or amended regulations shall become effective with
respect to property that is subject to a site specific development plan upon
the expiration or termination of the vested right in accordance with this
section. 



      (4)   A vested right is not a personal right, but shall attach
to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site specific
development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled
to exercise such right while applicable.



   (C)   Duration.



      (1)   A right which has been vested as provided for in this
section shall remain vested for a period of two years.



      (2)   This vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or
modifications to a site specific development plan unless expressly provided
by the approving authority at the time the amendment or modification is
approved.



      (3)   Following approval, or approval with conditions, of a
site specific development plan, nothing in this section shall exempt such a
plan from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the
terms and conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and
approvals are not inconsistent with the original approval.



   (D)   Termination. A right that has been vested as provided in this
section shall terminate upon any of the following:



      (1)   No building permit. Termination of the applicable
vesting period with respect to buildings and uses for which no valid building
permit has been issued or for which a valid building permit has expired;



      (2)   Written consent. Written consent of the affected
landowner;



      (3)   Threat to public health or safety. Findings by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, who must present the findings to the Town Board
for them to adopt by ordinance, that natural or constructed hazards on or in
the immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious
threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to
proceed as contemplated in the site specific development plan;



      (4)   Compensation. Compensation to the affected landowner for
all costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including,
but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all
architectural, planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant's fees
incurred after approval by the local jurisdiction, together with interest
thereon at the legal rate until paid. Compensation shall not include any
diminution in the value of the property which is caused by such action;



      (5)   Misrepresentation. Findings by the Town Board, by
ordinance after notice and a hearing, that the landowner or his
representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material
misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval by the Town Board
of the site specific development plan; or



      (6)   State or federal law. Enactment or promulgation of a
state or federal law or regulation that precludes development as contemplated
in the site specific development plan, in which case the Town Board may
modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or
federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance, after notice
and a hearing.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.026  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.



   (A)   Establishment and membership.



      (1)   Pursuant to G.S. 160A-388, a Board of Adjustment is
hereby established.  Said board shall consist of at least five members, each
to be appointed for three year terms.  At least four members will be
residents of the Town of Wilkesboro and appointed by the Town of Wilkesboro
Board of Commissioners ("Town Board") and the remaining members will be
residents of the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction and will be appointed
by the Wilkes County Board of Commissioners.  Any vacancy in the membership
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial
appointment.



      (2)   One alternate member will be appointed by the Town
Board, who will serve in the absence of a regular member.  The alternate
member will be appointed for a term of three years.  While serving in the
absence of a regular member, the alternate shall have and may exercise all
the powers and duties of a regular member.



      (3)   Members shall serve with such compensation as shall be
determined by the Town Board.  Also, members may be removed by the Board for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office, and such removal
shall be reported at the next meeting of the Town Board and recorded in the
minutes of such meeting.



      (4)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt by-laws and rules of
procedure that shall govern its proceedings.



   (B)   Powers of the Board of Adjustment.



      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order,
requirement, decision, or determination made by any administrative official
charged with the enforcement of this chapter;



      (2)   To hear and decide requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter;



      (3)   To review applications for conditional use permits as
authorized under this chapter;



      (4)   To make interpretations of the Official Zoning Map and
to pass upon disputed questions of lot lines or district boundary lines and
similar questions as arise in the administration of this chapter;



      (5)   To enter, at reasonable times, upon private lands and
make examinations or surveys as necessary for the performance of its official
duties;



      (6)   To request City Council to hold public hearings on
matters within the purview of the Board;



      (7)   To hear and decide any other matter as required by the
provisions of this chapter or the Town of Wilkesboro Code of Ordinances.



   (C)   Appeals of administrative decisions.



      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an
administrative official charged with the enforcement of this chapter.  An
appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved by such decision or by an
officer, department or board of the town. 



      (2)   After notice of appeal, the chairperson of the Board of
Adjustment shall schedule a hearing, which shall be at a regular or special
meeting within 60 days from the filing of such notice of appeal.



      (3)   A notice of hearing that states the time, place,
location of affected property, and the general issue involved, shall be given
in at least two of the following ways:



         (a)   An advertisement in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Wilkesboro at least five days before the date of
the hearing;



         (b)   Mailed notice to the parties to the action
appealed from, and to such other persons as the Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall direct, at least five days before the hearing;



         (c)   Posting of signs in the neighborhood of the
affected property.



      (4)   An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Enforcement Officer certifies to
the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that
because of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril
to life or property or that because the violation charged is transitory in
nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of this chapter. 
In such case proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, on
notice to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and on due cause shown.



   (D)   Conditional use permits (See § 156.063).



   (E)   Variances.



      (1)   A variance from the literal requirements of this chapter
may be granted by the Board of Adjustment if it determines, pursuant to
findings of fact, that:



         (a)   strict enforcement of the regulations would result
in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships to the applicant for the
variance;



         (b)   the variance is in harmony with general purpose
and intent of the ordinance and preserves its spirit; and



         (c)   in granting the variance the public safety and
welfare have been secured and substantial justice has been done.



      (2)   An application and required submittals shall be done in
accordance with forms available from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



      (3)   After receipt of the required application materials, the
chairperson of the Board of Adjustment shall schedule a hearing, which shall
be at a regular or special meeting within 60 days from the filing of an
application.



      (4)   Written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed at
least five days prior to the date of the public hearing to the applicant and
the owners of any property adjoining the property for which the variance is
applied for.



   (F)   Majority vote required. The concurring vote of four-fifths
(4/5) of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of any administrative official
charged with the enforcement of this chapter, or to decide in favor of the
applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under any ordinance,
or to grant a variance from the provisions of this chapter.



   (G)   Judicial review. Every decision of the Board of Adjustment may
be appealed to the Superior Court by any aggrieved party.  Such appeal shall
be in the nature of certiorari and must be filed within 30 days after the
filing of the decision in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or
after a written a copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has
filed a written request for such copy with the chairman of the Board at the
time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later. The copy of the decision
of the Board may be delivered to aggrieved parties either by personal service
or by registered mail or certified mail return receipt requested.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



AMENDMENTS



§ 156.040  GENERAL.



   (A)   The Town Board may adopt an ordinance amending the text of
this chapter or amending the Official Zoning Map upon compliance with the
provisions of this section.



   (B)   A petition for amendment to the text of this chapter or to the
Official Zoning Map may be proposed by the Town Board, the Planning Board,
the Board of Adjustment, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or other interested
person or agency.  Forms are available from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.041  PLANNING BOARD AND TOWN BOARD.



   (A)   Referral.  The Zoning Officer shall submit the amendment
application and his/her review to the Planning Board no later than the first
regular meeting after submittal to the Zoning Enforcement Officer;



   (B)   Recommendation.  Within a maximum of 45 days after the
regular meeting at which a review of the application is scheduled, the
Planning Board shall submit a recommendation to the Town Board concerning the
disposition of the application.  Failure of the Planning Board to submit a
recommendation within the required time shall be considered a favorable
recommendation, without conditions;



   (C)   Public hearing.  Following receipt of a recommendation from
the Planning Board, the Town Board must hold a public hearing before formally
acting on the proposed amendment. 



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.042  PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Text amendment. The following requirements are established
pursuant to G.S. 160A-364:



      (1)   A notice of the public hearing shall be given once a
week for two successive calendar weeks in a paper of general circulation in
the area, and;



      (2)   The notice shall be published the first time not less
than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date fixed for the hearing;



      (3)   In computing such period, the day of publication is not
to be included, but the day of the hearing shall be included.



   (B)   Zoning Map amendment (rezoning).  The following requirements
are established pursuant to G.S. 160A-384:



      (1)   A notice of the public hearing shall be sent by
first-class mail to the owner of the parcel of land to be rezoned and all of
the abutting land owners at the address listed for the owners on the most
recent county tax listing;



      (2)   This notice must be deposited in the mail at least ten,
but not more than 25 days prior to the date of the public hearing;



      (3)   In computing such period, the day of publication is not
to be included, but the day of the hearing shall be included.



   (C)   Alternate notice procedure (rezoning only).  The following
procedure, pursuant to G.S. 160A-384, may be used in lieu of the mailed
notice above if the zoning map amendment affects more than 50 properties that
are owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners:



      (1)   An advertisement of the public hearing that shows the
boundaries of the area affected by the proposed zoning map amendment and the
nature of the proposed change shall be published once a week for four
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the area; 



      (2)   The final two advertisements shall comply with the
provisions of G.S. 160A-364;



      (3)   The advertisement shall not be less than one-half of a
newspaper page in size;



      (4)   The advertisement shall only be effective for property
owners who reside within the area of general circulation of the newspaper
that publishes the notice and property owners who reside outside of the
newspaper circulation area shall be notified by first class mail at the
address listed for the owner on the most recent county tax listing.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.043  PROTEST PETITIONS.



   (A)   In case of a protest against any amendment or change of this
chapter signed by the owners of 20% or more, either of the area of the lots
included in such proposed change; or of those immediately adjacent thereto,
either in the rear thereof or on either side thereof, extending 100 feet
there from; or of those directly opposite thereto extending 100 feet from the
street frontage of such opposite lots; such amendment shall not become
effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of all members of
the Town Board.



   (B)   No protest against any change or amendment of this chapter
shall be valid or effective under the provisions of the foregoing paragraph
unless such protest is in the form of a written petition actually bearing the
signatures of the requisite number of property owners and stating that the
signers do protest the proposed change or amendment, and unless such protest
shall have been received by the Town Board in sufficient time to allow at
least two normal workdays prior to the date established for a public hearing
on the proposed change or amendment to determine the sufficiency and accuracy
of the petition. Such petition shall be accompanied by a map or sketch
clearly showing the property of the petitioners in such detail as to show
that the ownership requirements of the foregoing paragraph are met, which
would compel a three-fourths (3/4) favorable vote by the Town Board.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.044  WITHDRAWAL OF APPLICATION.



   A zoning petition may not be withdrawn by the applicant after
publication, or scheduled publication which cannot be cancelled, of notice of
public hearing except by permission of the Town Board before which the
petition is pending for action or consideration. The filing fees are not
refundable, except that the Zoning Enforcement Officer may authorize refund
of the fees if no notice expenses related to the petition have been incurred.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.045  EFFECT OF DENIAL ON SUBSEQUENT PETITIONS.



   (A)   When the Town Board shall have acted upon an application or
the application shall have been withdrawn after the first notice of the
public hearing thereon, the Board of Commissioner shall not receive another
application for the same or similar text or map amendment, affecting the same
property or a portion of it, until the expiration of a one year period,
extending from the date of action or withdrawal, as appropriate.



   (B)   The Town Board may on its own motion, however, initiate an
amendment of this nature prior to the expiration of the one year period.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.046  MINOR CHANGES.



   Typographical errors, spelling changes, numerical reference errors,
errors in section or page numbering, or other purely non-substantive
editorial changes may be corrected by the Zoning Officer without formal
adoption by the Town Board provided that the changes necessary to correct
such errors do not change the meaning of the ordinance. Any correction made
pursuant to this section must be documented to the Town Board.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



ZONING DISTRICTS



§ 156.060  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The Official Zoning Map designates the location and boundaries
of the various zone districts established in this chapter within the town and
its ETJ (hereinafter "town"), and is incorporated herein by reference. The
Official Zoning Map shall be kept on file in the office of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer and is available for public inspection during normal
business hours.



   (B)   Zone district boundaries. Unless otherwise specified, zone
district boundaries are lot lines or the centerline of streets, alleys,
railroad rights-of-way, or such lines extended. Where a zone district
boundary divides a land parcel under a single ownership into two districts,
then the entire parcel shall be zoned for the less restrictive use by the
adjustment of the boundaries, provided that the boundary adjustment is a
distance of less than 100 feet.



   (C)   Changes to Official Zone District Map. Changes made in zone
district boundaries or other matters portrayed on the Official Zoning Map
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.  Changes
shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has
been approved by the Town Board with an entry on the Official Zoning Map.



   (D)   Mapping disputes. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have
the authority to interpret the Official Zone District Map and determine where
the boundaries of the different zone districts fall, if in dispute.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.061  ZONING DISTRICTS - INTENT AND DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   R-20A - Residential/Agricultural.



      (1)   Intent. The purpose of the R-20A District is to provide
for development compatible with bona-fide agricultural uses and rural
residential uses, such as manufactured housing.



      (2)   Application criteria. These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   In the town's extraterritorial jurisdiction; and



         (b)   Adjacent to areas zoned R-20, B-3, M-2.



      (3)   General dimensional requirements. There are two lot size
requirements for the district depending on whether a lot is served by
centralized water or sewer.



 

Minimum Lot Area
(sq. ft.) 20,000
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Maximum Density (du/acre)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


20,000 (without centralized water or sewer)
 
100
 
2.18
 
40
 
15
 
25

[see § 156.100(A)]
 
30

[see § 156.100(A)]
 
35


12,000 (with either centralized water or sewer)
 
90
 
3.63
 
35
 
10
 
20

[see § 156.100(A)]
 
25

[see § 156.100(A)]
 
35



 



   (B)   R-20 - Suburban Residential.



      (1)   Intent.  The purpose of the Suburban Residential
District is to provide areas suitable for low- to moderate-density
residential development and supporting public, institutional, and other
compatible uses that are designed, constructed, and maintained to avoid
detracting from a healthy and aesthetically-pleasing residential
environment.  This district is generally designed to encourage development
of single-family detached residences.



      (2)   Application criteria.  These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   Adjacent to areas zoned R-20A, R-8, B-2, B-3, M-2,
PUD, or areas laying just outside of the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
town;



         (b)   Neither centralized water nor sewer exists at the
site;



         (c)   Either centralized water or sewer exists at the
site, but not both.



      (3)   General dimensional requirements.  There are two lot
size requirements for the district depending on whether a lot is served by
centralized water or sewer. 



 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 20,000
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Maximum Density (du/acre)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


20,000 (without centralized water or sewer)
 
100
 
2.18
 
40
 
15
 
25

[see § 156.100(A)]
 
30

[see § 156.100(A)]
 
35


12,000 (with either centralized water or sewer)
 
90
 
3.63
 
35
 
10
 
20

[see § 156.100(A)]
 
25

[see § 156.100(A)]
 
35



 



   (C)   R-8 - Single-Family Residential.



      (1)   Intent. The purpose of the Single-Family Residential
District is to provide areas suitable for moderate-density residential
development and supporting public, institutional, and other compatible uses
that are designed, constructed, and maintained to avoid detracting from a
healthy and aesthetically-pleasing residential environment.  This district
will be served by centralized water and sewer facilities.



      (2)   Application criteria.  These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   Adjacent to areas zoned R-20, R-6, B-3, B-1, or
PUD;



         (b)   Centralized water and sewer exists at the site, or
are to be installed as part of the development process;



         (c)   There is direct vehicular access to a local or
collector street.



      (3)   General dimensional requirements.



 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 8,000
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Maximum Density (du/acre)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


8,000
 
70
 
5.44
 
35
 
10
 
20

[see § 156.100(B)]
 
25

[see § 156.100(B)]
 
35



 



   (D)   R-6 - General Residential.



      (1)   Intent.  The purpose of the General Residential
District is to provide areas for higher-density single-family residential,
two-family residential, multi-family residential, and other compatible uses
that are designed, constructed, and maintained to avoid detracting from a
healthy and aesthetically-pleasing residential environment.  This district
also serves as a transitional district for areas that may be changing from
single-family to more intense uses such as multi-family or professional uses.
This district will be located in urbanized areas with access to a full range
of urban services.



      (2)   Application criteria.  These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   Adjacent to areas zoned R-8, B-1, B-2, B-3, M-2,
or PUD;



         (b)   Centralized water and sewer exists at the site, or
are to be installed as part of the development process;



         (c)   There is direct vehicular access to a local or
collector street.



      (3)   General dimensional requirements.  There are several
lot size requirements for the district depending on the use.



 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) 6,000 9,000
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Maximum Density (du/acre)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


6,000 - single-family
 


60
 


7.26
 


25
 


8
 
18

[see § 156.100(C)]
 
30

[see § 156.100(C)]
 
35


9,000 - two-family
 
70
 
9.68
 
30
 
10
 
20

[see § 156.100(C)]
 
25

[see § 156.100(C)]
 
35


9,000 - multi-family
 
80
 
10.89
 
35
 
12
 
22

[see § 156.100(C)]
 
30

[see § 156.100(C)]
 
50


6,000 - other uses
 
60
 
---
 
25
 
8
 
18

[see § 156.100(C)]
 
20

[see § 156.100(C)]
 
35



 



   (E)   B-1 - Central Business.



      (1)   Intent.  The purpose of the Central Business District
is to encourage a mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented business district.  The
district is intended to accommodate a wide range of uses including retail,
office, service, and institutional, as well as residential uses on floors
above street level.  Performance standards shall be used to insure the
absence of adverse impacts beyond the zoning district boundaries.



      (2)   Application criteria.  These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   Adjacent to areas zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, or R-6;



         (b)   Centralized water and sewer exists at the site, or
are to be installed as part of the development process;



         (c)   Development is at a high density and pedestrian
facilities already exist or can be reasonably extended.



      (3)   General dimensional requirements.



 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


---
 
---
 
---
 
See § 156.077(C)
 
---
 
---
 
40



 



   (F)   B-2 - General Business.



      (1)   Intent.  The purpose of the General Business District
is to provide suitably situated and sized sites that allow a broad range of
commercial, office, and service uses.  In most cases, this district will be
located along thoroughfares, however, the district is not intended to
encourage strip commercial development.  Performance standards shall be used
to insure the absence of adverse impacts beyond the zoning district boundary.



      (2)   Application criteria.  These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   Adjacent to areas zoned B-1, B-2, B-3, M-1, or M-2;



         (b)   Centralized water and sewer exists at the site, or
are to be installed as part of the development process;



         (c)   Development will have access via an arterial
street.



      (3)   General dimensional requirements.



 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


10,000
 
100
 
30
 
See § 156.077(C)
 
20
 
20
 
50



 



   (G)   B-3 - Limited Business.



      (1)   Intent.  The purpose of the Limited Business district
is to accommodate moderately intense business and institutional uses in
proximity to areas of low intensity use, such as residential neighborhoods. 
This district may also be used in rural areas where urban services are not
provided.  Performance standards shall be used to insure the absence of
adverse impacts beyond the area occupied by the building.



      (2)   Application criteria.  These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   Adjacent to areas zoned R-20, R-6, B-1, B-2, B-3,
M-1, or M-2;



         (b)   Adequate water and sewer facilities exist either
through centralized provision or other means;



         (c)   The site would provide a buffer or step down in
the intensity of land use from a commercial or industrial use to a less
intense use;



      (3)   General dimensional requirements.



 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


10,000
 
75
 
20
 
10
 
20
 
10
 
40



 



   (H)   M-1 - Industrial.



      (1)   Intent.  The purpose of the Industrial District is to
provide locations for enterprises engaged in manufacturing, processing,
creating, repairing, renovating, painting, cleaning, and assembling of goods
or equipment.  This district includes uses that may be offensive due to
odors, dust, fumes, traffic, or vibration.  The operation may involve some
outside activity, such as outdoor storage.  To the extent possible, this
district will be located away from incompatible uses and separated by
features such as roads, natural features, and the like.  Where this is not
possible, performance standards will be used to insure the absence of adverse
impacts on adjoining properties.



      (2)   Application criteria.  These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   Adjacent to areas zoned B-2, M-1, or M-2;



         (b)   Centralized water and sewer exists at the site, or
are to be installed as part of the development process;



         (c)   Development will have access via an arterial
street;



         (d)   Where roads, natural features, and the like
provide a buffer between the district and other incompatible land uses.



      (3)   General dimensional requirements.



 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


40,000
 
150
 
40
 
See § 156.077(C)
 
20
 
30
 
---



 



   (I)   M-2 -  Limited Industrial.



      (1)   Intent.  The purpose of the Limited Industrial District
is to provide suitable locations for enterprises engaged in limited
manufacturing, distribution, wholesaling, warehousing, and related commercial
and service activities.  The operation will minimize outdoor storage or
similar activity that may have adverse impacts outside of the property. 
Performance standards will be used to insure the absence of adverse impacts
on adjoining properties.



      (2)   Application criteria.  These districts will usually be
applied:



         (a)   Adjacent to areas zoned R-6, B-2, B-3, M-1, or M-2;



         (b)   Adequate water and sewer facilities exist either
through centralized provision or other means;



         (c)   Development will have access via an arterial
street.



      (3)   General dimensional requirements.



 

Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.)
 
Minimum Lot Width (ft)
 
Minimum Front Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Side Setback (ft)
 
Minimum Rear Setback (ft)
 
Maximum Building Height (ft)


Interior Lot
 
Corner Lot


20,000
 
100
 
30
 
See § 156.077(C)
 
20
 
20
 
---



 



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.062  PERMITTED USES.



   (A)   Table 156.062 lists uses permitted within each district in
accordance with the following:



      (1)    A "P" indicates a use permitted by right;



      (2)   A "C" indicates a use permitted under certain conditions;



      (3)   A blank cell indicates a use that is not allowed;



      (4)   A notation in the "Standards" column indicates the
cross-reference for additional standards a use must meet.



   (B)   Use interpretation.  If an application is submitted for a use
that is not listed, a Use Interpretation committee shall be authorized to
make a similar use interpretation based on the intent of the district and the
similarity to other uses in the district.  This committee will consist of
the Zoning Enforcement Officer and one member appointed from the Planning
Board.  If an applicant is denied a favorable use interpretation, they may
appeal the decision to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with this
chapter.



Table of Permitted Uses 156.062



 

USE TYPE
 
R20A
 
R20
 
R8
 
R6
 
B1
 
B2
 
B3
 
M1
 
M2
 
Standards




RESIDENTIAL USES


Accessory dwelling units
 

 

 

 
C
 
P
 

 

 

 

 
§ 156.105


Accessory structures, customary
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 
§ 156.100


Boarding or rooming house
 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 



Condominium
 

 

 

 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 



Congregate care facility
 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 



Duplex
 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 



Family care home
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 
§ 156.107


Home occupation, customary
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 



Manufactured and/or mobile home
 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
§ 156.111


Manufactured home park
 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
§ 156.112


Modular home
 
P
 
P
 
C
 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 



Multi-family or apartments
 

 

 

 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 
§ 156.116


Single-family, detached
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 



Townhouse
 

 

 
C
 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 



COMMERCIAL USES


ABC store
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Accessory uses and structures
 
P
 
P
 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
§ 156.100


Adult establishment
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 
§ 156.101


Animal hospital (without open kennels)
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Appliance sales and service
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Bank or financial service
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Bar
 

 

 

 

 
C
 
P
 

 

 

 



Bed and breakfast
 
P
 
P
 
C
 
P
 
C
 

 

 

 

 
§ 156.102


Beauty or barber shop
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Bicycle sales and service
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 
P
 



Boat sales and service
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Building materials, supply and sales
 
C
 
C
 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 



Bus station
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Convenience store without fuel sales
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 
P
 



Convenience store/service station with fuel sales
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
C
 

 
P
 
§ 156.117


Dance studio
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Dry cleaning and laundry
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Drive-thru window
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Electronic gaming operations
 

 

 

 

 

 
C
 

 

 

 



Farm equipment sales and service
 
C
 
C
 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 



Feed and grain stores
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 



Florist
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Grocery store
 

 

 

 

 
C
 
P
 
C
 

 

 



Greenhouse/nursery
 
C
 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Health and fitness center
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 
C
 

 

 



Heavy equipment sales and service
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 



Hotel/motel
 

 

 

 

 
C
 
P
 

 

 

 



Kennel
 
C
 

 

 

 

 
C
 

 

 
C
 



Manufactured home sales
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Massage therapists
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Medical or dental office
 

 

 

 

 
C
 
P
 
C
 

 

 



Medical or dental laboratory
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 



Mini-storage unit
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
C
 
P
 



Motor vehicle, body and paint shop
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 
§ 156.114


Motor vehicle rental and leasing
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Motor vehicle sales and service
 
C
 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Motor vehicle repair (without open storage)
 
C
 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 



Motor vehicle wash or detailing
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Music and art studio
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
C
 

 

 



Nightclub
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Office supplies sales and service
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 



Pawnshop
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 



Personal service
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
C
 

 

 



Professional office
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
C
 

 

 



Restaurant and café
 

 

 

 
C
 
P
 
P
 
C
 

 

 



Restaurant w/ drive-thru
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Retail, General
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 



Retail, single and multi- tenant retail establishments with a gross floor
area equal or greater than 30,000 square feet
 

 

 

 

 

 
S
 
S
 

 

 
Development standards for specific uses § 156.122


Storage services
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Theater, Indoor
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 

 

 

 



PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL USES


Assembly hall/coliseum
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Campground
 
C
 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Cemetery
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 
P
 

 

 

 
§ 156.103


Child day care/nursery school
 
C
 

 

 
P
 
P
 
C
 
P
 

 

 
§ 156.104


Church
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Clubhouse or lodge
 
C
 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



College or university
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 



Community center
 
C
 

 

 
C
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Fire or police station
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 



Funeral home
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Golf Course
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 
P
 

 

 

 



Golf driving range
 
C
 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 

 
P
 



Government offices
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Hospitals
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Library
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Museum/art gallery
 

 

 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Nursing home
 

 

 

 
C
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Park, athletic
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 



Park, community
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 



Schools, primary and secondary
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 

 



Schools, business/ technical/vocational
 
P
 

 

 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 

 
P
 



Telecommunications antenna
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
§ 156.120


Telecommunications tower
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 

 
C
 
C
 
C
 
C
 
§ 156.120


Utilities, public
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
P
 
§ 156.116


INDUSTRIAL USES


Asphalt and concrete plant
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 



Extraction of earth products
 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Correctional facility
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Farm, bona-fide
 
P
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Feed and grain mill
 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 



Fill site
 
C
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
C
 

 



Food or beverage processing
 

 

 

 

 

 
C
 

 
P
 
C
 



Freight terminal
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 

 



Junkyard or salvage yard
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
§ 156.108


Motor vehicle graveyard
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
§ 156.108


Petroleum products, storage and distribution
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 



Publishing and printing establishment
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 



Radio and/or television studio
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 



Warehousing
 

 

 

 

 

 
P
 

 
P
 
P
 





 



(Am. Ord. 2016-01, passed 9-12-2016; Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016; Am. Ord.
2017-02, passed 3-6-2017; Am. Ord. passed 10-2-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-04, passed
4-9-2018)



§ 156.063  CONDITIONAL USES.



   (A)   Intent. Conditional uses, because of their inherent nature,
extent of development, or external effects, require special care in the
control of their location, design and methods of operation, in order to
insure protection of the public health, safety and welfare. It is the intent
of this section to set forth the additional information required for
submittal and consideration of conditional uses and to state the standards by
which each application shall be judged.



   (B)   General standards and findings of fact. The Board of
Adjustment shall not approve any conditional use unless it finds:



      (1)   The use will not materially endanger the public health
and safety, if located where proposed and developed and operated according to
the plan as submitted.



      (2)   The use, which is listed as a conditional use in the
district in which it is proposed to be located, complies with all applicable
regulations and standards, including the provisions of § 156.061, §§
156.075 through 156.087, and §§ 156.100 through 156.123 this chapter.



      (3)   The use will not substantially injure the value of
contiguous property, or the use is a public necessity.



      (4)   The use is in compliance with the general plans for the
physical development of the Town as embodied in these regulations, or portion
thereof, adopted by the Town Board.



   (C)   Procedures for approval of conditional use permits.



      (1)   Application submittal requirements.



         (a)   Applications for approval of a conditional use
permit shall be filed on forms available from the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



         (b)   Applications which are not complete shall be
returned forthwith to the applicant, with a notation of the deficiencies in
the application.



      (2)   Notice of public hearing required for all conditional
use permits.



         (a)   After receipt of the required application
materials, the chairperson of the Board of Adjustment shall schedule a
hearing, which shall be at a regular or special meeting, within 60 days from
the filing of the application.



         (b)   Notice of the public hearing shall be given once a
week for two consecutive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in Wilkes County. The notice shall be published the first time not less than
ten days no more that 25 days before the date fixed or the hearing. In
computing such period, the day of publication is not to be such period, the
day of publication is not to be included but the day of the hearing shall be
included.



         (c)   Written notice shall be sent to all adjacent
property owners not less than ten days before the hearing date. Adjacent
property owners are those whose property lies within 500 feet of the affected
property and whose names and addresses are currently listed in the Wilkes
County tax records.



      (3)   Board of Adjustment action.



         (a)   The Board of Adjustment shall review the record of
the public hearing and shall take action on the application based on findings
of fact as to the determinations required in § 156.063(B).  All findings
shall be based on competent evidence presented at the public hearings.



         (b)   Action on the application shall be of the
following:



            1.   Approval;



            2.   Approval subject to conditions; or



            3.   Denial.



         (c)   If the Board of Adjustment denies the permit, the
reasons for its action shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting.



   (D)   Imposed conditions.



      (1)   The Board of Adjustment may impose such reasonable
conditions upon approval of a conditional use permit as will afford
protection of the public health, safety, and general welfare, ensure that
substantial justice is done, and equitable treatment provided.



      (2)   Any conditions based on time must be consistent with the
provisions in §§ 156.020 through 156.026 on vested rights.  Such
conditions shall run with the land and use and shall be binding on the
original applicant(s) as well as all successors, assigns, and heirs.



   (E)   Notice of decision and issuance of conditional use permit.



      (1)   The Zoning Officer shall cause notice of the disposition
of the application to be delivered by certified mail to the applicant and any
aggrieved party who has filed a written request for a copy with the Board at
the time of the hearing, and shall cause a copy of the decision to be filed
in the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer.



      (2)   The letter notifying the applicant of the Board's action
shall be approved and signed by the Chairman or Vice-Chairman of the Board of
Adjustment.



      (3)   In the case of approval or approval with conditions, the
Zoning Officer shall issue the necessary conditional use permit in accordance
with the action of the Board of Adjustment and the applicant shall record it
in the office of the Wilkes County Register of Deeds within ten days of
receipt.



   (F)   Time limitations validity of conditional use permit and
approval of a site plan. A conditional use permit issued pursuant to this
section shall expire two years after the date of issuance or approval if the
work authorized by the permit or approval has not been commenced.



   (G)   Effect of denial or withdrawal on subsequent applications.
When the Board of Adjustment shall have denied an application or the
application shall have been withdrawn, by written notice, after publication
of the first public hearing notice, the Zoning Officer shall not accept
another application for the same or similar conditional use, affecting the
same property or a portion thereof, until the expiration of one year from the
date of denial or withdrawal.



   (H)   Appeal of decision. A decision by the Board of Adjustment on
an application for a conditional use permit may be appealed only to the
Superior Court by an aggrieved party.  Such appeal shall be in the nature of
certiorari and must be filed within 30 days of filing of the decision in the
office of the Zoning Officer.



   (I)   Revocation.



      (1)   A conditional use permit may be revoked by the Board of
Adjustment after a finding of the existence of any one of the following
conditions:



         (a)   That the physical construction or activity
authorized by a conditional use permit has not commenced within the time
limit set above;



         (b)   That the governmental licensees or permits
required for the activity authorized by a conditional use permit have not
been obtained or have subsequently been terminated; or



         (c)   That any of the applicable requirements of this
section or any conditions attached to the conditional use permit, or
modification of conditional use permit, have been violated.



      (2)   On request by the holder of a conditional use permit,
the Board of Adjustment may, for good cause shown, extend the time limits for
commencement of authorized construction or activity by up to 12 months.



      (3)   The Board of Adjustment may consider reapplication for a
conditional use permit on property on which previous permit has been revoked
provided that all of the standards which are set forth in this chapter are
met.



   (J)   General requirements. The following additional information is
required for all conditional use applications: eight copies of the site plan
prepared by a registered North Carolina land surveyor or engineer which shall
contain the following:



      (1)   North point, scale and date;



      (2)   Extent of area to be developed;



      (3)   Locations and widths of all easements and rights-of-way
within or adjacent to the site;



      (4)    Location of all existing or proposed structures on the
site;



      (5)   Location of all areas on the site subject to flood
hazard or inundation as shown on flood maps or soil maps;



      (6)    Location of all water courses on the site, including
direction of flow;



      (7)   Existing topography at a contour interval of five feet
based on mean sea level datum;



      (8)   Proposed or existing fencing, screening, gates, parking,
service and storage areas;



      (9)   Access to site including sight distances of all roads
used for access;



      (10)   Architectural elevations of all structures proposed to
be used in the development;



      (11)   Names and addresses of owners and applicants; and



      (12)   A fee, as set by the Town Board.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.064  SPECIAL USES.



   (A)   Intent. This chapter provides for certain uses to be located
by right in certain districts where the uses are compatible with the purpose
of the district and with other uses to be located in certain districts only
by complying with additional development standards to insure the same
compatibility. However, certain uses which are basically in keeping with the
intent and purpose of the district may have substantial impact on the
surrounding area and shall only be allowed after a review of a specific
proposal. In order to insure that these uses would be compatible with
surrounding development, be in conformance with adopted plans and policies
and be in keeping with the purpose of the district in which they are proposed
to be placed, they are not allowed to be established as a matter of right.
They may be established only after review and approval of a special use
permit by the Town Council as set forth in this section.



   (B)   Procedures for approval of special use permits.  The
following information shall be submitted as part of a request for a special
use permit. Applications which are not complete shall be returned forthwith
to the applicant, with a notation of the deficiencies in the application.



      (1)   A completed written application for a special use permit
along with standard application fees required by the town shall be filed with
the Zoning Administrator. All other reasonable application expenses incurred
by the town for the processing of a special use permit application shall be
paid prior to the issuance of a final notification of action taken, and the
associated issuance of a special use permit, if any. The application, at a
minimum, shall include the following items:



         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the
applicant and all property owner(s), if different from the applicant, deed
book and page number of the property description;



         (b)   A scaled boundary survey drawn to an appropriate
scale prepared by and certified to be correct by a surveyor or engineer
registered with State of North Carolina showing the total acreage, present
zoning classification (s), date and north arrow;



         (c)   The current owners' names, addresses, and tax
parcel numbers (as shown on the current year Wilkes County Tax Records), and
the uses and current zoning classifications of all adjacent properties;



         (d)   All existing easements, reservations,
rights-of-way and all yard requirements for the zoning district;



         (e)   A site plan showing all existing and/or proposed
buildings, storage areas, parking and access areas, proposed size, layout and
setbacks of land and proposed structures, planned illumination, and proposed
number, type and location of signs;



         (f)   Landscape plan showing existing and proposed
trees, ground cover and landscape material, proposed screening, including
walls, fences or planted areas as well as treatment of any existing natural
features;



         (g)   Plans and elevations for all proposed structures
with materials and colors of all exterior surfaces noted;



         (h)   A map at the same scale as the site plan showing
the following:



            1.   Delineation of areas within the floodplain as
shown on the official flood hazard boundary maps;



            2.   Existing and proposed topography at five foot
intervals; and



            3.   Plans for providing potable water and for the
treatment of wastewater; and



         (i)   Proposed phasing, if any, and approximate
completion time of the project.



      (2)   Prior to submitting an application, the applicant may
submit to the Zoning Administrator a sketch plan of the proposed development
showing the appropriate location and dimensions of all proposed structures
and improvements. The Zoning Administrator shall review the sketch plan and
forward the sketch plan to members of the town's Technical Review Committee
and advises the applicant as to its general compliance with this subchapter
and any other pertinent regulations and plans.



      (3)   After the receipt of the required application materials,
the Zoning Administrator shall place the item on the planning board agenda
which shall be at a regular or special meeting within 60 days from the filing
of the application.



      (4)   The Planning Board shall have a maximum of 45 days from
the date at which it met to review the application and to submit its
recommendation to the Town Council. If a recommendation is not made during
the 45 day period, the application shall be forwarded to the Town Council
without a recommendation from the Planning Board.



      (5)   When dealing with the special use permit process, it may
be desirable to request additional information in order to evaluate a
proposed use and its relationship to the surrounding area. Therefore, the
Zoning Administrator, the Technical Review Committee, the Planning Board
and/or the Town Council may request additional information, as they may
individually deem necessary.



      (6)   Once the application is forwarded to the Town Council
from the Planning Board (or the Zoning Administrator as prescribed in §
156.064(B)(4)), the Town Council shall consider conducting a public hearing.
If a public hearing is held, due notice of such public hearing shall be
published in a manner similar to that as prescribed in § 156.042 - Public
Hearing and Notice Requirements.



   (C)   Town Council decision. If the Town Council should find, after
conducting a public hearing, that the proposed special use permit should be
granted, the Town Council may impose such additional reasonable and
appropriate special conditions upon such special use permit, as it may deem
necessary.  In no instance shall any of these conditions be less restrictive
than any requirements which would pertain to that particular development
found in the same zoning district.  Any conditions should relate to the
relationship of the proposed use to surrounding property, proposed support
facilities such as parking areas and driveways, pedestrian and vehicular
circulation systems, screening and buffer areas, the timing of development
and other matters that the Town Council may find appropriate or the
petitioner may propose.  The conditions may include sign controls and
architectural review or control.  The landscaping provisions of the tree
ordinance shall be minimum landscaping requirements as a condition for
awarding a SUP, however, the Town Council may impose additional reasonable
landscaping requirements as a condition for awarding a SUP as the Council
considers necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare in accordance
with the purpose and intent of this chapter. The petitioner will have a
reasonable opportunity to consider and respond to any additional requirements
prior to approval or denial by the Town Council.  The Town Council shall
give due regard to the intent and purpose of this section of the chapter and
that the public health, safety and welfare will be secured and substantial
justice done.



      (1)   Burden of proof. The applicant has the burden of
producing competent material and substantial evidence, tending to establish
the existence of the facts and conditions which the appropriate section of
this chapter requires for the issuance of a special use permit.



      (2)   Voting. When deciding special use permits, the Town
Council shall follow quasi-judicial procedures.  No vote greater than a
majority vote shall be required for the Council to issue such permits.  For
the purposes of this section, vacant positions on the Council and members who
are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be
considered "members of the Council" for calculation of the requisite majority.



      (3)   Findings to be made by Town Council.  The Town Council
shall issue a special use permit only after having conclusively confirmed
each of the following findings:



         (a)   The use will not materially endanger the public
health or safety if located where proposed and developed according to the
submitted plan.



         (b)   The use meets all required conditions and
specifications.



         (c)   The use will not substantially injure the value of
adjoining or abutting property, or the use is a public necessity.



         (d)   The location and character of the use, if
developed according to the plan as submitted and approved, will be in harmony
with the area in which it is to be located and will be in general conformity
with this chapter and adopted town plans and policies.



         (e)   Additional review criteria, as listed for specific
uses in § 156.064(J), shall also be considered and addressed where required.



      (4)   Appeal of Town Council decision on special use permit.
Every SUP decision of the Town Council shall be subject to review by the
Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari.  Any petition for
review by the Superior Court shall be filed with the appropriate Clerk of
Superior Court within 30 days after the decision of the Town Council is filed
in the Office of the Town Clerk, or after a written copy thereof is delivered
to every aggrieved party who has filed a written request for such copy with
the Clerk at the time of the hearing of the case, whichever is later.  The
decision of the Town Council may be delivered to the aggrieved party either
by personal service or by registered mail or certified mail return receipt
requested.



   (D)   Binding effect.



      (1)   Any special use permit so authorized shall be likewise
binding to the property included in such permit unless subsequently changed
or amended by the Town Council.  Notification of any approved special use
permit shall be forwarded to the Wilkes County Register of Deeds for
recordation.



      (2)   However, minor changes in the detail of the approved
plan which will (1) not alter the basic relationship of the proposed
development to adjacent property, or (2) will not alter the uses permitted or
increase the density of development, or (3) will not decrease the off-street
parking ratio or (4) reduce the yards provided at the boundary of the site
may be made upon submittal to and the subsequent approval of the Zoning
Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall take action on such requests
within 15 days, unless additional information is requested.  A written
decision shall be provided to the applicant, and, if positive, a copy shall
be forwarded to the Wilkes County Register of Deeds.  Any applicant may
appeal a negative decision of the Zoning Administrator to the Board of
Adjustment which shall determine if an amendment to the special use permit is
required in order to allow the proposed minor change to be made to the
approved plan.



   (E)   Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any building or land use on a piece of property which has received
a special use permit unless the building or structure is constructed, or
used, or the land is developed or used in conformity with the special use
permit as approved by the Town Council.  In the event that only a segment of
a proposed development has been approved, the certificate of occupancy shall
be issued only for that portion of the development as approved.



   (F)   One year limitation.



      (1)   If a special use permit request is denied by the Town
Council, a similar application for a special use permit for the same property
or any portion thereof shall not be filed until the expiration of a 12 month
period from the date of most recent determination by the Town Council.



      (2)   This waiting period shall not be applicable or otherwise
be involved in the filing of a new application for rezoning of all or any
part of the property previously considered by the Town Council where the new
application requests rezoning to a different zoning district and/or where the
application for a special use permit is substantially different from the
original application.



   (G)   Change in special use permit. Any request to materially change
a SUP shall be reviewed by the Planning Board as required by § 156.064(B) or
in compliance with the applicable portion of the minor change approval
procedure set forth in § 156.064(D).  The Town Council may thereafter
change or amend any previously approved special use permit, only after having
held a public hearing.  Notice of a public hearing shall be in accordance
with the provisions of § 156.042. Amendment by the Town Council of a special
use permit shall be subject to the same considerations as provided for in §
156.064(C)(3).



   (H)   Time limitations validity of special use permit and approval
of a site plan. A special use permit issued pursuant to this section shall
expire two years after the date of issuance or approval if the work
authorized by the permit or approval has not commenced.



   (I)   Revocation.



      (1)    A special use permit may be revoked by the Town Council
after a finding of the existence of any one of the following conditions:



         (a)    That the physical construction or activity
authorized by a special use permit has not commenced within the time limit
set above;



         (b)    That the governmental licensees or permits
required for the activity authorized by a Special Use Permit have not been
obtained or have subsequently been terminated; or



         (c)    That any of the applicable requirements of this
section or any conditions attached to the special use permit, or modification
of special use permit, have been violated.



      (2)   On request by the holder of a special use permit, the
Town Council may, for good cause shown, extend the time limits for
commencement of authorized construction or activity by up to 12 months.



      (3)   The Town Council may consider reapplication for a
special use permit on property on which previous permit has been revoked
provided that all of the standards which are set forth in this chapter are
met.



   (J)   Additional review criteria. The review criteria specified for
each of the following uses shall be addressed by the Town Council as an
integral part of any applicable special use permit review activity:



      (1)   Single and multi-tenant retail buildings with a gross
floor area equal to or greater than 30,000 square feet.



         (a)   Access to public streets and the adequacy of those
streets to carry anticipated traffic.



         (b)   On-site circulation for both pedestrian and
on-site and off-site vehicular traffic circulation patterns.



         (c)   Adequacy of existing community facilities such as
water, sewer, and police and fire services.



         (d)   Compatibility of the proposed use with the general
characteristics of the area with respect to the location and design of
structures, the location, design and landscaping of parking and service
areas, and the location, size and character of signs and the streetscape.



   (K)   Additional standards for findings of fact require in specific
uses.



      (1)   The review criteria specified for each of the following
uses shall be addressed by the Zoning Board of Adjustments as an integral
part of any applicable conditional use permit.



      (2)   Assembly/coliseum uses.



         (a)   Compatibility of proposed use with the general
characteristics of the area with respect to the location and impacts of
existing land use.



         (b)   Compatibility with the Town of Wilkesboro and
Wilkes County's economic development efforts to bring additional jobs to the
area.



         (c)   The proposed location is being utilized at its
highest use.



         (d)   Adequate parking for the use can be onsite or
though a shared parking agreement.



         (e)   The existing structure can be modified to meet all
building and fire codes.



         (f)   Access to the site can be provided by the existing
roads or improvements of existing roads can be improved to meet the
transportation requirements of the new use.



         (g)   Meets all adequate zoning codes.



         (h)   Adequate traffic control is provided for each
special event.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS



§ 156.075  PRINCIPAL STRUCTURES.



   There shall be only one principal structure per zoning lot, except in
cases of an approved multi-family development or other group projects that
are not subject to this provision.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.076  MINIMUM FRONTAGE.



   No building shall be erected on any lot which does not abut at least 25
feet on a publicly dedicated or maintained street.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.077  EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT AND SETBACK REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Height limitations. The height limitations of this chapter
shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended
for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observations towers,
transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, radio
towers, television towers, masts aerials and similar structures, except as
otherwise provided in the vicinity of airports.



   (B)   Front yard setbacks for dwellings. The front yard setback
requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where
the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or partially within
100 feet on each side of the proposed dwelling within the same block and
zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the
minimum required front yard depth.  In such case, the setback on such lots
may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the
existing on the aforementioned lots, or within ten feet of the street
right-or-way line, whichever is greater.



   (C)   When no side setback is required. In cases where no side yard
is required, if a side yard is provided it must be at least four feet in
width to allow for maintenance, cleaning, and the like.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.078  VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   At any public right of way intersection, no obstruction shall exceed 28
inches in height above existing grade within the area as shown in the
illustration below.  "A" is located at the intersection of the road edges or
curb.







(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.079  OFF-STREET PARKING.



   (A)   Required. Off-street automobile parking shall be provided on
every lot on which a use is established.  If no parking space can be
reasonably provided on the same lot, such space shall be provided on a lot of
which a substantial portion is within 500 feet of such use.  No certificate
of occupancy will be issued upon completion of any building or group of
buildings unless all off-street parking requirements are in place and ready
for use.



   (B)   Central Business District parking. Uses in the B-1, Central
Business District, are exempt from parking requirements unless required by
other provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Combined parking. The required parking space for any number of
separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to
one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that
one-half (½) of the parking space required for churches, theaters, or
assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be
assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays.



   (D)   Reduction in number of required spaces. As part of its review,
the Town Board may reduce the required number of parking spaces required by
this section by up to 10% upon finding that the reduced number of parking
spaces will be sufficient to satisfy the demand for parking expected for the
use, considering: the nature of the use, the number of trips generated by the
use, the times of day when the use generates the most trips, and the extent
to which other establishments are located on the same property and may reduce
the number of vehicle trips required between different establishments.



   (E)   Size and number.  Each parking space shall be not less than
nine feet by 19 feet, in or exclusive of adequate access drives and
maneuvering space.  Each space shall be provided with vehicular access to a
street or alley and shall be equal in number to at least the minimum
requirement for the uses set out in Table 156.079(1).  Requirements based on
the number of seats, students, etc., are based on the design capacity of the
building.



Table 156.079(1)



 

Residential Uses
 
Parking Requirements


Single family, duplex, condominiums, manufactured homes, and similar
residential
 
2 spaces per dwelling unit


Multi-family (apartments, etc.)
 
2 spaces per one-bedroom unit and two-bedroom unit; 2.5 spaces per 3 +
bedroom unit


Multi-family for elderly, handicapped (including group homes)
 
1 space per resident


Rooming or boarding house
 
1 space plus one for each room to be rented



 



 

Institutional Uses
 
Parking Requirements




Churches and similar places of worship; funeral homes
 
1 space per 4 seats in principal auditorium


Clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations, civic organizations, etc.
 
1 space per 400 sq. ft. of gross floor area or 1 space per 2 seats of meeting
space, whichever is greater


Schools, elementary and intermediate
 
2 spaces for each classroom and 1 space for each administrative office


Schools, senior high
 
2 spaces per classroom plus 1 per 3 students


Hospital
 
1 space per  patient bed plus 1.25 per full-time employee (total number,
regardless of shifts)


Colleges
 
1 space per classroom 1.5 spaces per 2 students


Libraries, museums, and other like cultural establishments
 
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Day care centers
 
1 space per 8 to 10 licensed attendees plus 1 per employee


Nursing/rest/convalescent homes
 
1 space per 4 residents plus 1 per staff member on largest shift


Stadium, auditorium, theater, convention center
 
1 space per 2 seats


Golf courses
 
4 spaces per green plus 1 per employee


Community recreation centers
 
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area


   with swimming pool
 
1.25 spaces per lane


   with tennis or racquets courts
 
3 spaces per court




 



 

Commercial/Business/Office Uses
 
Parking Requirements




Restaurants
 
1 space per 3 seats


   - with drive-thru
 
3 stacking spaces for each window


Auto repair establishments
 
4 spaces per service bay or rack


Convenience mart
 
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Banks
 
1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area plus:


   - drive-thru
 
3 stacking spaces for each window


   - automated teller machine
 
1 space per machine


Medical/dental/vet offices and/or clinics
 
1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Hotels/motels
 
1 space per room plus 1 space per 3 employees on largest shift plus:


   - with conference/meeting facilities
 
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Commercial recreation, indoor, such as:

- dance instruction

- martial arts instruction

- skating rink

- billiard parlor

- bowling alley

- music instruction, etc.
 
1 space per 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Commercial recreation, outdoor, such as:

- driving range

- miniature golf

- skeet range, etc.
 
1.5 spaces for every tee, station, or other method of designating the total
number of participants at the facility at one time


Retail establishments
 
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Offices (general, professional)
 
1 space per 300 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Home occupation
 
1 space in addition to residential requirements


Auto/boat/truck sales and rental
 
1 space per 300 sq. ft. of enclosed gross floor area plus 1 space per 5,000
sq. ft. display area


Shopping centers
 
5 spaces per 1000 sq. ft. of leasable area (not including restaurants, which
still must meet seating requirement)


Personal service establishments (barbers, tanning, etc.)
 
1 space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area




 



 

Industrial/Wholesale Uses
 
Parking Requirements


Manufacturing, heavy
 
.75 space per employee on largest shift plus 1 space per truck


Manufacturing, light
 
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Wholesale establishments
 
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Warehousing and distribution establishments
 
1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area


Warehouses/storage
 
1 space per employee plus 1 space per truck



 



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.080  OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE.



   (A)   Required.  Every building used for business, trade, or
industry hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated herein for the
loading and unloading of goods, and the like.  Each space shall have access
to an alley or street.



   (B)   Size and number. Each off-street loading space shall have
minimum dimensions 14 feet in height above the alley or street grade and 25
feet in depth from the alley or street line.  The number of spaces required
is as follows:



      (1)   Retail:  One space of 300 square feet for each 5,000
square feet of floor area;



      (2)   Wholesale/industry:  One space of 500 square feet for
each 10,000 square feet of floor area.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.081  SIGNS.



   (A)   Purpose.



      (1)   The purpose of this section is to establish enforceable
and impartial regulations for all types of signs.  It is hereby determined
that signs are a legitimate and beneficial use of property and/or business
and should preserve and reinforce the natural, historical, and architectural
qualities of neighborhoods. The regulations thereof are necessary to:



         (a)   Protect the public health, safety, convenience and
general welfare;



         (b)   Reduce traffic hazards caused by signs which may
distract, confuse and impair the visibility of motorists and/or pedestrians;



         (c)   Facilitate the efforts of fire, emergency services
and law enforcement protection;



         (d)   Incorporate sufficient signage which readily
describes the locations of all general public and governmental services;



         (e)   Incorporate sufficient signage which readily
describes the locations, services, and/or products of all legitimate
businesses and industries;



         (f)   Afford the residents the freedom and access to
express acceptable information to visitors and the community from public
venues;



         (g)   Ensure the unobstructed view of public traffic
signs and signals;



         (h)   Minimize the potentially negative impacts to the
public's property investments; and



         (i)   Preserve the scenic and economic values which
support equally the interests of all residents and businesses within the
community. 



      (2)   This chapter may be reviewed and revised as needed by
the Wilkesboro Planning Board in an effort to keep current with the desires
of the community at large.



   (B)   Minimum Requirements Provision. In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
convenience and general welfare.  Wherever the requirements of this chapter
are at variance with the requirements of any other town ordinances, state
laws, and/or federal laws the highest or most restrictive standard shall
apply.



   (C)   Title. This subchapter shall hereinafter be known and cited as
the "Town of Wilkesboro Signage Ordinance".



   (D)   Applicability. This subchapter is intended to regulate all
signs currently existing or yet to come into existence, which are to be
located within the Town of Wilkesboro North Carolina City Limits and the
Extra Territorial Jurisdiction.



   (E)   Definitions.



      ABANDONED SIGN.  Signs which have not been in use for 90 days or
more shall be deemed to be abandoned and non-conforming.  Supporting
structures for freestanding signs are not exempt when sign and/or lettering
are removed. 



      ADDRESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign which is limited to the
address and number of a building, institution, complex or person.



      AGRA-BUSINESS SIGNS.  A commercial business which grows and
sells over 50% of the items indigenous to the local growing area (Wilkes
County and adjacent counties) whether on the premises or at other local
growing locations.



      ART.  Integral decorative and/or architectural features of
buildings or individual works of art that do not contain letters, trademarks,
or contain any commercial references or messages.



      ATTACHED (i.e., WALL) SIGN.  A sign fastened to or painted on
the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes
the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the sign and
which does not project more than 16 inches from such building or structure.



      AWNING.  A roof-like covering consisting of any material
attached to a rigid frame dependent on another structure and forming a
sheltered walk to the entrance/exist of a building.



      BANNER. A temporary sign composed of lightweight material, either
enclosed or not enclosed in a rigid frame, and supported on at least two
opposing sides and/or edges.



      BILLBOARD.  A billboard is an off-premises "sign"or object
typically erected in high traffic areas such as alongside major highways,
expressways, corridors or principal arterials that are displayed outdoors or
visible from a public right of way. Billboards do not include on-premises
commercial or political signage nor small commercial or non-commercial signs
temporarily placed in residential lawns by residents, owners, contractors,
realtors, or by or on behalf of political candidates or issues as described
in this chapter.



      BUILDING DEPARTMENT.  A building inspector as designated by the
Town of Wilkesboro.



      Wilkes County Building Inspections



      (3rd floor)



      110 North Street



      Wilkesboro, NC 28697



      Phone (336) 651-7303



      Fax (336) 651-7567



      CHANGEABLE SIGNS.



         (a)    ANIMATED and/or MECHANICAL SIGN.  A sign which
creates motion, action, or the illusion of action and/or motion (Includes
intentional wind/air-blown, inflatable signs or figurines).



         (b)    CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN.  A sign designed to allow
changing of copy by automatic, mechanical or manual means.



         (c)    SCROLLING SIGN.  A sign which incorporates
and/or conveys a continuous or intermittent written message or image through
moving surfaces, rotating surfaces, pixels or lights that give the illusion
of active sequential motion.



      COMPLEX IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A sign identifying a complex but
which does not include identification of any individual business within the
complex.



      CONSTRUCTION SIGN.  A temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction,
indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects,
contractors and similar persons or firms having a role or interest with
respect to the structure or project.



      DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  Any sign erected on premises and commonly
associated with and limited to information and directions necessary and
convenient for persons coming on the property, including signs marking
entrances, parking areas, one-way drives, rest rooms, pickup and delivery
areas and the like.



      FARM STAND.  An individual Farm Producer selling Farm Products.



      FLAG.  A flag is a piece of flexible material suspended on one
end from a pole or other structure.  (Includes streamers and pennants).



      FREESTANDING SIGN.  A sign that is attached to, erected on, or
supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure)
that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other
structure whose principal function is something other than the support of a
sign.  If the message is removed from the freestanding sign, the supporting
structure shall still be considered a sign.



      FRONTAGE.



         (a)   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The linear distance of a
building and/or business facing a street or right-of-way and which contains
the main entrance to the building and/or business.



         (b)   STREET FRONTAGE.  The linear distance of the
parcel measured along the primary entrance street.



      GOVERNMENTAL SIGN.  A sign erected and maintained pursuant to
any governmental function or required by any law, ordinance or governmental
regulation.



      GROUND (i.e. grade) LEVEL.  The average ground elevation within
a ten foot diameter circle measured horizontally from the most centrally
located point of the sign base.



      HEIGHT.  The vertical distance between the ground level under a
sign and the highest point of the sign structure.



      HOUSE OF WORSHIP.  A religious edifice; a church, temple, or
similar place where believers go to practice their faith.



      HUMAN SUPPORTED SIGN.  Any sign which is carried, handled, held,
or supported by a human being for display or promotion.



      ILLUMINATED SIGN.  Any sign which emanates light either by means
of exposed tubing, surface lamps, illumination transmitted through sign
surface or which reflects light from a source intentionally directed upon it.



      INFLATABLE SIGNS.  Signs and/or sculptures inflated with fluids,
expanding solids, air or gas whose primary purpose is to expand or increase
surface areas or create movements which attract attention.



      LOGO.  A symbol, graphic, trademark or emblem commonly
associated with or representing a specific entity, product or concept.



      LOT.  Any parcel of real property recorded in deed form filed in
the Wilkes County Register of Deeds Office.



      MAXIMUM PERMITTED SIGN AREA. A formulation or arithmetic
methodology that assigns a value which computes the permissible area of a
sign to determine compliance with this chapter.  Reference division
(H)(1)(a) of this section.



      MERCHANDISE SALES EVENT.  Merchandise and/or service promotion
for the express purpose of merchandise clearance and/or service offerings to
stimulate customer flow.



      MULTI-TENANT SIGN.  A sign containing a list of the names of
business establishments located within a building complex (i.e. multi-tenant
building). The style, lettering and color for all tenants identified on such
signs shall be similar.



      MULTI TENANT ESTABLISHMENTS. Include two or more of any separate
and distinct non-residential licensed establishments, which are located on
the same premises. 



      NON-CONFORMING.  Any sign which was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to the effective date of this subchapter or any amendments
thereto.



      OFF-PREMISES SIGN.  Any sign advertising or calling attention to
any business or activity not located on the same continuous parcel of real
estate as the sign.



      ON-PREMISES SIGN.  Any sign which is located on the same
continuous parcel of real estate as the business it advertises.



      OUTDOOR SALES AREA SIGNS.  Signs which promote goods which are
displayed in a clearly defined, open air, designated retail or wholesale
space. 



      PARAPET.  A portion of a vertical wall or architectural railing
of a building that extends above the roofline.



      PERMANENT SIGN.  A sign for which a permit has been issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which will remain in force unless
the conditions of this chapter are violated.



      PLANNING BOARD.  The Town of Wilkesboro North Carolina and Extra
Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) Planning Board.



      POLITICAL SIGN.  A sign announcing or supporting political
candidates or issues connected with any national, state or local election.



      PORTABLE SIGN.  A sign designed or constructed in such a manner
that it can be moved or relocated without involving any structural or support
changes.  Signs designed to be portable cannot be retrofitted to become
permanent.



      PRIVATE or YARD SALE SIGN.  A sign advertising the sale of
personal property at house sales, garage sales, and/or rummage sales.  YARD
SALE SIGNS may not be attached to governmental signs and/or public utility
poles.



      PROJECTING SIGN.  A sign which projects 16 inches or more from
and is supported by a wall of a building or structure.  PROJECTING SIGNS not
exceeding six square feet do not require building permit. (Ref: NC State
Building Code).  PROJECTING SIGNS shall not be constructed or project below
eight feet.



      PUBLIC SERVICE/INFORMATION SIGN.  Any sign intended primarily to
promote items of general interest to the community such as time, temperature
and date, atmospheric conditions, news, traffic control, and/or special
events (Subject to Planning Department Review).



      REAL ESTATE SIGN.  A sign pertaining to the sale, lease or rent
of real property, or a portion thereof.



      RUNNING SIGN.  A sign which consists of a series of two or more
separate signs placed in a line parallel to a street when read in succession
carries a single message, copy or announcement.



      ROOF.  Any building surface whose slope is less than two
vertical units to one horizontal unit.  (See illustration below)







      ROOFLINE, TOP.  The top edge of the roof or top of the parapet,
whichever forms the top line of the buildings silhouette.



      ROUTINE MAINTENANCE:  The replacement of existing colors,
graphics, lettering, logos, sign structure, lighting and/or trim, and/or
materials which were originally designed, approved, permitted, or built and
which does not alter the perception of the signs appearance or the size of
the signs presentation. 



      SIGN.  Any device, object, display, or structure, or part
thereof which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract
attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location to express a point of view or display
identification, description, illustration or device by any means, including
words, letters, figures, design, symbols, advertising flags, fixtures,
colors, illuminations, electronic message centers or projected images whether
illuminated or non-illuminated which is visible from any public place or is
located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs
attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution,
business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated
merchandise, or any logo, painting, banner, pennant, placard or temporary
sign, with the exception of window displays and national flags. "Signs" shall
also include all sign structures.



      SIGN STRUCTURE.  Any structure or material which supports, or
previously supported a sign, including the decorative cover.



      SPECIAL EVENT.  A group activity including, but not limited to,
a performance, meeting, assembly, contest, exhibit, ceremony, parade,
athletic competition, reading, and/or community gathering.  SPECIAL EVENTS
shall not include casual park use by visitors or tourists.



      STREET and/or PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY.  A public highway, road or
thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to adjacent lots,
measured from property line to property line.



      TEMPORARY SIGN.  Any sign which is not intended to be permanent.



      WALL.  Any building surface whose slope is two vertical to one
horizontal or steeper.(See Illustration)







      WINDOW SIGN.  A sign that is applied or attached to a window or
located within three feet of the interior of the window and which can be seen
from the exterior of the structure.



      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  Wilkesboro Planning Department
Director or appointed designee.



   (F)   Permit required.Scope. A sign may not be replaced, erected,
moved, enlarged, or altered in any manner except for routine maintenance
unless a Wilkesboro sign permit is obtained.  All signs requiring a permit
shall include a scaled drawing of the proposed sign(s) showing the size,
height, method of illumination and whether it will be attached or
freestanding.  As deemed necessary by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a site
plan and/or sketch shall be submitted showing the location of the sign on the
property in relation to lot lines, buildings, sidewalks, intersections and
overhead utility lines along with any other necessary information needed in
order to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter.    Signs that do
not require a permit are identified in division (I) of this section: "Signs
Not Requiring a Permit and Certain Temporary Signs".



   (G)   Administration and enforcement.



      (1)   The provisions of this subchapter shall be administered
and enforced by the Town of Wilkesboro Zoning Enforcement Officer or his/her
designee, which shall have the power to make necessary inspections and
interpretations.



      (2)   No sign permit shall be approved by the Town of
Wilkesboro Enforcement Officer except in compliance with the provisions of
this subchapter.



   (H)   General standards.



      (1)   Sign area determination.



         (a)   The surface area of a sign shall be computed by
including the entire area within the smallest contiguous perimeter of the
sign's space within not more than eight straight lines or a circle enclosing
the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or any elements of
display together with any inclusive interior air space and any material or
color forming an integral part of the background of the display used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any necessary supporting framework, engineered
structure or bracing that is clearly incidental to the signage display.



         (b)   The maximum combined sign area calculated by
division (H)(1)(a) of this section may not exceed 200 square feet of signage
per premises.



         (c)   Maximum sign area determination for on premises
outdoor sales area(s) must not exceed 50% of the parcel's linear street
frontage times one square foot up to a maximum of 100 square feet.



         (d)   Where a sign has two identical display planes or
faces and only one image is visible from a single observation point, the area
of only one face shall be considered as the sign area. 



         (e)   In the case of other multi-sided signs such as
cylinders, wedges, spheres or cube shaped signs, which are substantially
three-dimensional in respect to their display area; all areas shall be
considered when calculating the sign area.



      (2)   Sign height determination.  Signage height
determination is based on zoning classification and can be reviewed in
divisions (L), (M), and (N) of this section and § 156.078 Visibility at
Intersections.



      (3)   Non-conforming and abandoned signs.



         (a)   Any sign legally in existence prior to the
enactment of this subchapter, April 19, 2010, may be continued and
maintained.  A sign may not be replaced, erected, moved, enlarged, or
altered in any manner except for routine maintenance unless a Wilkesboro sign
permit is obtained.



         (b)   Any sign which is replaced, erected, moved,
enlarged, and/or altered in any manner shall be considered a new sign and
shall be required to conform to the requirements contained herein.



         (c)   Any sign, whose copy displays an image, icon,
symbol or lettering that is incomplete, is faceless, and is meaningless or
illegible shall be considered to be an abandoned sign; or 



         (d)   Signs which have not been in operation for 90 days
or more shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall be removed by the property
owner.  After the end of the 90 day period, the Town of Wilkesboro reserves
the right to remove the said sign at the owner's expense. Supporting
structures for freestanding signs are not exempt when sign and/or lettering
are removed. 



         (e)   At the discretion of the Wilkesboro Planning
Board, any portion of an abandoned sign which has potential value may remain
pursuant to this chapter.



      (4)   Little or no building frontage. Establishments with
little or no building frontage, such as interior office establishments, may
have a maximum sign area of 24 square feet provided that the total maximum
permitted sign area allowed for the building is not exceeded.



      (5)   Freestanding signs.



         (a)   Freestanding signs shall be permitted only when
the principal building or structure in which the activity is conducted is set
back at least 20 feet from the edge of pavement or face of the curb of the
adjacent roadway.



         (b)   No portion of a freestanding sign shall be located
closer than ten feet to any adjacent lot line of a separate lot and 20 feet
if the side lot line abuts a residentially zoned district.



         (c)   In addition to the previously stated setback
requirements of this section, no part of any freestanding sign shall extend
into or over an existing right-of-way as shown on the Wilkes County tax maps
or a survey.  (Exception: political signs, special events, and/or
governmental signs).



         (d)   Freestanding sign height shall be measured from
ground level (Ref: definition GROUND LEVEL).



         (e)   Any freestanding sign in any zoning district shall
comply with § 156.078 Visibility at Intersections.



         (f)   All freestanding signs shall be self-supporting
structures and the applicant of such sign designs shall comply with all
applicable building codes and a building permit shall be obtained if deemed
necessary by the Wilkes County Building Inspections Department.



         (g)   No freestanding sign shall be located directly
underneath any overhead utility lines or within the vertically plumb space
one foot on either side of its path. 



         (h)   Freestanding signs may be allowed within the
street right-of-way of entrances to subdivisions, planned developments,
institutions, and the like, and must comply with the following requirements: 



            1.   Applicant must acquire Planning Board
approval;



            2.   The town will not be responsible for
maintenance;



            3.   An entity responsible for maintenance shall
be created or identified;



            4.   No such signs shall interfere with sight
distance or with normal maintenance requirements; and



            5.   Maximum size not to exceed 80 square feet.



            6.   Free standing signs shall be placed a minimum
of 100 feet apart unless separated by a public right-of-way in which instance
a minimum total separation of at least 50 feet is required.



      (6)   Sign illumination.



         (a)   Lighting from an externally illuminated sign or
floodlight shall be shaded, shielded or directed so that it illuminates only
the face of the sign.



         (b)   Lighting from an internally and/or externally
illuminated sign and/or a light emitting diode (LED) sign cannot become a
nuisance to occupants of adjacent residential building interiors, and/or
interfere with driver visibility.  Whether or not a sign is considered a
nuisance will be the discretion of the Planning Board, and alteration or sign
removal will be decided by the Wilkesboro Town Council. 



         (c)   Illuminated tubing and/or strings of lights on the
exterior of a building cannot exceed one perimeter length of measurement
around the building.



         (d)   Flashing signs as listed and prohibited in
division (J) of this section.



   (I)   Signs not requiring a permit and certain temporary signs.
Signs listed in this section are exempt from the permit requirements of
division (F) of this section and may be erected in any zoning district
provided they comply with the conditions described herein and prior
notification is provided to the Planning Department.  Signs permitted in
this section will not be considered in determining maximum permitted sign
area.  All such signs except government signs and political signs shall be
located outside of the public right-of-way as determined by the Wilkes County
tax maps, off government and utility poles, and outside of any sight distance
as described in section § 156.078.  Temporary non-profit and community
event signage may be allowed with planning department and Wilkesboro Planning
Board designee collective approval.



      (1)   Address identification signs. Signs indicating the
address of the premises, not exceeding the total of four square feet and not
including any commercial logo or advertising.



      (2)   Houses of worship directional signs.  Off-premise
directional signs shall not exceed six square feet per sign; this exemption
covers up to two such signs.  One off-premise sign is allowed per parcel
location provided property owner's approval is obtained.



      (3)   Directional signs.  On premise signs directing traffic
or identifying buildings within the premises that do not exceed eight square
feet or shall not be less than four square feet each.  No more than two
signs per entrance and/or exit. Logos shall be permitted up to 40% of the
area of the sign.



      (4)   Construction site and subdivision signs.  On-premise
signs identifying the project name, owner, developer, and the like. 



         (a)   Each site shall be limited to one sign per street
frontage with each not exceeding 50 square feet and ten feet in height. 



         (b)   Signs shall be removed by the time either a
permanent sign is erected; 30 days after the certificate of occupancy is
issued; or two years after the first certificate of occupancy is issued in
the case of a subdivision whichever comes first.



      (5)   Electronic time and temperature signs.  Unpermitted
time and temperature signs may not exhibit any other message except for time
and temperature and the successive alternating images cannot change more
frequently than three seconds each.  Time and temperature formats will not
be permitted should the feature be designed or integrated in another
changeable sign format to justify the shorter lapse time of image changes.



      (6)   Farm products signs. On-premise signs announcing the
availability of seasonal farm products.  Such signs shall not exceed a total
area of 40 square feet in area. 



      (7)   Flags.  On premise flags representing any government,
religious, charitable, civic, public or not for profit organization, subject
to the following:



         (a)   No single non-governmental entity shall display
more than three such flags per premises. 



         (b)   Flagpoles shall not exceed 50 feet in height
(above grade). 



         (c)   The United States Flag must be displayed in
accordance with the US Flag Code Section 1 of Title 4. 



         (d)   The lowest portion of the flag at rest cannot
extend below eight feet above grade.



      (8)   Holiday decorations.  Decorations, including displays
and/or lights, provided such lighting does not constitute a visibility or
safety hazard. 



      (9)   Merchandise on display.  On premises merchandise
offered for sale or rent where the product is displayed is subject to the
height, setback and sight distance requirements; not allowed if it inhibits
the safe ingress or egress to the premises onto a public street or
thoroughfare.  Exception: Merchandise displayed within an "outdoor sales
area".



      (10)   Merchandise "sale event" signs. "Sale event" signs
cannot be displayed for more than 30 consecutive days and may not display
more than two on premises "sale event" signs per active campaign nor can the
combined sign areas exceed 32 square feet.  This section applies to
permanent businesses "on premise" events and excludes "special events". 
Such signs are subject to removal if not maintained in a presentable manner.



      (11)   Political signs.  Erected in connection with public
elections or campaigns.  Such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet each and
shall not be erected more than 60 days prior to an applicable election
(campaign) and shall be removed within ten days after the elected conclusion
of the campaign.  The following regulations apply to political signs:



         (a)   If these signs are deemed to create a hazardous
condition they shall be subject to immediate removal by a representative of
the town authorized to do so by the Town Manager. If information is provided
to the town or included on the sign indicating whom to contact regarding the
sign, the town shall provide notice to the contact following removal of the
sign.



            1.   Political signs shall not be placed in any
public street median, or on any bridge, public utility box, or any pole used
for public utility, traffic control signs, traffic signals, or street signs.



            2.   Political signs shall not be placed in or
along public rights-of-way such that they are considered by the town to be a
sight distance problem for the drivers of vehicles, or which interfere or
distract from the traffic control devices in place, or which interfere with
safe bicycle or pedestrian circulation.



            3.   With the exception of public parks, political
signs may be placed on public property within ten feet from the back of curb
adjacent to a public street if they do not interfere with pedestrian
circulation along sidewalks, pathways or the levee/pedestrian-way; do not
obstruct bicycle circulation along bicycle paths; do not obstruct the sight
distance of drivers of vehicles; and/or, do not cause unsafe conditions as
determined by the town.



         (b)   Political signs located in or over the right of
way cannot exceed four square feet.



         (c)   Political signs placed in residential zoning
districts shall be no larger than 24 square feet. Placement of political
signs on roofs is prohibited.



         (d)   Political signs placed on private property must
have the express consent of the property owner; includes the yard space from
the property line to the face of the curb (i.e., public right-of-way). 
Roads and associated right-of-way which are maintained by NCDOT are governed
by NCDOT policy and authorities granted under G.S. 160A-296 and are not
controlled or regulated by the Town of Wilkesboro.



         (e)   Political signs shall not be illuminated.
(Exception: bill boards).



      (12)   Portable sidewalk signs. One sign per business not
exceeding six square feet.  Portable sidewalk signs are only allowed in the
B1 - Central Business District, and B-2 - General Business District.



      (13)   Real estate signs.  Indicating the availability of
real property for sale, lease or rent and are located on said property.



         (a)   Such signs shall be limited to one per street
frontage and shall not exceed 12 square feet in residential zones and 16
square feet in all other zones.



         (b)   If said property has more than 400 feet of
frontage, then a second such sign (maximum two per lot) will be allowed. 
Maximum height is six feet. 



         (c)   In addition, two off-premises signs are allowed
within the right of way not to exceed six square feet each and not to exceed
three feet in height. 



         (d)   Signs must be removed no later than 30 days after
the execution of the contract.



      (14)   Right-of-way signs. Only "political" and "special
event" signs as described in this chapter. 



      (15)   Scoreboards.  Scoreboards on athletic fields.



      (16)   Security and warning signs.  On premise signs
regulating the use of the property such as "no trespassing", "no hunting",
"no fishing", "no loitering", "no smoking", "Caution", "Warning" and "Danger"
signs that do not exceed eight square feet each.



      (17)   Special event signs. On premises special event signs
shall be allowed in addition to the maximum allowable sign area normally
permitted.  All signs shall be in conformance with the following provisions:



         (a)   Signs shall only be allowed for up to two separate
15 day periods or one continuous 30 day period per 180 day period.



         (b)   Portable changeable copy signs may not be used.



         (c)   Special events signs are allowed in the
right-of-way.



         (d)   Special event signs shall not exceed a total
combined area of 400 square feet in area for a maximum number of 20 signs. 
Signs exceeding 32 square feet per sign require a permit.



         (e)   Special events signs shall be separated by 100
feet.



      (18)   Vehicle signs.  Signs which are painted or otherwise
permanently attached to operable and currently licensed motor vehicles and
trailers which are properly parked on premises and which are not used primary
as a sign. 



      (19)   Window signs.  On premise signs located inside an
enclosed building and visible through a window or door.  A permit is
required when the opaque coverage exceeds 50% of the total window and/or door
area.



      (20)   Yard/garage sale signs.  Two on-premises and four
off-premises signs per yard sale provided that no sign exceeds eight square
feet and all are removed within 24 hours after the sale.  Yard sale signs
shall not interfere with visibility of intersections or be placed on public
right of way, signs and/or utility poles.  Signs placed on private property
must have the property owner's approval.



      (21)   Non-legible/readable signs.  Signs which cannot be
read because of viewing distance from a public right-of-way. (Example: store
hours, menu boards, and the like).



      (22)   Inflatable signs.  Inflatable signs are subject to
specific criteria which includes:



         (a)   A minimum lot size of six tenths (0.6) acre;



         (b)   A minimum single street frontage of 150 linear
feet;



         (c)   A maximum height not to exceed 30 feet above grade;



         (d)   A limit of one inflatable per parcel (no
intentional or actuated movements allowed);



         (e)   Adequate securing of the inflatable is required;



         (f)   "Lighter than air" inflatable's volume not to
exceed a total volume of 1,151 cubic feet. (Example: 6.5 foot diameter of a
single inflatable round balloon);



         (g)   An inflatable placement cannot be closer than the
inflatable's height measurement from any structure, overhead utilities or
vehicle right-of-way;



         (h)   Inflatables must be removed or deflated during
periods of high wind exceeding 30 miles per hour; and



         (i)   An Inflatable may not be displayed more than 30
sequential days within one 90-day period. (Examples:  One 30-day period in
90 days or three, ten-day periods in 90 days or five, six-day periods in 90
days, and the like).



      (23)   Miscellaneous exemptions. Exceptions not requiring a
permit include:



         (a)   Handicapped parking space signs;



         (b)   Automatic teller machines (ATM);



         (c)   Equipment or other functional safety signs;



         (d)   Gas pumps;



         (e)   Memorial signs;



         (f)   Menu boards;



         (g)   Monuments;



         (h)   Plaques or grave markers which are non-commercial
in nature;



         (i)   Security and warning signs (See definitions); and



         (j)   Vending machines.



   (J)   Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited within
the Town of Wilkesboro's Extra Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) unless
expressly permitted elsewhere in this chapter.



      (1)   Flashing signs.  Signs with flashing/blinking lights or
light of changing degrees of intensity and/or color.



      (2)   Glaring signs.  Signs with light sources or
reflectivity from surfaces of such brightness that the brilliance constitutes
a traffic safety hazard or general public nuisance.



      (3)   Off-premises human supported signs. (See definitions).



      (4)   Animated and/or mechanical motion signs. (See
definitions).



      (5)   Nudity or a state of nudity signs.  Signs which display
or show the male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or
cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and
areola or suggests displays of sexual intercourse which is presented to the
public at large. 



      (6)   Off-premises signs.  Unless expressly permitted
elsewhere in this chapter.



      (7)   Scrolling signs. (See definitions).



      (8)   Running signs. (See definitions).



      (9)   Simulated traffic signs, and the like.  Signs, lights,
rotating disks, words or other devices which resemble, imitate or obstruct
the view of any authorized traffic signals or signs, emergency warning or
vehicle signs or governmental signs.



      (10)   Temporary signs. (See definitions). Unless expressly
permitted elsewhere in this chapter.



      (11)   Violence or a state of violence signs.  Signs which
display or show acts of mutilation, infliction of physical damage,
dismemberment, assault, or other violent illegal behaviors which is presented
to the public at large.



      (12)   Portable changeable copy signs. (See definitions).







Portable Changeable Copy Sign Example



      (13)   Right-of-way signs.  Signs within or over any public
road right-of-way, or signs placed on bridges, utility poles, street signs,
fire hydrants, parking meter poles, structures, and the like, unless
otherwise approved by the Town of Wilkesboro.  Special event, political
campaigns, and governmental signs are allowed within the public right of
way.  Signs placed in public right of way are subject to removal without
notification.



      (14)   Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics are
prohibited in association with a sign.



      (15)   Any sign which interferes with free passage of any fire
escape, window, door or opening intended as a means of primary or secondary
ingress or egress.



      (16)   A sign which contains obscene words and/or pictures
which offend the general public at large.  Identification and removal of
offensive signs will be at the discretion of the Town of Wilkesboro Town
Council.



      (17)   Other signs not expressly permitted by this chapter. 



      (18)   Signs which block or inhibit pedestrian or vehicular
infrastructural right-of-ways.



      (19)   Signs below eight feet over pedestrian walk-ways.



   (K)   Signs subject to special conditions. The following signs are
subject to special conditions within the Town of Wilkesboro's Town Limits and
Extra Territorial Jurisdiction unless expressly exempt elsewhere in this
chapter.



      (1)   Mechanical changeable signs. All mechanical changeable
signs must be static for a minimum of five minutes and the transition must
not exceed 30 seconds.



      (2)   Electronic message center or display. Images and/or
messages must be static a minimum of 30 seconds and the transition must occur
as instantaneously as technology allows. This is not considered animation
and/or a flashing sign.



         (a)   Brightness. The sign must not exceed a maximum
illumination of 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours
and a maximum of 750 nits (candelas per square meters) between dusk and dawn,
nor shall the sign have varying light intensity during the display of any
single message.



         (b)   Every sign must be equipped with a dimming
mechanism that adjusts display brightness to accommodate varying ambient
light conditions. This function can be performed manually or automatically
with the use of a light sensing device.



      (3)   Billboard signs.  In addition to the following
regulation and criteria, Billboard signs may be erected at off-premises
locations only (maximum 420 square feet) and are subject to specific criteria
set forth in the NCDOT Outdoor Advertising Manual.



         (a)   Ownership documentation and/or lease agreements
must be filed with the Town of Wilkesboro's Planning Department supporting
the use of a property for billboard signage.



         (b)   Billboard locations shall be permitted only on:



            1.   Privately owned property and not allowed on
any road right-of-way.



            2.   Permitted only on non-freeway federal aid
primary highway within B-2 and M-1 zoning districts.



         (c)   No two billboard signs shall be spaced less than
1,000 feet apart as measured by an extending radius around each sign.



         (d)   No billboard sign advertising a business shall be
permitted on the premises of that same business.  A billboard must be an off
premises sign.



         (e)   No billboard advertisement or sign is permitted
within 1,000 feet of the advertising business's property line. 



         (f)   Total sign area shall not exceed 420 square feet
and maximum length of 60 feet inclusive of any border and trim but excluding
the base of apron, supports and other structural members.  If an advertising
message appears on the base or apron, it will not be included with the
maximum dimensions and maximum allowable sign area.



         (g)   Signs may not exceed 30 feet in height as measured
from ground level.



         (h)   Except as noted above, outdoor advertising signs
should comply with specifications set out in the NCDOT Outdoor Advertising
Manual.



         (i)   Signs located on-premises are not billboard signs
and are regulated elsewhere in this chapter.



   (L)   Sign permitted in residential districts. The intent of this
division is to provide for a limited use of signs which are generally not
illuminated and which will enhance the residentially oriented character of
the neighborhoods.  Signs allowed without a permit are listed in division
(I) of this section. The following signs may be placed in said districts
subsequent to the issuance of a sign permit by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.  Permits are required for all other allowed signs which are
governed by the following specific criteria and by the additional general
criteria in division (H) of this section.  All other signs are prohibited.



      (1)   Signs on the premises of residential subdivisions,
multi-family developments, nursing homes and mobile home parks are regulated
as follows.



         (a)   Type.  Attached or freestanding on premise.



         (b)   Number.  One per vehicle entrance onto a public
street not to exceed two per development.  If two free standing signs are
used they shall be at least 50 feet apart.



         (c)   Maximum area.  Twenty-four (24) square feet per
sign.



         (d)   Maximum height.  Attached signs shall not be
constructed on the roof or parapet and shall not extend above the top
roof-line.  Freestanding signs shall not exceed eight feet in height.



         (e)   Minimum setbacks.  Twenty (20) feet from the edge
of the street pavement/face of curb or ten feet behind the utility poles
whichever is less, and also ten feet from any other separate lot and outside
of any sight distance as defined in § 156.078.



         (f)   Illumination.  External or detached illumination
only. Lighting from an externally illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded
or directed so that it illuminates only the face of the sign.



      (2)   Signs on the premises of other permitted non-residential
uses are regulated as follows:



         (a)   Type.  Attached or freestanding on premise.



         (b)   Number.  Attached, not to exceed two signs. 
Freestanding, one per vehicular entrance onto a public street not to exceed
two per project.



         (c)   Maximum area.  Forty (40) square feet for
churches and schools, all other users are allowed 24 square feet total.



         (d)   Maximum height.  Freestanding signs shall not
exceed eight feet in height.  Attached signs shall not be constructed on the
roof or parapet.



         (e)   Minimum setbacks.  Fifteen (15) feet from the
edge of the street pavement/face of curb or five feet behind the utility
poles whichever is less, and also ten  feet from any other separate lot line
and outside of any sight distance as defined in § 156.078.



         (f)   Illumination.  External or detached illumination
only.  Lighting from an externally illuminated sign shall be shaded,
shielded or directed so that it illuminates only the face of the sign.



   (M)   Signs permitted in Central Business District (B-1). All signs
under this division require the approval of the Town of Wilkesboro Historic
Preservation Commission. The B-1 (Central Business) District has diverse
shops and services in close proximity to one another and is scaled primarily
to pedestrian use rather than vehicular use. The intent of this division is
therefore to promote a village atmosphere.  The size and height (i.e.,
scale) and method of illumination of signs can significantly impact the
warmth, friendliness and natural and architectural beauty of the area. 
Signs allowed without a permit are listed in division (I) of this section. 
Permits are required for all other allowed signs which are governed by the
following specific criteria and by the additional general criteria in
division (H) of this section.  All other signs are prohibited.



      (1)   Type. Attached or freestanding on premise. 
Freestanding signs shall only be allowed where the principal building, along
with any awning, is setback at least 20 feet from the edge of the street
pavement/face of curb.



      (2)   Number.  Attached, not to exceed four signs. 
Freestanding, one except that two shall be permitted if the principal use has
direct vehicular access from two or more public streets.  If two
freestanding signs are allowed they shall be located at least 100 feet apart
as measured using the shortest straight line distance between the two signs
and said signs shall front along two separate streets.



      (3)   Maximum area.  Total sign area shall not exceed one and
one-half (1 ½) square foot of sign area per linear foot of building
frontage.  The total sign area may be divided among attached and
freestanding signs in any proportion provided that no single freestanding
sign exceed 24 square feet and no single attached sign exceed 60 square feet.



      (4)   Maximum height.  Attached signs shall not extend above
the top building roofline or parapet.  Freestanding signs shall not exceed
ten feet in height.



      (5)   Minimum setbacks.  Attached signs shall not project
from the building front more than five feet unless said signs are an integral
part of any awning or canopy.  In either case, said signs shall be located
no closer than three feet from any street pavement/face of curb.  Attached
signs which project from the building in a perpendicular fashion shall be at
least eight feet above the ground.



      (6)   Portable sidewalk signs.  One sign per business not
exceeding six square feet.



      (7)   Illumination.  External or detached illumination
only.  Lighting from an externally illuminated sign shall be shaded,
shielded or directed so that it illuminates only the face of the sign.



   (N)   Signs permitted in General Business (B-2), Limited Business
(B-3), Limited Industrial (M-1) and Industrial (M-2) Districts. The business
and industrial districts provide for a variety of commercial services. 
These districts are often located along highly traveled roads.  Therefore,
it is the intent of this division to allow for an efficient means of
identifying establishments quickly and easily while still considering the
purpose and intent of this division.  Signs allowed without a permit are
listed in division (I) of this section.  Permits are required for all other
allowed signs which are governed by the following specific criteria and by
the additional general criteria in division (H) of this section.  All other
signs are prohibited.



      (1)   Signs on the premises of single tenant, commercial or
industrial establishments or other uses are permitted as follows:



         (a)   Type. Attached or freestanding on premise.



         (b)   Number. Attached, no limit.  Freestanding one,
except two shall be permitted if the development has direct vehicular access
from two or more public streets.  If two freestanding signs are allowed, the
shortest straight-line distance between the two signs shall be no less than
100 feet and said signs shall front along the two separate streets and not
along the same street.



         (c)   Maximum area.  Total sign area shall not exceed
one and one-half (1 ½) square feet of sign area per linear foot of building
frontage up to a maximum of 200 square feet of signage per premises.  The
total sign area may be divided among attached and freestanding signs in any
proportion provided that no single freestanding sign exceeds 125 square feet
in area.



         (d)   Maximum height.  Attached signs shall not extend
above the top building roofline or parapet.  Freestanding signs shall not
exceed 30 feet in height.



         (e)   Minimum setbacks.  Freestanding signs shall be
setback 15 feet from the edge of the public street pavement/face of curb or
five feet behind the utility poles whichever is less, and it must be at least
ten feet from any separate lot line.



      (2)   Multi-tenant establishments are regulated as follows. 
The style, lettering and color for all tenants identified on such signs shall
be similar.



         (a)   Type.  Attached or freestanding on premise.



         (b)   Number.  Attached, no limit.  Freestanding one,
except two shall be permitted if the development has direct vehicular access
from two or more public streets.  If two freestanding signs are allowed, the
shortest straight-line distance between the two signs shall be no less than
100 feet and said signs shall front along the two separate streets and not
along the same street.



         (c)   Maximum area.  Attached signs shall not exceed
one and one-half (1 ½) square foot of sign area per one linear foot of
building frontage up to a maximum of 100 square feet of signage per
individual establishment.  Freestanding signs shall not exceed 125 square
feet for multi-tenant premises with five tenants or less.  For multi-tenant
developments with more than five tenants freestanding signs shall not exceed
175 square feet.  In addition, "Big Box" multi-tenant establishments are
allowed 175 square feet for freestanding signs.



         (d)   Maximum height.  Attached signs shall not extend
above the top building roofline or parapet.  Freestanding signs shall not
exceed 30 feet in height.



         (e)   Minimum setbacks.  Freestanding signs shall be
setback 15 feet from the edge of the public street pavement/face of curb or
five feet behind the utility poles whichever is less, and it must be at least
ten feet from any separate lot line.



   (O)   Historic Downtown Wilkesboro - Local Historic District.
Signage proposed to be located in Historic Downtown Wilkesboro must obtain a
certificate of appropriateness (COA) approval from  the Wilkesboro Historic
Preservation Commission.  Applications and associated information (e.g.,
enabling legislation, Historic Preservation zoning language, Local Historic
Downtown Wilkesboro boundary map, and the like) can be obtained from the
Wilkesboro Planning Department.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.082  ADDRESSING - RESERVED.



§ 156.083  ACCESS - RESERVED.



§ 156.084  EXTERIOR LIGHTING - RESERVED.



§ 156.085  BUFFERING AND SCREENING.



   (A)   Where a non-residential lot abuts any residential district,
there shall be a side or rear yard clearance of at least ten feet on the side
and/or rear yard abutting the residential district.



   (B)   Upon any side or rear lot located in a non-residential zoning
district that abuts a residential zoning district there shall be a densely
planted buffer strip at least six feet in height along the rear and/or side
lot abutting the residential property.  No such buffer shall extend nearer
to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the
adjoining residential lot.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.086  LANDSCAPING - RESERVED.



§ 156.087  UTILITIES - RESERVED.



DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES



§ 156.100  ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.



   (A)   In R-20 and R-20A zoning districts, accessory structures are
permitted only in a rear yard and shall be not less than 15 feet from any
property line, except on corner lots where they shall be set back at least 50
feet from any side street right-of-way line.



   (B)   In the R-8 zoning district, accessory structures are permitted
only in a rear yard and shall be not less than ten feet from any property
line, except on corner lots where they shall be set back at least 40 feet
from any side street right-of-way line.



   (C)   In the R-6 zoning district, accessory structures are permitted
only in a rear yard and shall be not less than five feet from any property
line, except on corner lots where they shall be set back at least 30 feet
from any side street right-of-way line.



   (D)   In the B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts, accessory uses shall not
include open storage.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.101  ADULT USES.



   (A)   No adult establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of a
church, public or private school, library, child day care center, residential
district, residential development, public park, or an establishment with an
on-premise North Carolina ABC license.



   (B)   All windows, doors, openings, etc. shall be covered, screened,
or located so that views into the interior are not possible from any public
area.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.102  BED AND BREAKFASTS - RESERVED.



§ 156.103  CEMETERIES - RESERVED.



§ 156.104  CHILD DAY CARE/NURSERY SCHOOL FACILITIES.



   (A)   At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area shall be
provided for each child.



   (B)   A completely fenced play area is required. No play area shall
be allowed in the street setback.



   (C)   The applicant must obtain any and all required state licenses
and comply with all state licensing requirements.



   (D)   Outdoor play times shall not be scheduled before 9:00 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m. Care should be taken to minimize noise impacts on adjacent
residences.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.105  ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.



   (A)   Dwellings in B-1 Central Business.



      (1)   Ground floor. A dwelling will only be permitted within
the B-1 district if it is in a structure in which the ground floor is used
exclusively as a non-residential use.



      (2)   Parking. A dwelling unit will only be permitted within
the B-1 district if it can provide private, off-street parking in accordance
with this chapter.



   (B)   Dwellings in R-8 Single Family Residential, R-6 General
Residential, R-20 Suburban Residential and R-20A Suburban
Residential/Agricultural.



      (1)   Quantity.  There shall be no more than two dwelling
units in a structure previously built and/or used as a single family
dwelling, and no more than two dwelling units on a lot.



      (2)   Design.  The ADU shall be designed so that the
appearance of the structure maintains that of a single family dwelling.



      (3)   Parking.  There shall be provided at least two
off-street parking spaces for the principal dwelling(s). One parking space
shall be provided on-site for each one bedroom ADU and two parking spaces
shall be provided on site for each two bedroom ADU.



      (4)   Size restrictions.  The living area for an accessory
dwelling unit shall not exceed 50% of the principal dwelling floor area. The
height of an attached or detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed
the height of the principal dwelling.



      (5)   Deed restrictions.  Before obtaining a zoning
compliance permit for an accessory dwelling unit the property owner shall
file with the county register of deeds a declaration of restrictions
containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by
the present owner and stating that:



         (a)   The accessory unit shall not be sold separately;
and



         (b)   The unit is restricted to the approved size as
stated in size restrictions above.



      (6)   Owner occupancy. Accessory dwelling.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-14, passed 9-10-2018)



§ 156.106  EXTRACTION OF EARTH PRODUCTS - RESERVED.



§ 156.107  FAMILY CARE HOME.



   No new family care home is permitted within a one-half (½) mile radius
of an existing family care home.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.108  JUNKYARDS, MOTOR VEHICLE GRAVEYARDS, AND SALVAGE YARDS.



   (A)   Junkyards, motor vehicle graveyards, and salvage yards must
adhere to the following development standards and/or conditions.



   (B)   Nonconforming motor vehicle storage yards, junkyards, and
salvage operations. Nonconforming vehicle graveyards, junkyards, and salvage
yards that were legally established but are not currently allowed within the
zoning district in which they are located and/or do not meet the development
standards of this section may not be continued for more than one year after
the date of this amendment (April 19, 2010) unless the following conditions
are met:



      (1)   A principal structure shall be located on parcel.  The
storage area shall be located in the rear yard of a principal structure and
more than 50 feet from the street right-of-way;



      (2)   The storage area shall be screened by an opaque wall or
fence that is a minimum of six feet tall and is constructed of wood, vinyl,
masonry, or similar material.  Chain link fence with vinyl slats may not be
used to satisfy this requirement.  No items may be stacked taller than the
wall or fence.  If deemed necessary by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, a
site plan shall be submitted to determine the required fencing height and
design, which is to be based on the visibility lines and terrain of the
parcel in question and/or surroundings areas;



      (3)   Burning shall not be permitted;



      (4)   Disposal of garbage unrelated to motor vehicles shall be
in an approved container and regularly maintained.  Open dumping of garbage
shall be prohibited;



      (5)   Disposal of toxic and/or hazardous matter is prohibited
anywhere without a state permit;



      (6)   Stock piling of tires and batteries is prohibited; and



      (7)   Storage of items shall be so arranged as to permit easy
access for fire-fighting purposes, which will be reviewed and approved by the
Wilkesboro Fire Inspector.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.109  ELECTRONIC GAMING OPERATIONS.



   (A)   The maximum number of machines/ terminals/computers for any
electronic gaming operations business shall be unlimited, except as limited
only by division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Minimum paved parking spaces.



      (1)   One space per every two terminals or one space per every
100 square feet of total floor area, whichever is greater;



      (2)   One handicapped space per every 25 or fewer spaces;



      (3)   One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than
one, shall be served by an access aisle 96 inches wide minimum and shall be
designated "van accessible";



      (4)   One additional space per each one employee.



   (C)   All applicable permits must be issued to the applicant prior
to the issuance of the conditional use permit and the opening of business.



   (D)   If food or beverage is served, the establishment must meet the
requirements of the Wilkes County Health Department, including any and all
necessary permits and/or licenses.



   (E)   The establishment must be a minimum of 500 feet from any
building being used as a dwelling or any residential zoning district.



   (F)   The establishment must be a minimum of 1,000 feet from any
other organization engaged in an electronic gaming operation business or any
adult or sexually oriented business.  The establishment must also be a
minimum of 1,000 feet from any established place of religious worship,
school, daycare center/home, library, public park, recreation area or motion
picture establishment where "G" or "PG" movies are shown to the general
public on a regular basis.



   (G)   When, separated by an imposing physical divide such as a road
right of way which is difficult to cross, or other substantial geographical
barrier such as a steep slope or river or other substantial water course,
then such gaming facility's entrance door must be a minimum of 250 feet from
any structures mentioned in divisions(E) and (F) of this section.  The
determination of whether an "imposing physical divide" or "other substantial
geographical barrier" exists shall rest in the sole and unfettered discretion
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



   (H)   A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared
within 30 days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines and the structures containing any existing electronic
gaming operations within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the
property lines of any established religious institution/synagogue, school,
daycare center/home; library, public park, recreation area or motion picture
establishment where "G" or "PG" rated movies are shown to the general public
on a regular basis that is within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified.
For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or
established if it is in existence at the time an application is submitted.



   (I)   Measurement of distance separation shall be in a straight line
from the closest point of the parcel at which the electronic gaming
operations business is located.



   (J)   No alcoholic beverages will be served or consumed on the
premises of electronic gaming operations.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.110  KENNELS - RESERVED.



§ 156.111  MANUFACTURED HOMES ON INDIVIDUAL LOTS.



   (A)   Setup.



      (1)   Manufactured homes shall be set up in accordance with
the standards established by the North Carolina Department of Insurance;



      (2)   All transportation lights and towing apparatus shall be
removed.



   (B)   Roof.



      (1)   A roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of two feet
for each 12 feet of horizontal run;



      (2)   A roof shall be shingled or metal construction.



   (C)   Siding.



      (1)   Wood, hardwood, aluminum, or vinyl comparable in
composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding common in
standard residential construction; 



      (2)   In no case shall aluminum or vinyl siding exceed the
reflectivity of glossy white paint.



   (D)   Skirting.



      (1)   Skirting shall be masonry or stucco and the reflectivity
when painted shall in no case exceed that of glossy white paint;



      (2)   Skirting shall be continuous under all sides of the home
except for required ventilation and access; 



      (3)   Skirting shall be installed no later than 60 days after
the set-up of the home.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.112  MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.



   (A)   Plan requirements. In addition to the other requirements of
this chapter, an applicant seeking a conditional use permit to establish a
manufactured home park must submit a detailed plan which specifies the
following design components in relation to requirements described in division
(B) of this section.



      (1)   Name of the manufactured home park (approval required by
Planning & Community Development Department) and complex identification
signage.



      (2)   Location and dimensions of every manufactured home
space, including total number of spaces.



      (3)   Location and dimensions of every street (street names
approval required by the Planning and Community Development Department) as
well as accommodations for service and emergency vehicles.



      (4)   Location of required signage as described in division
(B) of this section.



      (5)   Location of designated mail space as described in
division (B) of this section.



   (B)   General requirements of manufactured home parks.



      (1)   Entrance sign. There shall be at least one entrance sign
identifying the park which complies with the requirements of § 156.081 Signs
of the Wilkesboro Zoning Ordinance. 



      (2)   Mail service. There shall be a designated space on the
grounds for mail service for the residents of the manufactured home park.



      (3)   Minimum size. A manufactured home park site shall be a
minimum of two acres and have a minimum of five spaces for initial
development.  Adding spaces after initial approval shall require new
conditional use permit approval.



      (4)   Lot size. Each manufactured home space shall be a
minimum of 80 feet by 100 feet and there shall be no more than five
manufactured home spaces per acre of park area.



      (5)   Placement. All manufactured homes shall be placed
parallel to the public street. As determined by the Board of Adjustment,
manufactured home park layout shall be designed to 1) prevent public view
into property, 2) provide resident privacy, and 3) provide appurtenance
screening.



      (6)   Appearance. Homes should meet the appearance criteria in
§ 156.111.



      (7)   Setbacks.



         (a)   Spaces.  All manufactured home spaces must be set
back at least 20 feet from all public right-of-ways and adjoining property
lines.



         (b)   Home setbacks.  Setbacks for manufactured homes
in relation to individual space boundaries as shown on the detailed plan are
as follows:



            1.   Front setback: 25 feet.



            2.   Side setbacks: ten feet.



            3.   Rear setback: 20 feet.



      (8)   Accessory structures.  Structures shall be located a
minimum of 25 feet from any residential unit within the park and a minimum of
25 feet from any property line. 



   (C)   Streets and signage.



      (1)   Streets shall be graded and surfaced with pavement and
be a minimum width of 18 feet. If a street is proposed for dedication to the
Town, it must meet North Carolina Department of Transportation specifications.



      (2)   Each manufactured home park shall have a complex
identification sign located at entrance.



      (3)   All streets in the manufactured home park intersecting
another street shall have a stop sign that conforms to the North Carolina
Department of Transportation specifications. 



      (4)   Each street shall have a permanent street sign installed
with an approved designated E911 name.



      (5)   Permanent dead end streets shall have a cul-de-sac.
Cul-de-sacs shall be designed to accommodate emergency response and service
vehicles.



   (D)   Access.



      (1)   All entrances/exits of the manufactured home shall have
steps and/or ADA compliant ramp.



      (2)   Each manufactured home space shall have direct vehicular
access to an internal private street, however; no manufactured home space
shall have direct vehicular access to a public or private street outside of
the development.



   (E)   Parking.



      (1)   Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided within
each manufactured home space and cannot be located between the front of the
home and the public street. Parking spaces must be at least four feet away
from unit.



      (2)   On-street parking areas may be utilized if the street
within the manufactured home park is designed and constructed to accommodate
on-street parking.



      (3)   To meet the two parking space requirement, a combination
of off-street and on-street parking is allowed.



   (F)   Sanitation, water and sewer.



      (1)   Sanitation. Parks must provide sanitation service that
consists of either each home having its own container, or a dumpster provided
for the entire development.  Dumpsters must be screened from public view and
shall be maintained to avoid accumulation of rubbish outside of the container.



      (2)   Water.  An accessible, adequate, safe, and potable
supply of water shall be provided in each manufactured home park. Where an
approved public water supply is available, connection shall be made there and
its supply used. When a public water supply is not available, adequate water
supply shall be developed in accordance with the Wilkes County Health
Department standards.



      (3)   Sewer.  Adequate and safe sewage disposal facilities
shall be provided in all manufactured home parks. Collection systems and
sewage treatment plants shall be in compliance with the requirements of the
North Carolina Department of Environmental and Natural Resources. Individual
septic tank systems can be considered, if soil, topography, and ground water
conditions are favorable, and approval is granted by the Wilkes County
Environmental Health Department.



   (G)   Landscaping/buffering. Certain land uses may create an adverse
impact when developed adjacent to other less intensive land uses. Buffers
shall provide screening between a proposed development and a dissimilar
existing land use or zoning designation to provide a transition between them.
A buffer is a strip of land together with some form of screening such as
existing vegetation, planted vegetation, a landscaped earthen berm, a fence,
a wall, or a combination of the above.



      (1)   Landscaped buffer must be a minimum width of 15 feet and
no less than six feet in height at maturity. Total number of plants required
for every 100 linear feet shall equal or exceed 18.



      (2)   Grade changes in areas to be included in the landscaped
buffers shall not exceed 5% from the pre-development profile, except wherein
an earthen berm is incorporated as part of the landscaped area.



      (3)   All dumpsters, loading docks, or utility structures
visible from a public street or adjacent property line shall be screened
unless already screened by an intervening building or buffer. Landscaping
shall not interfere with the access and operation of any such structure or
facility. All unenclosed outdoor storage areas greater than 25 square feet
shall also be screened from adjacent properties and streets.



   (H)   Recreation area.  Each manufactured home park shall have a
minimum of 8% of the total area set aside and developed for recreation
purposes. Land set aside for recreation must be suitable for such purposes.
Steep slopes and other unsuitable area shall not be counted towards the 8%
minimum. Recreation areas shall be maintained by property owner in a safe and
sanitary manner and available to all residences of the park.



   (I)   Park register. The park operator must maintain a register
containing a record of all occupants. The register must contain the following
information:



      (1)   Name, address, and space number of each occupant; and



      (2)   The date the manufactured home entered the park.



   (J)   Maintenance.



      (1)   Grounds and buildings of the manufactured home park
shall be kept free of debris, trash, and litter to prevent the infestation of
rodents, flies, mosquitos, and other pests.



      (2)   Grounds within the manufactured home park shall have
proper drainage to prevent the accumulation of water.



      (3)   All maintenance is responsibility of property owner.



   (K)   Lighting. All streets in the manufactured home park shall be
adequately illuminated from sunset until sunrise as determined by the Board
of Adjustment. The minimum size street light shall be a 175 watt mercury
vapor (approximately 7,000 lumen class), or its equivalent, spaced at
intervals not more than 400 feet.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.113  MINI-STORAGE UNITS - RESERVED.



§ 156.114  MODULAR UNITS - RESERVED.



§ 156.115  MOTOR VEHICLE BODY SHOP - RESERVED.



§ 156.116  MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS - RESERVED.



§ 156.117  PRECIOUS METALS DEALER - RESERVED.



§ 156.118  PUBLIC UTILITIES.



   (A)   In residential zones, public works and public utility
facilities such as distribution lines, transformer stations, transmission
lines and towers, electric substations, water tanks, and telephone exchanges,
should be essential to the service of the immediate area and there should be
no vehicles or equipment stored or any offices located on the property.  The
entire lot shall be landscaped properly and furnished with a densely planted
buffer at least six feet in height.



   (B)   Service and storage yards for public works or public utility
facilities are only permitted in an M-1 or M-2 district.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.119  SERVICE STATIONS WITH FUEL SALES.



   Gasoline pumps and other appliances shall be located at least 12 feet
behind the property line.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.120  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES OR COMPLEXES.



   (A)   Purpose and legislative intent.



      (1)   The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the Town of
Wilkesboro's authority concerning the placement, construction and
modification of wireless telecommunications facilities or complexes. This
chapter provides for the safe and efficient integration of wireless
facilities or complexes necessary for the provision of advanced wireless
telecommunications services throughout the community and to ensure the
availability of reliable wireless services to the public, government
agencies, the economy and associated businesses and first responders, with
the intention of furthering the public's safety and citizen's general welfare.



      (2)   The Town of Wilkesboro (Town) finds that Wireless
Telecommunications Facilities (Facilities) and Complexes may pose significant
concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and environment of
the town and its inhabitants. The town also recognizes that facilitating the
development of wireless service technology can be an economic development
asset to the community and a significant benefit to the economy, guests
and/or residents. In order to assure that the placement, construction or
modification of a facility or complex is consistent with the town's land use
policies, the town hereby adopts a single, comprehensive, wireless
telecommunications facility or complex application and permitting process.



      (3)   The intent of this section is to:



         (a)   Minimize the physical impact of wireless
telecommunications facilities on the community, protect the character of the
community to the extent reasonably possible;



      (b)   Establish a fair and efficient process for review and
approval of applications;



      (c)   Assure an integrated, comprehensive review of
environmental impacts of such facilities; and



      (d)   Protect the health, safety and welfare of the town.



   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, and where not
inconsistent with the context of a particular section, the defined terms,
phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning
given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the
present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number
include words in the singular number and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory, and not merely
directory.



      ACCESSORY FACILITY or STRUCTURE. An accessory facility or
structure serving or being used in conjunction with wireless
telecommunications facilities or complexes, including but not limited to
utility or transmission equipment storage sheds or cabinets.



      AMEND, AMENDMENT and AMENDED. Means and shall relate to any
change, addition, correction, deletion, replacement or substitution, other
than typographical changes of no effect.



      APPLICANT. Any wireless service provider submitting an
application for a conditional use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities.



      APPLICATION. All necessary and required documentation that an
applicant submits in order to receive a conditional use permit or a building
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.



      ANTENNA. A system of electrical conductors that transmit or
receive electromagnetic waves or radio frequency or other wireless signals.



      BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Town
of Wilkesboro.



      CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION or COC. A required document issued by
the town that confirms that all work represented in the application:



         (a)   Was properly permitted;



         (b)   Was done in compliance with and fulfilled all
conditions of all permits, including any final completion deadline;



         (c)   Was fully constructed as approved and permitted;
and



         (d)   A final inspection was requested, conducted and
the facility or complex passed the final inspection.



      CO-LOCATION. The use of an approved telecommunications structure
to support antenna for the provision of wireless services.



      CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. The official document or permit by which
an applicant is allowed to file for a building permit to construct and use a
facility or complex as granted or issued by the town.



      COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE. The
inability to perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce, the
cause or occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or
foreseen and that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The
inability to achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit,
standing alone and for a single site, shall not deem a situation to be
COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE and shall not render an act or the terms of an
agreement COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE.



      COMPLETED APPLICATION. An application that contains all necessary
and required information and/or data as set forth in this chapter and that is
necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an
application and action on the application.



      COMPLEX. The entire site or facility, including all structures
and equipment located at the site.



      DAS or DISTRIBUTIVE ACCESS SYSTEM. A technology using antenna
combining technology allowing for multiple carriers or wireless service
providers to use the same set of antennas, cabling or fiber optics.



      ELIGIBLE FACILITY. An existing wireless tower or base station
that involves collocation of new transmission equipment or the replacement of
transmission equipment that does not constitute a substantial modification.
An eligible facility application shall be acted upon administratively and
shall not require a conditional use permit, but shall require staff
administrative approval.



      FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated
and authorized successor agency.



      FACILITY. A set of wireless transmitting and/or receiving
equipment, including any associated electronics and electronics shelter or
cabinet and generator.



      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly
designated and authorized successor agency.



      HEIGHT. The distance measured from the pre-existing grade level
to the highest point on the tower or support structure, even if said highest
point is an antenna or lightening protection device. As regards increasing
the height of an existing structure, height means the height above the top of
the structure prior to any work related to a wireless facility.



      IN-KIND REPLACEMENT. Replacing a component(s) that is
malfunctioning with a properly functioning component of the same weight and
dimensions and that does not enable an increase in revenue for the service
provider or increase the compensation paid to the owner or manager of the
support structure.



      MAINTENANCE. Plumbing, electrical, carpentry or mechanical work
that may or may not require a building permit, but that does not constitute a
modification of the WTF.



      MODIFICATION or MODIFY. The addition, removal or change of any of
the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless
facility or complex with identical components, including but not limited to
antennas, cabling, equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds,
changing the color or materials of any visually discernable components,
vehicular access, parking and/or an upgrade or change-out of equipment for
better or more modern equipment. Adding a new wireless carrier or service
provider to an existing support structure or tower as a co-location is a
modification, unless the height, profile or size of the compound is
increased, in which case it is not a modification.



      NECESSARY or NECESSITY or NEED. What is technologically required
for the equipment to function as designed by the manufacturer and that
anything less will result in the effect of prohibiting the provision of
service as intended and described in the narrative of the application.
Necessary, necessity or need does not mean what may be desired, preferred or
the most cost-efficient approach and is not related to an applicant's
specific chosen design standards.



      NIER. Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation.



      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership,
joint stock company, association of two or more persons having ajoint common
interest, or any other entity.



      PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY. See definition for WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



      PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICE or PTS. The same meaning as defined and used in the 1996
Telecommunications Act.



      REPAIRS  AND  MAINTENANCE. The replacement or repair of any
components of a wireless facility or complex where the replacement is
identical to the component being replaced, or for any matters that involve
the normal repair and maintenance of a wireless facility or complex without
the addition, removal or change of any of the physical or visually
discernable components or aspects of a wireless facility or complex that will
impose new visible burdens of the facility or complex as originally
permitted. Any work that changes the services provided to or from the
facility, or the equipment, is not repairs or maintenance.



      STEALTH or STEALTH SITING TECHNIQUE. A design or treatment that
minimizes adverse aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property,
buildings, and other facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally
the same area as the requested location of such wireless telecommunications
facilities, which shall mean building the least visually and physically
intrusive facility and complex that is not technologically or commercially
impracticable under the facts and circumstances. STEALTH TECHNIQUE includes
such techniques as:



         (a)   DAS or its functional equivalent; or



         (b)   Camouflage where the tower is disguised to make it
less visually obtrusive and not recognizable to the average person as a
wireless facility or complex.



      STATE. The State of North Carolina. .



      STRUCTURAL CAPABILITY or STRUCTURAL CAPACITY  or  STRUCTURAL
INTEGRITY. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other standard,
code, regulation or law, up to and not exceeding a literal 100% of the
designed loading and stress capability of the support structure.



      SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION. A change or modification that:



         (a)   Increases the existing vertical height of the
structure by the greater of:



            1.   More than 10%;



            2.   The height of one additional antenna array
with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet; or



         (b)   Except where necessary to shelter the antenna from
inclement weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable, adding an
appurtenance to the body of a wireless support structure that protrudes
horizontally from the edge of the wireless support structure the greater of:



            1.   More than 20 feet;



            2.   More than the width of the wireless support
structure at the level of the appurtenance; or



            3.   Increases the square footage of the existing
equipment compound by more than 2,500 square feet.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission and/or reception of audio,
video, data, and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other
electronic or electromagnetic systems.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE. See definition for WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.



      TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE. A structure used primarily to
support equipment used to provide wireless communications or was originally
constructed primarily for such purpose.



      TEMPORARY. Not permanent in relation to all aspects and
components of this section and that will exist for fewer than 90 calendar
days.



      TOWER. Any structure designed primarily to support an antenna
and/or other equipment for receiving and/or transmitting a wireless signal
and is the lesser of:



         (a)   More than 10 feet taller than the adjacent
buildings or trees; or



         (b)   Taller than forty feet.



      TOWN. The Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina.



      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY OR FACILITIES (WTF or WTFs),
FACILITY, SITE, COMPLEX, TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE AND PERSONAL WIRELESS
FACILITY SITE. A specific location at which a structure that is designed or
intended to be used to house, support or accommodate antennas or other
transmitting or receiving equipment is located. This includes without limit,
towers and support structures of all types and kinds, including but not
limited to buildings, church steeples, silos, water towers, signs or any
other structure that is used or is proposed to be used as a support structure
for antennas or the functional equivalent of such. It expressly includes all
related facilities and equipment such as cabling, radios and other electronic
equipment, equipment shelters and enclosures, cabinets and other structures
associated with the complex used to provide, though not limited to, radio,
television, cellular, SMR, paging, 911, Personal Communications Services
(PCS), commercial satellite services, microwave services, internet access
service and any commercial wireless telecommunication service whether or not
licensed by the FCC.



   (C)   General policies and procedures for applications under this
section. In order to ensure that the location, placement, construction and
modification of a facility or the components of a complex do not endanger or
jeopardize the town's health, safety, public welfare, environmental features,
the nature and character of the community or neighborhood and other aspects
of the quality of life specifically listed elsewhere in this section, the
town hereby adopts an overall policy and related procedures with respect to
the submittal, review, approval and issuance of permits or administrative
approval granted authority for wireless facilities for the express purpose of
achieving the following outcomes:



      (1)   Requiring a conditional use permit for any new complex,
facility or any substantial modification of a facility, complex or for a
co-located facility;



      (2)   Requiring administrative approval and a properly issued
building permit for any co-location or modification of a facility or complex
that is not a substantial modification or substantial co-location.



      (3)   Implementing an application process and requirements;



      (4)   Establishing procedures for examining an application and
issuing a conditional use permit or administrative approval that are fair and
consistent;



      (5)   Promoting, and requiring wherever possible, the sharing
and/or co-location of support structures among service providers;



      (6)   Requiring, promoting and encouraging, wherever possible,
the placement, height and quantity of attachments to a facility or complex in
such a manner as to minimize the physical and visual impact on the community,
including but not limited to the use of stealth siting techniques.



      (7)   Requiring that the facility and complex shall be the
least visually intrusive among those options that are not technologically
impracticable given the facts and circumstances.



      (8)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment is officially the
designated agency or body of the town to whom applications for a conditional
use permit for a facility or complex must be made, and that is authorized to
make decisions with respect to granting or not granting or revoking
conditional use permits applied for under this section.



      (9)   The Wilkesboro Town Council hereby designates the
Planning and Community Development Director or designee as the authority for
requests for anything other than a substantial modification or conditional
use permit, i.e. for all administrative approvals.



      (10)   Prior to the submission of an application there shall
be a pre-application meeting for all intended applications. The
pre-application meeting may be held either on site or telephonically as
deemed appropriate by the Planning and Community Development Director or
designee. The purpose of the pre-application meeting will be to address:



         (a)   Issues that will help to expedite the review and
permitting process; and



         (b)   Specific issues or concerns the town or the
applicant may have. Costs of the town's permitting process and to prepare for
and attend the pre-application meeting will be borne by the applicant and
paid for out of a fee set forth in the town's schedule of fees, which shall
have been paid to the town prior to any site visit or pre-application meeting
or any work related to an intended application preceding the site visit or
pre-application meeting.



      (11)   If there has not been a prior site visit for the
requested facility or complex within the previous 6 months a site visit shall
be conducted.



      (12)   An applicant shall submit to the town the number of
completed applications determined to be needed at the pre-application
meeting. If Board of Adjustment action is required, applications will not be
transmitted for consideration until the application is deemed complete.



      (13)   The owner(s) of the support structure to which antennas
or related equipment are to be attached must be an official applicant of
record, unless the owner is the town, in which case, to prevent a conflict of
interest, the town shall not be a party to the application.



      (14)   All applicants shall closely follow the instructions
for preparing an application. Not following the instructions without
permission to deviate from such shall result in the application being deemed
incomplete and a tolling of the time allowed for action on an application
until a complete application is received.



      (15)   Within 30 days of the date of submission of an
application the applicant shall be notified in writing of any deficiencies
related to the completeness of the application. Remediation of deficiencies
in an application shall be deemed an amendment of the application that was
received.



      (16)   The town may deny applications not meeting the
requirements stated herein or which are otherwise not complete after proper
notice and a reasonable opportunity to make the application complete has been
afforded. Applications will be deemed abandoned if left incomplete for more
than 90 days after the date of notice of incompleteness.



      (17)   No work of any kind on or at a facility or complex
shall be started until the application is reviewed and approved and the
conditional use permit or administrative approval, as applicable, has been
issued, and a building permit has been issued in accordance with the town's
code.



      (18)   Any and all representations made by the applicant or
that are made in support of the application shall be deemed to be on the
record, whether written or verbal, and shall be deemed to have been relied
upon in good faith by the town. Any verbal representation shall be treated as
if it were made in writing.



      (19)   Other than to remediate non-compliant situations
related to matters of safety or the conditions of a permit, no permits for
work at a facility or complex shall be issued where the facility or complex
is not in full compliance with all applicable local, state and federal laws,
rules, regulations and orders. A facility or complex not in full compliance
with this section shall be required to be brought into full compliance before
any permit of any kind will be issued.



      (20)   An application shall be signed on behalf of the
applicant(s) by a person vested with the authority to bind and commit the
applicant attesting to the truthfulness, completeness and accuracy of the
information presented.



      (21)   The applicant must provide documentation to
substantiate that it has the right to proceed as proposed on the site or at
the complex in the form of an executed copy of the lease with the landowner
or landlord or a signed letter of agency granting authorization. If the
applicant owns the site or complex, a copy of the ownership record is
required.



      (22)   Applications shall include written commitment
statements to the effect that:



         (a)   The applicant's facility or complex shall at all
times and without exception be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance
with all conditions of all permits, as well as all applicable and permissible
local codes, ordinances, and regulations and all applicable town, state and
Federal laws, rules, and regulations, unless specifically granted relief by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment in writing; and



         (b)   The construction of the facility or complex is
legally permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the
applicant is licensed to do business in the state.



      (23)   Where a certification is called for in this section,
such certification shall bear the signature and seal of a professional
engineer licensed in the state.



      (24)   A support structure and any and all accessory or
associated structures shall maximize the use of building materials, colors
and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it may be affixed
and to harmonize with the natural surroundings. This shall include the
utilization of stealth or camouflage or concealment technique as may be
required by the town.



      (25)   All utilities at a complex or site shall be installed
underground and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the town, including specifically, but not limited to
applicable electrical codes. At a facility or complex needing vehicular
access, an access road, parking and turn around space for emergency vehicles
shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access. Maximum
use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the extent
practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground disturbance
and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow natural
contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion. If the
current access road or turn around space is deemed in disrepair or in need of
remedial work to make it serviceable and safe and in compliance with any
applicable regulations as determined at a site visit, the application shall
contain a commitment to remedy or restore the road or turn around space so
that it is serviceable and safe and in compliance with applicable regulations.



      (26)   All work at a facility or complex shall be done in
strict compliance with all current applicable technical, safety and
safety-related codes adopted by the town, state, or United States, including
but not limited to the most recent edition of the TIA ANSI Code, National
Electric Safety Code, the National Electrical Code, the Occupational and
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations, recommended practices of
the National Association of Tower Erectors and accepted and responsible
workmanlike industry practices. The codes referred to are codes that include,
but are not limited to, construction, building, electrical, fire, safety,
health, and land use codes. In the event of a conflict between or among any
of the preceding the more stringent shall apply.



      (27)   A holder of a conditional use permit or administrative
approval granted authority granted under this section shall obtain, at its
own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable law, ordinance,
rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and
effect, for as long as required by the town or other governmental entity or
agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.



      (28)   Unless such is proven to be technologically
impracticable, the town requires the co-location of new antenna arrays on
existing structures, as opposed to the construction of a new complex or
support structure or increasing the height, footprint or profile of a
facility or complex beyond the conditions of the approved conditional use
permit for an existing facility or complex. In instances not qualifying as an
eligible facility, the applicant shall submit a comprehensive report
inventorying all existing structures more than 50 feet in height within
one-half mile of the location of any proposed new facility or complex.



      (29)   An applicant intending to co-locate on or at an
existing facility or complex shall be required to document the intent of the
existing owner to permit its use by the applicant.



      (30)   Co-located equipment shall consist only of the minimum
antenna array technologically needed to provide service primarily and
essentially within the town, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is
shown in the form of clear and convincing evidence.



      (31)   A DAS system that is owned or operated by a commercial
carrier and is part of a commercial wireless system, or are used for
commercial purposes, is expressly included in the context of this section,
regardless of the location or whether the facility or any of its components
is located inside or outside a structure or building.



      (32)   The existence of a lease or an option to lease shall
not be deemed justification for not complying with the siting priorities set
forth in this section, as well as other applicable land use and zoning
regulations. An applicant may not by-pass sites of higher siting priority
than the priority chosen solely because the site proposed is under lease or
an option to lease exists. If a site other than the number 1 priority or
attaching to an existing structure is proposed, the applicant must
demonstrate and explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the town why
co-location is technically or commercially impracticable. Contractual or
build-to-suit agreements between carriers and a proposed tower owner shall
not be a valid basis for any claim of exemption, exception or waiver from
compliance with the siting priorities.



      (33)   Any technical information must be provided in such a
manner, detail and form that the content and any conclusions are able to be
verified by a third party using the information used and provided by the
applicant.



      (34)   All costs associated with the preparation and
submission of an application and/or necessitated by the requirements for
obtaining and maintaining any and all town permits shall be borne by the
applicant or permittee.



      (35)   Any new wireless facility shall be designed and
constructed so as to be the least visually intrusive, create the least visual
impact reasonably possible and have the least negative impact on nearby
property values, provided that pursuant to 47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(B)(II)
compliance with this requirement does prohibit or effectively serve to
prohibit the provision of the intended service from one or more facilities.



      (36)   No new facility or antenna array shall be identifiable,
recognizable or discernable as a wireless facility or antenna by a typical
lay-person from a distance of 250 feet or more.



      (37)   The fact that a proposed use satisfies all specific
requirements for a conditional use permit in a given type of zoning or land
use district does not create a presumption that the use is compatible or in
harmony with nearby properties within 1,000 feet and, in itself, is not
sufficient to require the grant of a conditional use permit.



         (D)   Responsible party(s). With the exception of the
town itself, the owner(s) of a facility or complex, any support structure
used to accommodate wireless facilities, and of the land upon which a
facility support structure or complex is located, shall at all times be
jointly and individually responsible for:



      (1)   The clean, neat, non-littered and safe condition of the
facility or complex, support structure and all components on the site related
to the facility or complex;



      (2)   Assuring that all activities of owners, users, or
lessees occurring on the site, and all components on the site related to the
facility or complex, are at all times in compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, rules, regulations, orders, and permits related to the facility
or complex; and



      (3)   Assuring the proper permitting as required by this
article and other town regulations by all lessees and users of the facility
or complex, including but not limited to any upgrades and/or modifications of
equipment. Said owner(s) shall regularly and diligently monitor activities at
the site to assure that the facility or complex is operated in compliance
with this chapter, other town regulations and any conditional use permit.



   (E)   Fees. All fees and charges, including but not limited to
application fees, expert assistance fees, and permit fees, shall be as set
forth in the town's schedule of fees and charges. For new towers, support
structures or substantial modifications, the expert assistance fee shall be
as set forth in the town's fee schedule, and to prevent taxpayer
subsidization of the applicant shall be: $8,000 for new towers, $2,500 for
substantial modifications, and $1,500 for modifications.



   (F)   Existing facilities and complexes.



      (1)   Any legally permitted facility, tower or other support
structure or complex that exists on the effective date of this section of the
town's codes shall be allowed to continue as it presently exists, provided
that:



         (a)   All work was properly permitted;



         (b)   The facility or complex is in compliance with all
applicable local, state and Federal laws, rules regulations, orders and
permit conditions;



         (c)   The site is in compliance with the latest version
of TIA ANSI 222 as regards the physical condition of the site; and



         (d)   A certificate of completion (COC) was issued for
the most recent work performed;



      (2)   Any work not properly previously permitted prior to the
adoption of this section must be properly permitted within 90 days of the
effective date of this section or prior to any modification of, on or at the
site or facility.



      (3)   Any new co-location and/or modification of a facility,
tower or other support structure or complex or a carrier's equipment located



on the tower or facility, must be permitted under this section and the entire
facility or complex and any new co-location or modification shall comply with
all applicable laws, rules and regulations, including obtaining a valid COC.



   (G)   Certificate of completion.



      (1)   No work shall be allowed to be done at or on any
facility or complex, excepting normal repair and maintenance work as defined
in this section, for which the owner cannot produce the COC for the most
recent work, until a final inspection has been conducted and a COC has been
issued. The owner of the facility, tower or other support structure or
complex shall pay for the actual cost of the required final inspection prior
to the inspection being conducted. If the facility or complex does not pass
the initial final inspection, the owner shall be required to pay for any
subsequent re-inspection prior to the re-inspection being conducted. A
passing final inspection is required prior to the issuance of a COC.



      (2)   If no COC can be produced for previously done work, at
the discretion of the Planning and Community Development Director, per day
per violation fines and other penalties as allowed by law may be imposed
until the facility or complex is compliant and the required COC has been
issued.



   (H)   Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from this section:



      (1)   Any facilities expressly exempt from the town's zoning,
land use, siting, building and permitting authority.



      (2)   Any reception or transmission devises expressly exempted
under the Telecommunications Act of 1996.



      (3)   A facility used exclusively for private, non-commercial
radio and television reception and private citizen's bands, licensed amateur
radio and other similar non-commercial telecommunications that is less than
100 feet above ground level.



      (4)   Facilities used exclusively for providing wireless
service(s) or technologies where:



         (a)   There is no charge for the use of the wireless
service;



         (b)   The facility or complex does not require a new
tower or increase the height or profile of the structure being attached to;
and



         (c)   The service is not intended to be useable more
than 75 feet from the antenna.



   (I)   Application requirements for a new tower, support structure,
or a substantial modification or co-location.



      (1)   All applicants for a conditional use permit for a new
wireless facility or complex, including for a new tower or other new support
structure or that constitutes a substantial modification, shall comply with
the requirements set forth in this section. In addition to the required
information set forth hi this section, all applications for the construction
or installation of new wireless facility or complex or substantial
modification shall contain the information hereinafter set forth prior to the
issuance of a conditional use permit. Any technical information must be
provided in such a manner, form and with such content that it is able to be
verified by a third party using the information used and provided by the
applicant.



      (2)   Ownership and management.



         (a)   The name, address, phone number and e-mail address
of the person preparing the application;



         (b)   The name, address, phone number and e-mail address
of the property owner and the applicant, including the legal name of the
applicant. If the owner of the structure is different than the applicant, the
name, e-mail address and all necessary contact information shall be provided;



         (c)   The postal address and tax map parcel number of
the property;



         (d)   A copy of the FCC license(s) applicable for the
intended use(s) of the wireless telecommunications facilities, including all
FCC licensed frequency bands to be used; and



         (e)   The applicant shall disclose in writing any
agreement in existence that would limit or preclude the ability of the
applicant to share any new telecommunication tower or support structure that
it constructs or has constructed for it.



      (3)   Zoning and planning.



         (a)   The Zoning District or designation in which the
property is situated;



         (b)   The size of the property footprint on which the
structure to be built or attached is located, stated both in square feet and
lot line dimensions, and a survey showing the location of all property lot
lines;



         (c)   The location, size of the footprint and height of
all existing and proposed structures, enclosures and cabinets on the property
on which the structure is located and that are related to the subject of the
application;



         (d)   A site plan to scale, not a hand drawn sketch,
showing the footprint of the support structure and the type, location and
dimensions of access drives, proposed landscaping and buffers in compliance
with the town's Building or Development Code, including but not limited to
fencing and any other requirements of site plans;



         (e)   Elevation drawings showing the profile or the
vertical rendition of the tower or support structure at the facility or
complex and identifying all existing and proposed attachments, including the
height above the existing grade of each attachment and the owner or operator
of each, as well as all lighting;



         (f)   The type of tower or support structure, the number
of antenna arrays proposed to be able to be accommodated and the basis for
the calculations of the tower's or support structure's capability to
accommodate the required number of antenna arrays for which the structure
must be designed;



         (g)   Disclosure in writing of any agreement in
existence prior to the submission of the application that would limit or
preclude the ability of the applicant to share any new telecommunication
tower that it constructs; and



         (h)   A certified statement of:



            1.   The total cost of construction for the work
associated with the application; and



            2.   The total cost of all equipment of the
applicant at the facility. To verify the accuracy of the information, the
town reserves the right to require copies of applicable invoices or other
clear and convincing corroborating evidence.



      (4)   Safety.



         (a)   The age of the tower or support structure and
complex stated in years, including the date of the grant of the original
permit;



         (b)   A description of the type of tower, e.g. guyed,
self-supporting lattice or monopole, or other type of support structure;



         (c)   For a tower, the make, model, type and
manufacturer of the tower and the structural design analysis and report,
including the calculations, certified by a professional engineer licensed in
the state, proving the tower or support structure's capability to safely
accommodate the facilities of the applicant without change or modification;



         (d)   If a substantial co-location, change or
modification of a facility or complex is needed, a detailed narrative
explaining what changes are needed and why they are needed;



         (e)   A complete, unredacted copy of the foundation
design and report for the tower or other structure, including a geotechnical
sub-surface soils investigation report and foundation design for the facility;



         (f)   If substantially modifying or co-locating on an
existing tower or other support structure, a complete, unredacted and
certified TIA ANSI 222 report regarding the physical condition of the complex
and all of its components done within the previous 6 months. If such report
has not been done within the previous 6 months, one shall be done and
submitted as part of the application. No building permit shall be issued for
any wireless facility or related equipment where the structure being attached
to is in need of remediation to comply with the requirements of this
subsection and other adopted standards of the town regarding the physical
condition and/or safety of the facility, unless and until all remediation
work that is deemed needed has been completed, or a schedule for the
remediation work has been approved by the Town Planning Department;



         (g)   In an instance involving a tower with only a
single array of antennas, or for the first antenna array to be attached to a
tower where the array will be 33 feet or more above ground level, and not
within 100 feet of areas to which the public has or could reasonably have or
gain access to, in lieu of a full RF emissions study, if deemed appropriate
by the town, signed documentation in the form of the FCC's “Checklist to
Determine whether a Facility may be Categorically Excluded” may in certain
cases be allowed to be used and shall be provided to verify that the facility
and complex with the proposed installation will be in full compliance with
the current FCC's RF emissions regulations;



         (h)   In certain instances the town may deem it
appropriate to have a post-construction on-site RF survey of the facility or
complex done after the construction or modification and activation of the
facility or complex, such to be done under the direction of the town or its
designee, and an un-redacted copy of the survey results provided, along with
all calculations, prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance. Such
study shall reflect the cumulative effects, readings or levels of all active
RF equipment at the site;



         (i)   In the event the town deems it necessary to
determine compliance with the FCC's maximum permitted exposure (MPE) rules,
and in lieu of the procedure contained in the preceding division (4)(h) of
this division (I), the town expressly reserves the right to request the
involvement of the FCC and/or OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health
Administration) to determine or verity compliance with Federal standards and
guidelines that the town, itself, may be prohibited from determining.



         (j)   If not submitted in a previous application, a
signed statement that the applicant will expeditiously remedy any physical or
RF interference with other telecommunications or wireless devices or services.



      (5)   A written copy of an analysis completed by a qualified
individual or organization to determine if the proposed wireless
telecommunications facility or complex is in compliance with Federal Aviation
Administration Regulation Part 77, and if it requires lighting, including any
facility or complex where the application proposes to increase the height of
the existing tower or support structure.



      (6)   New towers shall be prohibited on private property in
residential districts, historic districts and areas officially deemed to be
visual or sensitive scenic areas within the town's corporate limits.



      (7)   All applications for a proposed facility or complex
applicable to this section shall contain clear and convincing evidence that
the facility or complex is sited and designed so as to create the least
visual intrusiveness reasonably possible given the facts and circumstances
involved. To achieve this goal the town expressly reserves the right to
require the use of stealth or camouflage siting techniques such as, but not
limited to, DAS (Distributive Antenna System), a small cell facility or a
functional equivalent as regards size, and such shall be subject to approval
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



      (8)   If proposing a new tower or support structure, or a
substantial co-location or modification of an existing structure, the
applicant shall be required to submit clear and convincing evidence that
there is no alternative solution within the search ring of the proposed site
that would be less visually intrusive and that not to permit the proposed new
tower or support structure, or a substantial co-location or modification
would result in the prohibition of service or the perpetuation of a
significant gap in service.



      (9)   An applicant proposing a new tower or support structure
shall use the largest search ring technically possible, and may be required
to prove technically that the search ring used is the largest that could be
used.



      (10)   In order to better inform the public, in the case of a
new tower or support structure or substantial modification, the applicant
shall hold a "balloon test" prior to the initial public hearing on the
application. The applicant shall arrange to fly, or raise upon a temporary
mast, a minimum of a 10 foot in length brightly colored balloon with
horizontal stabilizers, at the maximum height of the proposed new tower or
support structure or substantial modification. Unless conditions at the time
preclude it, for reasons of instability vis-a-vis wind speed, the use of
spherical balloons shall not be permitted.



      (11)   At the option of the Planning and Community Development
Director, a community meeting may be held concurrent with the balloon test,
the notification of which shall be as set forth in the following division
(L)(4).



      (12)   At least 14 days prior to the conduct of the balloon
test, a sign shall be erected so as to be clearly visible from the road
nearest the proposed site and shall be removed no later than 14 days after
the conduct of the balloon test. The sign shall be at least four feet by
eight feet in size and shall be readable from the road by a person with 20/20
vision.



         (a)   Such sign shall be placed off, but as near to, the
public right-of-way as is possible.



         (b)   Such sign shall contain the times and date(s) of
the balloon test and contact information.



         (c)   The dates, (including a second date, in case of
poor visibility or wind in excess of 15 mph on the initial date) times and
location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant seven and
14 days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general
circulation in the town and as agreed to by the town. The applicant shall
inform the town in writing, of the dates and times of the test, at least 14
days in advance. The balloon shall be flown for at least four consecutive
hours between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date
shall be on a week-end, but the second date, in case of poor visibility on
the initial date, may be on a week day. A report with pictures from various
locations of the balloon shall be provided with the application.



         (d)   The applicant shall notify all property owners and
residents located within 1,500 feet of the nearest property line of the
subject property of the proposed construction of the tower and facility or
complex and of the date(s) and time(s) of the balloon test. Such notice shall
be provided at least 14 days prior to the conduct of the balloon test and
shall be delivered by first-class mail. The Planning and Community
Development Director shall be provided an attested copy of the list of
addresses to which notification is provided. The wireless telecommunications
facility or complex shall be structurally designed to accommodate at least 4
antenna arrays, with each array to be flush mounted or as close to
flush-mounted as is reasonable possible.



      (13)   The applicant shall provide certified documentation in
the form of a structural analysis and report, including all calculations,
showing that the facility or complex will be constructed to meet all local,
state and Federal structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice
loads and including, but not limited to all applicable ANSI (American
National Standards Institute) TIA 222 guidelines. In the event of a conflict
the more stringent shall apply.



      (14)   The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment,
which may be required to include:



         (a)   A computer generated "Zone of Visibility Map" at a
minimum of one mile radius from the proposed structure shall be provided to
illustrate locations from which the proposed installation may be seen, with
and without foliage; and



         (b)   To-scale pictorial representations (photo
simulations) of “before and after” views from key viewpoints inside of
the town as may be appropriate and required, including but not limited to
state highways and other major roads, state and local parks, other public
lands, historic districts, preserves and historic sites normally open to the
public, and from any other location where the site is visible to a large
number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided
concerning the appropriate key viewpoints at the pre-application meeting. In
addition to photographic simulations to scale showing the visual impact, the
applicant shall provide a map showing the locations of where the pictures
were taken and the distance(s)of each location from the proposed structure;



      (15)   The applicant shall provide a written description and a
visual rendering demonstrating how it shall effectively screen from view the
bottom 15 feet of the facility or complex and all related equipment and
structures associated with the facility or complex.



      (16)   A building permit shall not be issued for the
construction of a new tower or other support structure until:



         (a)   There is an application for or by a specific
carrier that documents with verifiable technical evidence that the facility
or complex is necessary for that carrier to serve the community and that
co-location on an existing structure is not feasible; or



         (b)   That no owner of an existing structure within the
applicant's search ring will allow attachment to the owner's building or
other type of structure.



      (17)   Co-location on an existing structure is not reasonably
feasible if such is technically or commercially impracticable or the owner of
the Structure is unwilling to enter into a contract for such use at a fair
and reasonable price. If an applicant feels the price is unreasonable,
sufficient documentation in the form of clear and convincing evidence to
support such a claim shall be submitted to determine whether co-location on a
given existing structure is commercially impracticable or otherwise
unreasonable.



   (J)   Requirements for eligible facility co-locations or
modifications.



      (1)   For the co-location, modification or upgrade of a
wireless facility that qualifies as an eligible facilities request under
applicable law, the following information shall be required to be contained
in an application. Any technical information must be provided in such a
manner, form and with such content that it is able to be verified by a third
party using the information used and provided by the applicant.



      (2)   Safety.



         (a)   The age of the tower or other support structure in
years, including the date of the grant of the original permit;



         (b)   A description of the type of tower, e.g. guyed,
self-supporting lattice or monopole, or a description of another other type
of support structure;



         (c)   Certified documentation in the form of a
structural analysis and report done by a Professional Engineer licensed in
the State of North Carolina. Said analysis and report shall include all
supporting calculations, showing that the facility, as it exists, will meet
all local, state and Federal structural requirements for loads, including
wind and ice loads and including, but not limited to, the North Carolina
Building Code and all applicable ANSI (American National Standards Institute)
TIA 222 guidelines. In the event of a conflict, the more stringent shall
apply.



         (d)   A copy of:



            1.   The installed foundation design, including a
geotechnical sub-surface soils investigation report; and if necessary



            2.   A foundation remediation design and
recommendation for the tower or other structure;



         (e)   A certified, unredacted report and supporting
documentation, including photographs, regarding the physical situation and
physical condition of all equipment and facilities at the site in the form of
a report based on an on-site inspection done pursuant to and in compliance
with the latest version of TIA/ANSI 222. The inspection shall be done by a
qualified individual experienced in performing such inspections and the
report shall be signed by an individual with authority to order any needed
remediation or resolution of issues.



         (f)   A copy of the FCC licenses for each frequency band
applicable for the intended use of the wireless telecommunications
transmission and/or receive equipment;



         (g)   A list of all frequencies, to be used at the
facility;



         (h)   The number, type and model of the antenna(s)
proposed, along with a copy of the manufacturer's specification sheet(s),
i.e. cut sheet(s), for the antennas;



         (i)   Certification from the owner of the facility
certifying that the facility and all attachments thereto are currently in
compliance with the conditions of  the  approved  conditional  use 
permit or administrative approval or identifying any non-compliant situation.



      (3)   Ownership and management.



         (a)   The name, address and phone number of the person
preparing the application;



         (b)   The name, address, and phone number of the
property owner and the applicant, including the legal name of the applicant.
If the owner of the structure is different than the applicant, the name and
all necessary contact information shall be provided;



         (c)   The postal address and tax map parcel number of
the property;



         (d)   A copy of the FCC license applicable for the
intended use of the wireless telecommunications facilities.



      (4)   Construction.



         (a)   The total cost of construction showing the cost of
labor all new and/or replacement components and equipment.



         (b)   In certain instances the town may deem it
appropriate to have an on-site RF survey of the facility performed after the
construction or modification and activation of the facility, such to be done
under the direction of the town or its designee, and an un-redacted copy of
the survey results provided, along with all calculations, prior to issuance
of a certificate of compliance. Such study shall reflect the cumulative
effects, readings or levels of all active RF equipment at the site;



      (5)   In the event the town deems it necessary to determine
compliance with the FCC's Maximum Permitted Exposure (MPE) rules, and in lieu
of the procedure contained in the previous division (2) of this section, the
town expressly reserves the right to seek the involvement of the FCC and/or
OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) to determine or verify
compliance with Federal standards and guidelines that the town, itself, may
be prohibited from determining.



      (6)   Attachments to existing structures other than towers.



         (a)   Attachments to buildings. To preserve and protect
the nature and character of the area and create the least visually intrusive
impact reasonably possible under the facts and circumstances, any attachment
to a building or other structure with a facie, the antennas shall be mounted
on the facie without increasing the height of the building or other
structure, unless it can be proven that such will prohibit or have the effect
of prohibiting the provision of service, and all such attachments and exposed
cabling shall use camouflage or stealth techniques to match as closely as
possible the color and texture of the structure.



         (b)   Utility poles and light standards. If attaching to
a utility pole or light standard, no equipment may extend more than 10% of
the existing height beyond the top of the structure and no equipment other
than cabling shall be lower than 15 feet above the ground.



         (c)   Attachments to water tanks. If attaching to a
water tank, in order to maintain the current profile and height, mounting on
the top of the tank or the use of a corral shall only be permitted if the
applicant can prove that to locate elsewhere less visually on the tank will
prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service or that
to do so would be technologically impracticable.



         (d)   Profile. So as to be the least visually intrusive
and create the smallest profile reasonably possible under the facts and
circumstances involved, and thereby have the least adverse visual effect, all
antennas attached shall be flush mounted or as near to flush mounted as is
possible, unless it can be proven that such would prohibit or serve to
prohibit the provision of service or be technologically impracticable.



   (K)   Location of wireless telecommunications facilities.



      (1)   No tower or other new support structure taller than 35
feet shall be permitted in any existing or planned (i.e. platted) residential
neighborhood, nor within 1/2 mile of any existing or planned (i.e. platted)
residential neighborhood.



      (2)   If a new telecommunications support structure is
proposed to be located within 1/2 mile of an existing or planned residential
neighborhood and is proven by clear and convincing technical information to
be a technical necessity for the applicant's service to be provided in the
intended service area of the proposed facility, irrespective of the type of
zoning, the support structure shall not be taller than 10 feet above the
tallest obstruction between the proposed support structure and a residential
neighborhood.



      (3)   Applicants shall locate, site and erect all facilities
and associated equipment in accordance with the following priorities, in the
following order:



         (a)   On existing structures without increasing the
dimensions or size of the structure;



         (b)   On existing structures more than 1,000 feet from
the nearest boundary of the public right-of-way without increasing the height
or size of the profile of the tower or structure by more than is allowed for
an eligible facility;



         (c)   On existing structures without increasing the
height of the structure by more than is needed, as such need can be proven by
clear and convincing verifiable technical evidence.



         (d)   On properties in areas zoned for commercial use.



         (e)   In designated renaissance or historic districts in
the public right-of-way, but without increasing the height or size of the
profile of the support structure, and only if camouflaged or stealthed to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



         (f)   In areas zoned for residential use, in the public
right-of-way, but without increasing the height of the size or dimensions of
the support structure, and only if camouflaged or stealthed to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.



      (4)   If the applicant proposes and commits to locate on
town-owned property or structures, the town reserves to right to waive the
town application fee that would otherwise be paid to the town.



      (5)   If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest
priority listed above, then a detailed narrative and technical explanation
shall be provided as regards why a site from all higher priority designations
was not selected. The person seeking such an exception must demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the Planning and Community Development Director and the
Zoning Board of Adjustment the reason or reasons why a conditional use permit
or administrative approval should be granted for the proposed facility.



      (6)   Notwithstanding anything else to the contrary, the town
may approve any site located within an area in the above list of priorities,
provided that the town finds that the proposed site is in the best interest
of the health, safety and welfare of the town and its inhabitants and will
not have a deleterious effect on the nature and character of the community
and neighborhood. The town may also direct that the proposed location be
changed to another location that is more in keeping with the goals of this
section and the public interest as determined by the Board of Adjustment and
that serves the intent of the Applicant.



      (7)   Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in
an area of highest priority or highest available priority, the town may
disapprove an application for any of the following reasons:



         (a)   Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and
requirements, including but not limited to setback and fall zone requirements;



         (b)   Non-compliance with zoning or land use regulations;



         (c)   The placement and location of a facility or
complex would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable possibility of
such, to any person or entity for physical or financial damage, or of
trespass on private property;



         (d)   The placement and location of a facility or
complex would result in a conflict with, compromise in or change in the
nature or character of the adjacent and surrounding area, and expressly
including but not limited to loss in value as measured over the 12 months
preceding the application having been filed;



         (e)   Conflicts with the provisions of zoning or land
use regulations;



         (f)   Failure to submit a complete application within 60
days after proper notice and opportunity to make the application complete.



      (8)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this
section, for good cause shown such as the ability to utilize one or more
shorter, smaller or less intrusive facilities elsewhere and still accomplish
the primary service objective, the town may require the relocation of a
proposed site if relocation could result in a less intrusive facility or
complex singly or in combination with other locations,, including allowing
for the fact that relocating the site chosen by the applicant may require the
use of more than one facility to provide substantially the same service.



   (L)   Type and height of towers.



      (1)   No new towers of a lattice or guyed type shall be
permitted, unless relief is otherwise expressly granted.



      (2)   Except in the public rights-of-way and in residentially
zoned areas, the maximum permitted total height of a new tower or other
proposed support structure, shall be 100 feet above pre-construction ground
level, unless it can be shown by clear and convincing verifiable technical
evidence from a carrier who has committed to use the tower that such height
would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of service in
the intended service area within the town. The maximum permitted height is
permissive and is expressly not as-of-right.



      (3)   As the policy decision has been made that more
facilities of a shorter and less intrusive height is in the public interest,
as opposed to fewer but taller support structures, spacing or the distance
between facilities shall be such that the service may be provided without
exceeding the maximum permitted height.



      (4)   If proposed to be taller than the maximum permitted
height, the applicant for a new tower or support structure shall submit clear
and convincing technical evidence by a carrier or wireless service provider
that has committed to use the tower or other support structure justifying the
total height requested. If the applicant chooses to provide evidence in the
form of propagation studies, to enable verification of the need for the
requested height such must include all modeling information and support data
used to produce the studies at the requested height and at a minimum of 10
feet lower. The tower or its designee will provide the form that shall be
used for providing the modeling information.



      (5)   The town reserves the right to require a drive test to
be conducted under the supervision of the town or its designee to verity the
technical need for what is requested.



      (6)   At no time shall a tower or other support structure be
of a height that requires lighting by the FAA.



      (7)   Towers shall be structurally designed to support a
minimum of four carriers using functionally equivalent equipment to that used
by the first carrier attaching to a tower or other support structure, so that
the height can be increased if needed.



      (8)   New structures within rights-of-ways; required design
characteristics.



         (a)   Wireless installations shall be consistent
throughout the town limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ);



         (b)   Wireless installations shall be on non-conductive
poles;



         (c)   All antennas shall be indiscernible by an average
person from 250 feet away;



         (d)   Wireless installations shall utilize a
“concealed” design, including all cabling being inside a hollow pole;



         (e)   All radios, network equipment and batteries will
be enclosed in a pedestal cabinet near the pole, or in a pole-mounted cabinet
or under a pole-mounted shroud;



         (f)   Cabinets should be consistent in size and no
larger than standard DOT streetlight signal cabinets;



         (g)   Unless proven unfeasible by clear and convincing
evidence, in lieu of installing new poles, any wireless installation in the
PROW shall replace a pre-existing distribution pole, secondary pole or
streetlight;



         (h)   Wireless installations shall be on poles that meet
or exceed current NESC standards and wind and ice loading requirements of
ANSI 222 Version G;



         (i)   Any new poles installed shall be “green” and
not leach any volatile organic compounds or toxic materials into the ground;
and



         (j)   To avoid unsightly rust and corrosion, any new
pole installed shall be certified to be rust resistant and not reinforced
concrete.



   (M)   Visibility and aesthetics.



      (1)   No tower or support structure that is not a building and
is constructed after the effective date of this section shall not be tall
enough to require lighting by the FAA.



      (2)   Stealth. All new facilities, including but not limited
to towers, shall utilize stealth or camouflage siting techniques that are
acceptable to the town, unless such can be shown to be either commercially or
technologically impracticable.



         (3)   Finish/color. Towers shall be galvanized and/or
painted with a rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to harmonize
with the surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the
requirements of this section.



         (4)   Lighting. Notwithstanding the prohibition of
lighting, in the event lighting is subsequently required by the FAA, the
applicant shall provide a detailed plan for sufficient lighting of as
unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is permissible under state and
Federal regulations. For any facility or complex for which lighting is
required under the FAA's regulations, or that for any reason has lights
attached, all such lighting shall be affixed with technology that enables the
light to be seen as intended from the air, but that prevents the ground
scatter effect so that it is not able to be seen from the ground to a height
of at least 20 degrees vertical for a distance of at least 1 mile in a level
terrain situation. Such device shall be compliant with or not expressly in
conflict with FAA regulations. A physical shield may be used, as long as the
light is able to be seen from the air, as intended by the FAA.



      (5)   Retrofitting. In the event a tower or other support
structure that is lighted as of the effective date of this section is
modified, at the time of the first modification of the facility the town
reserves the right to require that the tower be retrofitted so as to comply
with the lighting requirements of the preceding division (D) of this section
or be reduced to a height that does not require lighting.



      (6)   Flush mounting. Except for omni-directional antennas,
all new or replacement antennas, shall be flush-mounted or as close to
flush-mounted on the support structure as is functionally possible, unless it
can be demonstrated by clear and convincing technical evidence that such has
the effect of prohibiting the provision of service to the intended service
area, alone or in combination with another site(s), or unless the Applicant
can prove that it is technologically impracticable.



      (7)   Placement on building. If attached to a building, all
antennas shall be mounted on the fascia of the building and camouflaged so as
to match the color and, if possible, the texture of the building, or in a
manner so as to make the antennas as visually innocuous and undetectable as
is reasonably possible given the facts and circumstances involved.



   (N)   Security. All facilities shall be located, fenced or otherwise
secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access. Specifically:



      (1)   All facilities, including antennas, towers and other
supporting structures, such as guy anchor points and guy wires, shall be made
inaccessible to unauthorized individuals and shall be constructed or shielded
in such a manner that they cannot be easily climbed or collided with and
shall expressly include removing the climbing steps for the first 10 feet
from the ground on a monopole; and



      (2)   Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall
be installed so that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized
to operate or service them.



   (O)   Signage. Facilities shall contain a sign no larger than 4
square feet and no smaller than 2 square feet in order to provide adequate
warning to persons in the immediate area of the presence of RF radiation. A
sign of the same size is also to be installed bearing the name(s) of the
owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s) as well as emergency phone
number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment shelter or cabinet of the
applicant and must be visible from the access point of the facility or
complex and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. On
tower sites, an FCC registration sign, as applicable, is also to be present.
The signs shall not be lighted, unless applicable law, rule or regulation
requires lighting. No other signage, including advertising, shall be
permitted.



   (P)   Setback and fall zone.



      (1)   All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless
support structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded
rights-of-way and roads and streets by the greater of the following distances:



         (a)   A distance equal to the height of the proposed
tower or support structure plus 110% of the height of the tower or other
structure, otherwise known as the fall zone; or



         (b)   The existing setback requirement of the underlying
zoning district, whichever is greater.



      (2)   For any facility located within a fenced compound, any
accessory structure shall be located within the fenced compound as approved
in the conditional use permit and so as to comply with the applicable minimum
setback requirements for the property on which it is situated. The fall zone
or setback shall be measured from the nearest portion of the tower to the
nearest portion of the right-of-way of any public road or thoroughfare and
any occupied building or domicile, as well as any property boundary lines.



      (3)   The nearest portion of any private access road leading
to a facility shall be no less than 10 feet from the nearest property line.



      (4)   There shall be no development of habitable buildings
within the setback area or fall zone.



   (Q)   Retention of expert assistance cost to be borne by applicant.



      (1)   To prevent the taxpayers from having to bear the cost
related to the issue of permitting and regulating a commercially used
wireless telecommunications facilities or negotiating agreements to lease or
amend or modify a lease for any town-owned property or structure, an
applicant shall pay to the town fees as set forth in the town's fee schedule.
The fees are intended to cover all reasonable costs of the expert assistance
needed by the town in connection with the review of any application,
including both the technical and non-technical review, and the permitting,
inspection, construction or modification requested, any application
pre-approval evaluation requested by the applicant and any lease
negotiations. The payment of the expert assistance fees to the town shall
precede any work being done that is related to the intended application or
lease, including a pre-application meeting or site visit.



      (2)   The town may hire any consultant of its choice to assist
the town in reviewing and evaluating applications and negotiating leases,
provided the consultant has at least 5 years of experience working
exclusively for the public sector regulating towers and wireless facilities
and negotiating leases, and has not had a recommendation successfully legally
challenged.



      (3)   The total amount of the funds needed for expert
assistance as set forth in the town's fee schedule may vary with the scope
and complexity of the application, the completeness of the application and
other information as may be needed to complete the necessary technical and
non-technical reviews, analysis and inspection of any construction or
modification or the amount of time spent responding to an applicant's
arguments as regards its application or the requirements of this section.



      (4)   For a new tower or support structure or a substantial
modification, to prevent taxpayer subsidization the expert assistance fee
shall be no less than $8,000.



      (5)   The town will maintain an accounting record for the
expenditure of all such funds.



      (6)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.52(f), if an Application is
Amended, or a waiver or relief is requested from any regulations at any time
prior to the grant of the certificate of completion required under this
chapter, the town reserves the right to require additional payment for the
review and analysis equal to, but not exceeding, the cost created for the
town by the applicant or its application. Such amount shall be paid to the
town prior to the issuance of the conditional use permit or administrative
approval or the certificate of completion, whichever is procedurally needed
next.



   (R)   Procedural requirements for a granting a conditional use
permit.



      (1)   When a conditional use permit is requested, the
following procedures shall apply.



      (2)   When deemed necessary or otherwise in the public
interest, as part of the process for any new towers or telecommunications
support structure, the town may require a neighborhood meeting with area
residents, the applicant, a representative(s) from the town staff and the
town's consultant to discuss the proposed facility and the effects of such.



      (3)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall schedule any
required public hearing(s) once it finds the application is complete and
there are no issues of non-compliance or conflict with applicable law, rule
or regulation. The town shall not be required to set a date for a hearing if
the application is not complete or if there are unresolved issues of
non-compliance by the applicant or a party to the application. The town may,
at any stage prior to issuing a conditional use permit or administrative
approval, require such additional information as it deems necessary and that
is not expressly prohibited from being required by applicable law as relates
to the issue of the siting, construction or modification of or at a wireless
telecommunications facility or complex.



      (4)   Upon Zoning Board of Adjustment approval, a conditional
use permit shall be issued for a new tower or substantially modified wireless
support structure or substantial co-location. Notwithstanding the preceding,
the building permit for a new tower or other proposed support structure shall
not be issued until an applicant has provided clear and convincing
substantiating documentation governing the placement of the first antenna
array of a carrier who has committed to use the structure prior to its
construction and that carrier has been properly permitted under this chapter.



   (S)   Action on an application.



      (1)   The town will undertake, or have undertaken, a review of
an application pursuant to this section in a timely fashion, consistent with
its responsibilities and applicable law, and shall act within the time
required by applicable law.



      (2)   The town may refer any application or part thereof to
any advisory committee or consultant for a non-binding recommendation.



      (3)   Either after the public hearing if a hearing is
required, or after administrative review for an eligible facility
application, and after formally considering the application, the town may:



         (a)   Approve;



         (b)   Approve with conditions; or



         (c)   Deny for cause a permit or administrative
approval. The decision shall be in writing and shall be supported by
substantial evidence contained in a written record, which record may be the
minutes of any or all official meetings. Throughout the application and
permitting process, the burden of proof for compliance with this chapter or
the need for a waiver or relief shall always be upon the applicant.



      (4)   An applicant shall not be permitted to refuse to provide
information needed to establish the substantial written record required under
Federal law and applicable case law. Refusal for more than 60 days without
agreement by the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall result in denial of the
application or the Application shall be deemed abandoned.



      (5)   Approval notification. If the town approves the
conditional use permit or administrative approval, then the applicant shall
be notified of the approval of its application, including any conditions,
within 30 calendar days of the town's action. The conditional use permit or
administrative authorization shall be issued within 30 days after such
approval.



      (6)   Denial notification. If denied, the applicant shall be
notified of the denial of its application at the Zoning Board of Adjustment
Meeting, and in writing within 30 calendar days of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment's action, which notice shall contain the reason or reasons for the
denial.



   (T)   Transfer or assignment. The extent and parameters of a
conditional use permit or administrative authorization for a facility or
complex shall be as follows:



      (1)   Such conditional use permit or administrative
authorization shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed without the
express prior written notification to the town, such notice to be not fewer
than 30 business days prior to the intended assignment, transfer or
conveyance.



      (2)   A transfer, assignment or other conveyance of the
conditional use permit or administrative authorization shall require the
written commitment of the proposed new holder of the conditional use permit
or administrative authorization to abide by all applicable laws, rules and
regulations, including but not limited to this chapter.



   (U)   Violations.



      (1)   Following written notice of violation and an opportunity
to cure, any permit or administrative approval granted under this chapter may
be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the uncured conditions
and provisions of the conditional use permit or other applicable law, rule,
regulation or order, and if warranted the payment of a fine(s) as is
permissible.



      (2)   If not cured within the time frame set forth in the
notice of violation, a hearing shall be held upon 30 days prior notice to the
applicant citing the violation and the date, time and place of the hearing,
which shall be provided by registered mail to the last known address of the
holder of the conditional use permit.



      (3)   Following the original notice and an opportunity to
cure, subsequent or repeated violations of a substantially similar nature
shall not require an opportunity to cure prior to the imposition of fines or
penalties.



   (V)   Removal and performance security.



      (1)   Removal and performance. The applicant and the owner of
record of any proposed new tower or other support structure or complex shall,
at its sole cost and expense, be required to execute and file with the town a
bond or other form of security that is acceptable to the town as to the type
of security and the form and manner of execution, in an amount of at least
$75,000 for a tower or other support structure and with such sureties as are
deemed adequate by the town to assure the faithful performance of the terms
and conditions of this section and the conditions of any conditional use
permit issued pursuant to this section. The full amount of the bond or
security shall remain in full force and effect throughout the term of the
conditional use permit and/or, if abandoned, until any necessary site
restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to
that, which existed prior to the issuance of the original conditional use
permit. The amount of the bond is, in part, determined by the current cost of
demolition, removal and site restoration multiplied by the compounding or
cumulative effect of a 3% annual cost escalator over a 30 year projected
useful life of the structure.



      (2)   Performance. The owner of any equipment attached to a
support structure or located in a complex shall be required to execute and
file with the town a performance bond or other form of performance security
that is acceptable to the town as to the type of security and the form and
manner of execution, in the amount of $25,000.



   (W)   Reservation of authority to inspect wireless
telecommunications facilities.



      (1)   In order to verify that the holder of a conditional use
permit for a facility or complex and any and all lessees, renters, and/or
licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities, places, constructs and
maintains such facility in accordance with all applicable technical, safety,
fire, building codes, zoning codes, laws, ordinances and regulations and
conditions of any permit granted under this chapter, the town or its designee
shall have the right to inspect all facets of said permit holder's, renter's,
lessee's or licensee's placement, construction, modification and maintenance
of such facilities, including, but not limited to, towers, antennas,
buildings and equipment and connections contained therein, or other
structures constructed or located on the permitted site.



      (2)   Refusal to allow or grant access to the town's
representative upon reasonable notice shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter.



   (X)   Liability insurance.



      (1)   A holder of a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications support structure shall secure and at all times maintain
public liability insurance for personal injuries, death and property damage,
and umbrella insurance coverage, for the duration of the conditional use
permit in amounts as set forth below:



         (a)   Commercial general liability covering personal
injuries, death and property damage: $2,000,000 per occurrence/$5,000,000
aggregate;



         (b)   Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/
$3,000,000 aggregate;



         (c)   A $5,000,000 umbrella coverage; and



         (d)   Workers compensation and disability: statutory
amounts.



      (2)   For a facility or complex located on town property, the
commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically name the
town and its officers, boards, employees, committee members, attorneys,
agents and consultants as additional insureds.



      (3)   The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or
representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state
and with an AM Best's rating of at least A.



      (4)   The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement
obligating the insurance company to furnish the town with at least 30 days
prior written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.



      (5)   Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be
delivered to the town at least 15 days prior to the expiration of the
insurance that such policies are intended to renew or replace.



      (6)   Before construction of a permitted wireless
telecommunications facility or complex is initiated, but in no case later
than 15 days prior to the grant of the building permit, the holder of the
conditional use permit shall deliver to the town a copy of each of the
policies or certificates representing the required insurance in the required
amounts.



      (7)   A certificate of insurance that states that it is for
informational purposes only and does not confer rights upon the town shall
not be deemed to comply with this section.



   (Y)   Indemnification.



      (1)   Any application for wireless telecommunication
facilities that is proposed to be located on town property shall contain a
signed statement fully and completely indemnifying the town. Such provision
shall require the applicant, to the extent permitted by applicable law, to at
all times defend, indemnify, protect, save, hold harmless and exempt the town
and its officers, boards, employees, committee members, attorneys, agents,
and consultants from any and all penalties, damages, costs, or charges
arising out of any and all claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award
of damages, whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising there from,
either at law or in equity, which might arise out of, or are caused by, the
placement, construction, erection, modification, location, products
performance, use, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement,
removal, or restoration of said facility or complex. Notwithstanding the
preceding, there shall be no claim of indemnification with respect to any act
attributable to the negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the town,
or its servants or agents. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges
referenced herein, reasonable attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert
witness fees are included in those costs that are recoverable by the town.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the requirements noted in division (A)
of this section, an indemnification provision will not be required in those
instances where the town itself, or an agency or department of the town,
applies for and secures a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunications facility or complex.



   (Z)   Fines.



      (1)   In the event of a violation of this section, or any
conditional use permit or administrative approval issued pursuant to this
section, the town may impose and collect, and the holder of the conditional
use permit or administrative approval for a wireless telecommunications
facility or complex shall pay to the town, fines or penalties as set allowed
by state law or as otherwise established by the town.



      (2)   Notwithstanding anything in this section, the holder of
the conditional use permit or administrative approval for a facility or
complex may not use the payment of fines, liquidated damages or other
penalties, to evade or avoid compliance with this section or any section of
this chapter. An attempt to do so shall subject the holder of the conditional
use permit to termination and revocation of the conditional use permit in
addition to the payment of fines. The town may also seek injunctive relief to
prevent the continued violation of this section without limiting other
remedies available to the town.



   (AA)   Default and/or revocation. If a support structure, facility
or complex is repaired, rebuilt, placed, moved, re-located, modified or
maintained in a way that is inconsistent or not in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or of the conditional use permit or administrative
approval, then the town shall notify the holder of the conditional use permit
or administrative approval in writing of such violation. A permit or
administrative approval holder found to be in violation may be considered in
default and subject to fines as permitted under applicable state law, and if
a violation is not corrected to the satisfaction of the town in a reasonable
period of time the conditional use permit or administrative approval shall be
subject to revocation.



   (BB)   Moving or removal of co-located facilities and equipment.



      (1)   If attached to an existing tower or other support
structure, unless the Zoning Board of Adjustment deems doing so to be in the
public interest, it shall be impermissible for a wireless service provider's
or carrier's equipment to be relocated from one structure to another without
clear and convincing evidence that not to do so would, for technical reasons,
prohibit or serve to prohibit the provision of service in the service area
served by the existing wireless facility.



      (2)   If the lease for the existing attachment and use expires
and is not renewed, thereby forcing the facility to be moved, such move shall
be allowed upon:



         (a)   The provision of clear and convincing evidence
satisfactory to the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the need to move or
relocate the facility; and



         (b)   Clear and convincing evidence satisfactory to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment of the lack of impact on the neighborhood or area
of the intended new location. Cancellation or abandonment of a lease by a
lessee or refusal to agree to terms of a lease that are not commercially
impracticable shall not be deemed a permissible reason for relocating.



      (3)   The owner of any facility or complex shall be required
to provide a minimum of 30 days written notice to the Town Clerk prior to
abandoning any facility or complex.



      (4)   Under the following circumstances, the town may
determine that the health, safety, and welfare interests of the town warrant
and require the removal of facilities.



         (a)   A facility or complex that has been abandoned
(i.e. not used as wireless telecommunications facilities) for a period
exceeding 90 consecutive days or a cumulative total of 180 non-consecutive
days in any 365 day period, except for periods caused by force majeure or
Acts of God, in which case, repair or removal shall be completed within 90
days of abandonment;



         (b)   A support structure, facility or complex falls
into such a state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard or
is deemed an attractive nuisance or a visual blight;



         (c)   A support structure or facility or complex has
been located, constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a
manner not authorized by, the required conditional use permit, or
administrative approval, and the conditional permit or administrative
approval may be revoked.



      (5)   If the town makes a determination as noted in division
(4)(b) or (c) of this section, then the town shall notify the holder of the
permit or administrative approval for the facility or complex that said
facility or complex is to be removed.



      (6)   The holder of the conditional use permit or
administrative approval, or its successors or assigns, shall dismantle and
remove the facility or complex and all associated structures and equipment
from the site and restore the site to as close to its original condition as
is reasonably possible, such restoration being limited only by physical or
commercial impracticability. Restoration shall be completed within 90 days of
the receipt of a written notice from the town. However, if the owner of the
property upon which the facility or complex is located wishes to retain any
access roadway to the facility or complex, the owner may do so with the
approval of the town.



      (7)   If a facility or complex has not been removed, or
substantial progress has not been made to remove the facility or complex,
within 90 days after the permit holder has received notice, then the town may
order officials or representatives of the town to remove or have removed the
facility or complex at the sole expense of the owner or conditional use
permit holder.



      (8)   If the town removes, or causes a facility to be removed,
and the owner of the facility or complex does not claim and remove it from
the site to a lawful location within 10 days, the town may take



steps to declare the facility or complex abandoned, and sell all remaining
equipment and materials.



      (9)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the
contrary, the town may approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the
facility or complex, but for no more than 90 days duration, during which time
a suitable plan for removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected
facility or complex shall be developed by the holder of the conditional use
permit, subject to the approval of the town, and an agreement to such plan
shall be executed by the holder of the conditional use permit or
administrative approval and the town. If such a plan is not developed,
approved and executed within the 90 day time period, then the town may take
possession and dispose of the affected facility or complex in the manner
provided in this section and may utilize the bond in division (V).



   (CC)   RF emissions.



      (1)   As may be deemed appropriate from time to time, to
assure the protection of the public health and safety, the town expressly
reserves the right under its police powers to require that a user of a
facility or complex or the owner of the facility or complex, verify
compliance with the FCC's regulations regarding cumulative RF emissions at
the site under the observation of a qualified staff member or the town's
consultant, and that all users of the facility or complex cooperate with the
party responsible for such testing or verification. Failure to cooperate
shall be deemed a violation of this section and subject the non-cooperating
party to all applicable and permissible fines and penalties.



      (2)   In the event the town deems it necessary to determine
compliance with the FCC's Maximum Permitted Exposure (MPE) rules, and in lieu
of the procedure contained in the preceding division (A) of this section, the
town expressly reserves the right to request the involvement of the FCC
and/or OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) to determine or
verify compliance with Federal standards and guidelines that the town,
itself, may be prohibited from determining.



      (3)   With respect to support structures other than towers, if
any section or portion of the structure attached to or to be attached to is
not in compliance with the FCC's regulations regarding RF radiation, that
section or portion must be barricaded with a suitable barrier to discourage
approaching into the area in excess of the FCC's regulations, and be marked
off with brightly colored plastic chain or striped warning tape, as
appropriate, as well as placing RF Radiation signs as needed and appropriate
to warn individuals of the potential danger. As deemed warranted by the town
at any time, the right of the town is expressly reserved to do itself, or
order done, an on-site RF emissions survey.



   (DD)   Relief.



      (1)   Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from
any aspect or requirement of this section shall address and identify such at
the pre-application meeting. The relief or exemption must be contained in the
submitted application for either a conditional use permit or administrative
approval, or in the case of an existing or previously granted conditional use
permit or administrative approval, a request for modification of the facility
or complex and/or equipment. Such relief may be temporary or permanent,
partial or complete.



      (2)   The burden of proving the need for the requested relief,
waiver or exemption shall be solely on the applicant to prove.



      (3)   The applicant shall bear all costs of the town in
considering the request and the relief, waiver or exemption.



      (4)   No relief or exemption shall be approved unless the
applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted, the
relief, waiver or exemption will have no significant effects on the health,
safety and welfare of the town, its residents, guests and/or other service
providers.



   (EE)   Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations.



      (1)   To the extent that the holder of a conditional use
permit or administrative approval for a wireless telecommunications facility
or complex has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt, from appropriate
state and/or Federal agency rules or regulations, then the holder of such a
conditional use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all applicable
rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or Federal agency,
including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC. Specifically included in
this requirement are any rules and regulations regarding height, lighting,
security, electrical and RF emission standards.



      (2)   To the extent that applicable rules, regulations,
standards, and provisions of any state or Federal agency, including but not
limited to, the FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and
regulations regarding height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are
modified during the duration of a conditional use permit or administrative
approval for wireless telecommunications facilities, then the holder of such
a conditional use permit or administrative approval shall conform the
permitted facility or complex to the applicable changed and/or modified rule,
regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months of the
effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule, regulation,
standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing entity.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-05, passed 6-4-2018)



§ 156.121  HELICOPTER LANDING PADS.



   (A)   Allowed in B-2, General Business, M-1, M-2, Manufacturing.



      HELICOPTER LANDING PAD. The designated takeoff and landing area
from which helicopter departures and approaches are intended to originate or
terminate.



      HELIPORT.  A helicopter terminal facility for general public
transportation with support facilities. The word heliport shall mean an area
on the ground used by helicopters, which may include, in addition to the
landing pad, passenger and cargo facilities, maintenance, overhaul, fueling,
service and storage facilities, tie-down areas, hangars, parking, and other
necessary buildings and open spaces. The term HELIPORT includes the terms
heliports and public-use heliport used in Federal Aviation Administration
publications.



      HELISTOP.  A limited use helicopter terminal facility,
restricted by the owner to the support of a related business, institution, or
other operation. The word HELISTOP shall mean an area, either on the ground
or on a building, and shall include the landing pad used by helicopters for
the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers or cargo, routine
maintenance facilities, parking area, fuel pumping facilities (only if such
activity is approved by the appropriate agencies), and storage or hangar
facilities, but no other accessory facilities. The term HELISTOP includes the
terms private-use heliport and personal-use heliport contained in Federal
Aviation Administration publications, except for the limitations on the
facility as noted.



   (B)   Supplementary requirements for helistops or heliports.



      (1)   Standards and requirements. All heliports and helistops
will meet the standards and requirements imposed by the Federal Aviation
Administration and all other federal, state, or local agencies having
jurisdiction.



      (2)    Site size. The minimum site size of helicopter terminal
facilities shall be:



         (a)    Helistops. One hundred (100) feet in width by 100
feet in length for a rectangular area, or 120 feet in diameter for a circular
area.



         (b)    Heliports. Two hundred (200) feet in width by 400
feet in length for a rectangular area, or 325 feet in diameter for a circular
area.



      (3)   Hours of operation. Non-emergency use of heliports and
helistops between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. is prohibited.
Emergencies excepted are for public safety or medical purposes.



      (4)    Setbacks. Landing pads for on-grade helistops and
heliports shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any property line and
400 feet from any building used for residential purposes, public or private
schools, hospitals, or public parks.



      (5)   Location. Heliports shall be located a minimum 1,000
feet from other heliports or on-ground helistops and 50 feet from the
easements for high voltage transmission lines.



      (6)   Access. An on-ground helistop or heliport shall be
surrounded by a fence or other barrier which prohibits access except at a
controlled access point. Adequate access for fire and other emergency
vehicles shall be provided to on-ground sites.



      (7)   Design standards. Federal Aviation Administration
standards for design of helicopter landing pads, taxiways, parking positions,
and pavement grades shall be met. The helistop or heliport landing area shall
be constructed of a material free of dust and loose particles which may be
blown about by the down blast of the helicopter rotor. Adequate drainage
shall be provided for the site and approved by the local jurisdiction.



      (8)   Lighting. Lighting for helistops or heliports is to be
provided according to Federal Aviation Administration requirements and is to
be oriented as much as possible away from adjacent uses.



      (9)   Approach surfaces. Approach surfaces and transitional
surfaces for landings and take-offs must be sufficiently clear of
obstructions to meet Federal Aviation Administration slope standards. If
necessary, a curved approach may be used. The landing area shall be aligned
to give maximum into-the-wind operation.



      (10)   Location on structures. Heliports may not be located on
structures. Helistops located on structures require certification of the
structure's integrity by an engineer.



      (11)   Setback adjustments. All setback and distance
requirements for elevated helistops may be reduced one foot for each one foot
of the elevation above ground level.



      (12)   Operation at an airport. A heliport or helistop may be
operated at an airport facility with the approval of the Federal Aviation
Administration and airport administration.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.122  SINGLE AND MULTI-TENANT RETAIL BUILDINGS GREATER THAN 30,000
SQUARE FEET (I.E., BIG BOX).



   (A)   Intent.  The intent of this section is to encourage visual
design interest and a pedestrian site design for large-scale retail
buildings. These structures shall be designed to reduce the massive scale and
uniform, monolithic appearances. Large retail buildings have the potential to
create adverse traffic, environmental and aesthetic effects and further erode
Wilkesboro's small town character. Therefore, the Town of Wilkesboro wants
careful attention to the local community design issues to promote adaptable
large retail buildings that fit the small-town character of this community.
Building and site design shall also promote a safe and comfortable pedestrian
oriented site with a mixture of uses and sizes of the structures.



   (B)   Applicability. The following design standards shall apply to
new single and multi-tenant retail buildings with a gross floor area equal to
or greater than 30,000 square feet and existing vacant single and
multi-tenant retail buildings equal or greater to 30,000 square feet
undergoing renovations or expansions equal to or greater than 50%of their
current assessed value as listed by the Wilkes County Tax Assessor.



   (C)   General development standards. All design standards contained
within this section shall be applicable unless otherwise specified.



      (1)   Exterior materials. Predominant exterior building
materials shall include wood, brick, limestone, granite, other native stone,
or tinted, textured concrete masonry units, or stucco. Prefabricated metal
buildings shall have a veneer of wood, brick, limestone, granite, other
native stone, or tinted, textured concrete masonry units, or stucco on all
sides visible to the public.



      (2)   Landscaping.  Please refer to § 96.14,  Landscaping
Requirements for Commercial Development, contained in the Wilkesboro Code of
Ordinances for specific requirements.



      (3)   Articulation. Facades greater than 100 feet in linear
length shall be articulated with recesses or projections, which total at
least 25% of that façade.  Each recess or projection shall be a minimum of
2% of the length of that façade.  No uninterrupted length of any façade
shall exceed 75 horizontal feet.



      (4)   Entrances. Large retail establishments over 75,000
square feet shall be required to have at least two customer entrances.  The
two entrances shall be separated by at least one-third (1/3) of the
building. 



   (D)   Building design. All new buildings shall incorporate at least
five of the following design features.  Renovations and expansions to
existing buildings shall incorporate at least three of the following design
features. The Town Council may allow minor deviations to the full requirement
of each chosen item if the petitioner can adequately demonstrate that the
overall intent and spirit of this section continues to be adhered to in the
overall development design:



      (1)   Color.  Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle,
neutral or earth tone colors.  The use of high intensity colors, metallic
colors, black or fluorescent colors is prohibited.  Building trim and accent
areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors.



      (2)   Material and textures.  Buildings shall have at least
three of the materials/textures set forth in division (C)(1) of this section.



      (3)   Pedestrian walkways. Covered pedestrian walkway (minimum
of eight feet depth across at least 35% of the façade).



      (4)   Window display. Clear glass window display areas that
covers at least 20% of one façade or 30% of two facades.



      (5)   Animating features. Ground floor facades shall have
arcades, display windows, entryways, awnings, and other such design features
on at least 60% of that façade. 



      (6)   Integral planters. Integral planters shall be
constructed parallel to the building.  The intent is to incorporate such an
area that shall be a minimum of five feet wide and shall cover at least 35%
of the façade.



      (7)   Parapets. Raised corniced parapets located over the main
entrance to the building.



      (8)   Outdoor patios. Outdoor patios, which incorporate
gathering and sitting opportunities adjacent to the main entrance or on the
front façade equivalent to 2% of the gross square footage of that
building.  Such areas shall include a seating area with benches or tables
and chairs.



   (E)   Roofs. The following standards are intended to foster a
variation in rooflines to soften and reduce the massive scale of large
buildings.  Roofs shall have the following features:



      (1)   Parapets concealing flat roofs and roof top equipment
such as HVAC units from public view.  The height of such parapet shall not
exceed one-third (1/3) of the height of the support wall.  Such parapets
shall feature three dimensional cornice treatments and shall not be of a
constant height for a distance of greater than 150 feet.







      (2)   Three or more roof slope planes.



   (F)   Transit stops. Single and multi-tenant retail establishments
over 80,000 square feet shall provide an off-street transit stop for
customers and employees if the development is located on an established or
planned public transit route. The location of the transit stop shall be shown
on the site plan.  The transit stop may be a freestanding structure or an
existing overhang/awning incorporated in the design of the building.



   (G)   Parking lots and pedestrian circulation. The parking lot
design and pedestrian circulation routes shall provide a safe, convenient and
efficient access for vehicles and pedestrians.  Pedestrian circulation via
internal public sidewalks shall be encouraged.



The placement of structures shall enhance and promote pedestrian circulation
on the site. All pedestrian and circulation requirements shall be noted on
the site plan.



      (1)   Artistic detailing, material changes and paving patterns
are encouraged in pedestrian walkways, plazas, and gathering areas.



      (2)   The number of required parking places may be reduced if
the establishment promotes shared parking and a more pedestrian friendly
environment for the development.



      (3)   At least five foot wide walkways shall connect focal
points of pedestrian activity, such as transit stops, street crossings or
entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas (four foot wide
minimum landscape depth) to provide a separate and pedestrian friendly access
route for no less than 50% of their overall length.



      (4)   All internal pedestrian walkways shall be physically
separated from the drive lanes.  Additionally all sidewalks and crosswalks
shall be visually distinct from the driving surfaces.



      (5)   Sidewalks, at least eight feet in width, shall be
provided along any façade featuring a customer entrance, and along any
façade abutting public parking areas.  At all times such sidewalks shall
maintain at least a five foot clear pedestrian passage.  Additionally, such
sidewalks shall connect all customer entrances to other internal sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall meet all ADA requirements.



      (6)   Where feasible, pedestrian paths and vehicular linkages
shall be made with adjoining properties.



      (7)   Overnight parking of RV's, camper trailers and other
vehicles providing transient residency shall be at the discretion of the
property owner but shall be limited to no more than two days.



   (H)   Miscellaneous site plan requirements.



      (1)   Outdoor shopping cart storage areas shall be provided in
the parking lots and adjacent to the building if they are not available at
the entrance.  Additionally, shopping cart storage location shall be clearly
defined on the site plan. Shopping cart locations next to the building shall
be located in an enclosed area.



      (2)   Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility
meters, HVAC equipment, trash dumpsters, trash compaction, and other such
service functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the
structure and landscaped so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these
functions are fully contained and out of the view from the general
passersby.  If screening material is needed it shall be the same material as
those used on the structure to avoid visual detection of the service function
on and off site.



      (3)   Only areas previously designated and approved for the
parking or storage of trucks, trailers, or containers as accessory outdoor
storage shall be permitted. These designated areas shall be screened from
public view.  Such areas are prohibited on any portion of a walkway, drive
aisle, parking or landscaped area. 



      (4)   Where applicable, private streets within an existing
site shall be required to be improved to town standards.



      (5)   Any infrastructure improvements needed for existing or
proposed structures shall be the responsibility of the developer/owner.



      (6)   Where applicable, any other site upgrades shall be the
sole responsibility of the developer.



   (I)   Outdoor sales. Permanent and seasonal outdoor sales areas
shall be incorporated into the design of the building and site. 
Additionally, only previously designated and approved permanent or seasonal
outdoor sales areas shall be permitted.



      (1)   Non-enclosed areas for the sale and storage of seasonal
inventories shall be permanently defined and separated with walls and/or
fences.  Walls and roofs shall conform to the standards defined in divisions
(C) and (E) of this section.



      (2)   If anti-theft devices for the area(s) are provided, they
shall be identified on the site plan.



      (3)   No outdoor display or sales area shall encroach on to
any portion of a walkway, drive aisle, parking or landscaped area.



   (J)   Traffic analysis and plan.



      (1)   NCDOT will review traffic impacts for all single and
multi-tenant retail establishments over 30,000 square feet.  The developer
shall comply will all NCDOT requests.



      (2)   The Town Council will review recommendations submitted
by NCDOT for internal and site specific conditions and shall have the ability
to require any recommendations as the Town Council deems appropriate.



      (3)   Where applicable, the Town Council may require an
outside firm to prepare a traffic impact analysis study for the development
site.  If required, the developer will accrue all costs associated with the
development and town review of the study.



   (K)   Lighting requirements.



      (1)   Lighting of buildings and landscaping. Lighting fixtures
shall be selected, located, aimed, and shielded so that direct illumination
is focused exclusively on the building facade, plantings, and away from
adjoining properties, public or private rights-of-way, and the night sky. All
wall pack fixtures shall be full cutoff fixtures.



      (2)   Lighting in parking lots and outdoor areas.



         (a)   All outdoor area and parking lot lighting fixtures
shall be full cutoff fixtures.



         (b)   The mounting height of all outdoor lighting shall
not exceed 30 feet above finished grade.



         (c)   All pole mounted fixtures shall be located in a
curbed island which may or may not be a part of a landscaped island



   (L)   Signs. Signs shall be appropriate to the design of the
structure. Signs shall be designed for both the pedestrian and the
motorist.  These requirements shall be in addition to the requirements set
forth in the Wilkesboro Sign Ordinance.



      (1)   Roof mounted signs are prohibited.



      (2)   Freestanding signs shall be constructed with a base of
the same materials as the structure to provide for a pedestrian scale and to
unify the sign with the structure(s).



      (3)   Architectural gateway or entrance elements, which
identify the address of the site, do not incorporate any commercial
advertising and are less than five feet in overall height, shall not
constitute a freestanding sign.



      (4)   Traffic and parking signs shall comply with the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.  Sign housings and posts shall be
designed to be a visual and design amenity for the site. Creativity in design
is encouraged.



      (5)   Signs shall comply with all requirements set forth in §
156.081 of this chapter.



   (M)   Vacant single and multi-tenant retail establishments over
30,000 square feet. Abandoned buildings and blighted sites cause negative
visual and fiscal concerns for the community.  Therefore in order to
minimize these instances upon the community, the following shall apply to
vacated buildings(s) or developments reviewed under this section.



      (1)   Exterior surfaces. All exterior surfaces, including but
not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches and trim
shall be maintained in good repair.  Exterior wood surfaces, other than
resistant materials shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective coverage or treatment.  Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repaired.  All siding and
masonry joints shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight.



      (2)   Exterior walls. Exterior walls of buildings shall be
maintained free from holes, breaks, loose or rotting materials, and graffiti;
and shall be maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated as need to
prevent deterioration.



      (3)   Roofs. Roofs of buildings shall be maintained so that
they are structurally sound and in a safe condition and weather tight, and
not have defects, which might admit rain or cause dampness in the interior
portions of a building.  All portions, additions or sections of a roof
including, but not limited to, the fascia, eave, soffit sheathing, rafter
tail, barge rafter, vent screening, gutter, downspout, roof jack, lead or
metal flashing, shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets,
braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building
practices.



      (4)   Windows. All glassed areas, including those in windows
and doors shall be fully supplied and maintained as per the approved plan(s),
or covered with smooth surface boards that are painted to coordinate with the
building.



      (5)   Grounds.



         (a)   All landscaped areas as defined in the approved
plan(s) shall be maintained and kept free of trash, old building materials,
junk, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles, and other such material and
equipment which, by its appearance, location or use, makes it incompatible
with the principle use or other uses in the immediate neighborhood.  The
height of the grass and other general ground cover shall be kept trimmed to a
height of no more than eight inches.  Trees and shrubs shall be kept
maintained and trimmed;



         (b)   All driveway, parking loading and outside storage
areas shall be maintained as per the approved plan(s); and



         (c)   All fences, walls, lighting, signs, storage
structures, and other visually physical improvements or appurtenances as per
the approved plan(s) shall be maintained in a safe, working order and in good
appearance and free of graffiti.



      (6)   Storage.



         (a)   No outside storage is permitted on a vacant site.



         (b)   No outdoor sales, such as new or used cars, or
mobile carwashes, shall be allowed on a vacant site unless approved in
advance by the Zoning Administrator and as per the applicable zoning district
allowed uses.



         (c)   The site shall have visible signage stating the
prohibited uses on the vacant site.



         (d)   Parking of RV's, camper trailers, storage
trailers, storage containers and the temporary parking of tractor trailers is
prohibited on vacant sites.



      (7)   Active marketing. The Town of Wilkesboro requires active
marketing of a vacant site.  Active marketing includes a visible for sale
sign and requires the property to be listed with a realtor of the developer's
choice.  A quarterly marketing report shall be submitted to the Planning
Department.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.123  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   (A)   Intent. Planned unit developments, as defined in this
subchapter, are recognized as being desirable in the town in order that the
public health, safety  morals and general welfare be furthered in an era of
increasing urbanization and of growing demand for housing of all types and
design; to provide for necessary commercial and educational facilities
conveniently located to such housing and to other areas of the community
which require such facilities; to encourage innovations in residential and
commercial development so that the growing demands of the population may be
met by great variety in type, design and layout of the buildings and by the
conservation and more efficient use of open space, and so that greater
opportunities for better housing and recreation and shops, conveniently
located to each other, may extend to all citizens and residents of the town;
to encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services, or private
services in lieu thereof, and to reflect changes in the technology of land
development so that resulting economies may inure to the benefit of those who
need home, to lessen the burden of traffic on streets and highways; to
encourage the building of new developments incorporating the best features of
modern design; to conserve the value of land; and, in aid of these purposes,
to provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of
residential and commercial development to the particular site and the
particular demand for housing and other facilities, including the foregoing,
at the time of development in a manner consistent with the preservation of
the property values within established residential area, and to insure that
the increased flexibility of substantive regulations over land development
authorized here in is subject to such administrative standards and procedures
as shall encourage the disposition of proposals for land development without
undue delay.



   (B)   Area requirements: uses and density regulations.



      (1)   Minimum area requirements.



         (a)   Planned unit developments comprising less than 30
acres shall contain residential uses only.



         (b)   All other planned unit developments comprising 30
acres or more, may contain all uses permitted by division (B)(2) of this
section.



      (2)   Regulations of uses.



         (a)   Permitted uses.  Subject to division (B)(1) of
this section, a planned unit development may contain any uses permitted in
the following district:



            R-20   Suburban Residential District;



            R-8      Single Family Residential District;



            R-6      General Residential District; and



            B-2      General Business District.



         (b)   However, no more than 5% of the gross planned unit
development acreage shall be used for commercial purposes.  Additional
permitted uses in any residential zone include:  cluster homes, zero lot
line houses, town houses and condominiums.



      (3)   Density limitations and open space requirements. The
residential density in a planned unit development shall not exceed that
defined in §§ 156.060 through 156.064.



   (C)   Open space, common open space.



      (1)   Open space. Planned unit developments shall provide open
space as follows:



         (a)   Not less than 20% of the gross acreage when the
development is 100 acres or less, and



         (b)   Not less than 25% of the gross acreage when the
development exceeds 100 acres.



      (2)   Common open space;  for the collective enjoyment of the
residents of the development, shall comprise at least 50% of the open space.



   (D)   Street design. All single family attached and detached
dwelling units on individually platted lots shall have access to a street
constructed to State DOT Standards in accordance with Article V of the
Subdivision Regulations.



   (E)   Common parking.



      (1)   May be allowed in conjunction with multi-family
structures.



      (2)   The land for such shall not be subdivided from the land,
which contains the multi-family, structures it serves.



      (3)   Lots for such shall be built to the construction
standards for public streets.



   (F)   Maximum building height.  Maximum building height shall be
controlled by the zoning district regulations in which the development is
occurring.



   (G)   Setbacks.



      (1)   All structures shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet
from the project's perimeter boundaries.



      (2)   Single family (attached or detached) and two-three-and
four-family requirements.



         (a)   Twenty (20) feet minimum front yard setback and 25
feet minimum length of paved driveway.



         (b)   Twenty (20) feet between exterior sides.



         (c)   Thirty (30) feet between exterior side wall of one
dwelling unit and the rear of another.



         (d)   Fifty (50) feet between the rear of one dwelling
unit and the rear of another.



         (e)   No building shall be closer than ten feet from any
parking area.



         (f)   Fifty (50) feet outside side yard at street
intersections.



      (3)   Multi-family (five or more) requirements.



         (a)   Twenty (20) feet front yard setback.



         (b)   Twenty (20) feet between exterior sides.



         (c)   Thirty (30) feet between an exterior side of one
dwelling unit and the rear of another.



         (d)   Fifty (50) feet between the rear of one dwelling
unit and the rear of another.



         (e)   Fifty (50) feet outside side yard at street
intersections.



   (H)   Maximum frontage.  A townhouse type structure, whether
multi-family or otherwise, and attached, shall not contain more than eight
dwelling units unless recommended by the Planning Board and approved by the
Town Board.



   (I)   Buffer strips and landscape screening. Landscaping and buffer
strip requirements are established to improve the appearance of vehicular use
are established to improve the appearance of vehicular use areas, outdoor
storage yards, and utility areas; to required buffering between incompatible
land uses; to protect the character and value of surrounding areas; and to
reduce noise pollution, air pollution, hear and artificial light glare.



      (1)   Buffer strip required between residential districts and
between residential districts and general business districts.  Where any
residential district shall abut property in a business district, the owner or
developer of the business property or his agent, shall cause to be planted on
the common boundary an evergreen buffer strip at least ten feet in width
consisting of one row of evergreen trees not more than 15 feet apart and one
row of dense shrubs at not more than five feet apart.  The trees shall be at
least five feet in height and the shrubs two feet in height at the time of
installation.  Existing vegetation may be substituted for this requirement
with planning board approval as per division (I)(3) of this section.



      (2)   Landscaping shall be required along any front or side
property line that abuts the right-of-way of a street, road or highway. 
Such landscaping shall be provided as follows.



         (a)   A landscaping strip of six feet in depth shall be
located between the abutting right-of-way and any off-street parking, loading
or other vehicular use areas, except where driveway openings are to be
provided.



         (b)   There shall be a landscaping strip planted between
the right-of-way and the off-street parking and the town engineer shall
approve it.



      (3)   Existing vegetation.  The developer should make every
reasonable effort to preserve existing vegetation.  By preserving existing
vegetation, potential erosion and sedimentation are minimized and vegetated
buffer zones for the use of the residents are provided.  Existing vegetation
may be substituted for the requirement of division (I)(1) of this section.



      (4)   Fences.  If fencing is to be used in the project, a
schematic fencing plan shall be incorporated in the development plan and
shall clearly illustrate the types of fencing to be used.



   (J)   Off-street parking.  Two spaces, exclusive of carport or
garage, for each dwelling unit are required.



   (K)   Lighting.  The plan to be used for lighting shall be
submitted as part of the final plat for each phase of project, as warranted.



   (L)   Requirements for development.Master land use plan.  All
applications for approval of a planned unit development shall be accompanied
by a preliminary plat (Section 4.5(C) of the Subdivision Regulations) and a
master land use plan which shall include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   The number and types of residential dwelling units;



      (2)   Planned primary and secondary traffic circulation
patterns including an analysis of anticipated traffic;



      (3)   Planned park, playgrounds and open areas to be developed
or preserved in accordance with § 156.137(C) of this chapter, or to be
dedicated pursuant to the subdivision ordinance;



      (4)   Planned means of providing for the organizational
arrangements for the ownership, maintenance and preservation of common open
spaces;



      (5)   Relationship of the planned unit development to the
surrounding land use;



      (6)   Plans for water and wastewater systems to be constructed
in accordance with town standards;



      (7)   Plans for the access of firefighting and refuse disposal
equipment; to include the method of refuse disposal such as compactors,
dumpsters, and the like;



      (8)   Plans for all utilities (including cablevision) wherever
reasonable possible all planned unit developments shall provide for
underground installation of utilities in both public ways and private
extension thereof, in accordance with the specifications and policies of the
respective utility companies;



      (9)   Plans for an adequate storm drainage system to be
constructed in accordance with town standards;



      (10)   The delineation of areas to be constructed in phases of
sections and the sequential order that  will be followed in development
including a written statement from the applicant indicating the date for
beginning each phase of construction and the estimated date of completion;



      (11)   Drafts of any covenants which create a homeowners
association for the maintenance of all privately owned common areas,
including, but not limited to streets, parking areas, easements, and the
like; and



      (12)   Drafts of any proposed declarations to be recorded
pursuant to the North Carolina Unit Ownership Act (G.S. Ch. 47A).



   (M)   Detailed site plan and construction drawings. After approval
of the master land use plan, the developer shall submit a final plat (Section
4.5(D) of the Subdivision Regulations) which shall in addition, contain the
following:



      (1)   Detailed engineering and construction plans of all
necessary on-site and off-site improvements in accordance with town standards
that may be submitted in phases as approved by Town Council.



      (2)   Final copies of all necessary covenants and declarations.



      (3)   Detailed plans that specify the types of erosion and
sedimentation control practices that are to be employed during all phases of
construction so required by the Sedimentation and Pollution Control Act of
1973, as amended.



      (4)   In areas where the soil types and slope are such that
the planning and zoning board deems it advisable, a report sealed by a North
Carolina Register Professional Engineer practicing in the soils or
geo-technical field describing the suitability of on-site soils for the
proposed development.



      (5)   The planning and zoning board may, when it deems
advisable, require greater detail on any of the items enumerated in this
section.



   (N)   Procedures.



      (1)   Review by the Planning and Zoning Board.



         (a)   The master land use plan and the detailed
engineering and construction drawings shall be submitted to and reviewed by
the planning and zoning board and forwarded to the town council with any
necessary recommendations.



         (b)   The planning and zoning board shall consult with
the recreation commission, town engineer, fire chief and other persons an d
boards to make a recommendation to the town council.



         (c)   The planning and zoning board may engage a
certified engineer and/or planning consultant, with demonstrated experience
in large scale residential or planned unit developments, to conduct an
independent review of the proposed PUD, and report findings and
recommendations to the planning board and town council prior to the approval
of the PUD master plan or any phases thereof.



         (d)   A notice of public hearing shall be given in the
same manner as for amendments to the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   Approval by the Town Council.  No permit for
construction of any on-site or off-site improvements in a planned unit
development shall be granted prior to final approval of the planned unit
development by the town council.



      (3)   Revisions of Approved Plans.  No phases or section of
an approved planned unit development shall be revised, enlarged or amended
without first resubmitting that phase or section to the planning and zoning
board and the town council as provided for in this section.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.124  RV PARK AND CAMPGROUND STANDARDS.



   No camper, including gear and vehicles, shall stay aa length of time
which exceeds 90 days sequentially. Additionally, no camper, including gear
and vehicles, shall stay a length of time which exceeds 180 days per calendar
year.



(Ord. 2018-06, passed 6-4-2018)



OVERLAY DISTRICTS



§ 156.135  WATERSHED PROTECTION OVERLAY.



   (A)   Intent. It is the purpose of this section to protect the
quality of drinking water for the Town of Wilkesboro by setting standards for
the development that occurs within designated Public Water Supply Watershed
areas.  It is further intended that the establishment of watershed
regulations reflect the protection of critical environmental areas in
accordance with the State of North Carolina's Water Supply Watershed
Protection Rules.



   (B)   Authority. The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has,
in Chapter 160A, Article 8, Section 174, General Ordinance Authority, and in
Chapter 143, Article 21, Watershed Protection Rules, delegated the
responsibility or directed local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry.



   (C)   Effective date. The provisions in this subchapter were adopted
on September 7, 1993 and shall become effective on September 30, 1993.



   (D)   Jurisdiction. The provisions of the subchapter shall apply
within the areas designated as a Public Water Supply Watershed by the North
Carolina Environmental Management Commission and shall be defined and
established on the Official Zoning Map.



   (E)   Existing development. Any existing development as defined in
this chapter may be continued and maintained subject to the provisions
provided herein.  Expansions to structures classified as existing
development, must meet the requirements of this chapter, however, the
built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be included in
the density calculations.



   (F)   Watershed areas described.



      (1)   For the purpose of this subchapter the Town of
Wilkesboro extraterritorial jurisdiction are hereby divided into the
following areas:



         (a)   WS-IV-Critical Area; and



         (b)   WS-IV-PA (Protected Area).



      (2)   WS-IV-Critical Area.



         (a)   Only new development activities that require an
erosion/sedimentation control plan under State law or approved local programs
are required to meet the provisions of this subchapter when located in the
WS-IV watershed.  In order to address a moderate to high land use intensity
pattern, single-family residential uses are allowed at a maximum of two
dwelling units per acre.  All other residential and non-residential
development shall be allowed 24% built-upon area.  New sludge application
sites and landfills are specifically prohibited.



         (b)   Allowed uses.



            1.   Agriculture subject to the provisions of the
Food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and Trade
Act of 1990.  Agricultural activities conducted after January 1, 1993 shall
maintain a minimum ten foot vegetative buffer, or equivalent control as
determined by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission, along all perennial
waters indicated on the most recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5
minute) scale topographic maps or as determined by local government
studies.  Animal operations greater than 100 animal units shall employ Best
Management Practices (July 1, 1994 recommended by the Soil and Water
Conservation Commission).



            2.   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of
the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCA
II.6101-.0209).



            3.   Residential.



            4.   Non-residential development, except, the
storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a spill containment plan is
implemented; landfills; and sites for land application of sludge/residuals or
petroleum contaminated soils.



         (c)   Density and built-upon limits.



            1.   Single family residential development shall
not exceed two dwelling units per acre on a project by project basis.  No
residential lot shall be less than one-half (½) acre, except within an
approved cluster development.



            2.   All other residential and
non-residential-development shall not exceed 24% built-upon area on a project
by project basis.  For the purpose of calculating the built-upon area, total
project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is
to be developed.



      (3)   WS-IV-Protected Area.



         (a)   Only new development activities that require an
erosion/sedimentation control plan under State law or approved local
government program are required to meet the provisions of this chapter when
located in a WS-IV watershed.  In order to address accommodate a moderate to
high land use intensity pattern, single family residential uses shall develop
at a maximum of two dwelling units per acres (2du/ac).  All other
residential and non-residential development shall be allowed at a maximum of
24% built-upon area. A maximum of three dwelling units per acre (3 du/ac) or
36% built-upon area is allowed for projects without a curb and gutter street
system.



         (b)   Allowed uses.



            1.   Agriculture, subject to the provisions of the
food Security Act of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and Trade
Act of 1990.



            2.   Silviculture, subject to the provisions of
the Forest Practices Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC
1l.6101-.0209).



            3.   Residential development.



            4.   Non-residential development, excluding the
storage of toxic and hazardous materials unless a spill containment plan is
implemented.



         (c)   Density and built-upon limits.



            1.   Single family residential development shall
not exceed two dwelling units per acre, as defined on a project-by-project
basis.  No residential lot shall be less than one half (½) acre (or 20,000
square feet, excluding roadway right-of-way), or one third (1/3) acre for
projects without a curb and gutter street system, except within an approved
cluster development.



            2.   All other residential and
Non-Residential-development shall not exceed 24% built-upon area on a
project-by-project basis.  For projects without a curb and gutter street
system, development shall not exceed 36% built-upon area on a
project-by-project basis.  For the purpose of calculating built-upon area,
total project area shall include acreage in the tract on which the project is
to be developed.



            3.   In addition to the development allowed under
divisions (F)(3)(c)1. and 2. of this section, new development and expansions
to existing development may occupy up to 10% of the protected area with up to
70% built-upon area on a project basis, when approved as a special density
allocation (SDA).  The Watershed Administrator is authorized to approve
SDA's consistent with the provisions of this chapter.  Projects must, to the
maximum extent practical, minimize built-upon surface area; direct storm
waterways from surface waters and incorporate Best Management practices to
minimize water quality impacts.  For the purpose of calculating built-upon
area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which
the project is to be developed.



   (G)   Special density allocations.



      (1)   The Watershed Review Committee may grant Special Density
Allocations (SDAs) to project sites in the WS-IV-PA Watershed Areas.  The
SDAs may permit up to 70% built upon area on a project by project basis
without requiring installation of stormwater control devices.  No more than
10% of the WS-IV-PA Watershed Area may be developed under SDAs.  At no time
may the built upon area of a SDA project site exceed 70% of the total SDA
project site.



      (2)   SDA requests must be submitted to the Watershed
Administrator, who shall preview the request and submit it to the Watershed
Review Committee.  The Watershed Review Committee will review the SDA
request, and either approve or deny the request.  If the request is denied,
the applicant may redesign the project and resubmit the request.



      (3)   If the request is approved by the Watershed Review
Committee, the Watershed Administrator shall issue a SDA permit.  The permit
shall be valid for one year from date of issuance.  A record of all SDA
permits shall be kept on file in the Office of the Watershed Administrator. 



      (4)   The following review criteria will be used by the
Watershed Review Committee to evaluate SDA requests.  The review criteria
will be used to encourage applicants to maximize development in the SDA
project areas, as well as incorporate measures to improve the water quality
and aesthetics of the project area.  Projects must have a point total of at
least 300 to qualify for a SDA.



 

REVIEW CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING SDA REQUESTS


CRITERIA
 
POINTS




Landscaping


   minimum of 8' landscaped area along street-side of property (measured
from right-of-way)
 
40


   minimum of 8' landscaped area along side of property  (measured
property line)
 
30


   minimum of one landscaped space for every space in parking lot
 
50


Landscaped area must have grass or mulch ground cover with trees or shrubs
planted according to the following specifications:

-evergreen shrubs - 6' spacing with 1.5' minimum height at planting

-evergreen trees - 10' spacing with 6' minimum height at planting

-deciduous trees - 20' spacing with 8' minimum height at planting


Easement


   permanent greenway easement, a minimum width of 25', granted to Town of
Wilkesboro along perennial streams or other location approved by the Town of
Wilkesboro Planning Board; or, dedication of right-of-way, a minimum width of
15', along street-side of property for sidewalks
 
50


Multi-story building development (excluding basement)
 
75


Building development with parking located under building (excluding basement)
 
75


Area of project that remains in undisturbed, natural vegetation


   50% or more natural vegetation
 
50


   25 to 50% natural vegetation
 
25


Erosion Control Plan approved and implemented
 
25


Permanent sedimentation/erosion control measures on site (i.e., dry detention
ponds, sand filters, artificial wetlands, infiltration ponds, etc.)
 
25


Tax base added by project:


   $250,000 or less
 
25


   $250,000 to $500,000
 
50


   $500,000 to $1,000,000
 
75


   $1,000,000 or more
 
100


Employment added by project:


   1 to 10
 
25


   11 to 25
 
50


   26 to 75
 
75


   76 or more
 
100


Planned Unit Development (PUD) approved by Town of Wilkesboro Planning Board
 
50


Drainage:


   surface drainage rather than curb and gutter; or
 
40


   drainage through vegetated buffer or grass swale
 
60


Percentage of Built-Upon Area:
 



   36 to 50%
 
25


   51 to 60%
 
50


   61 to 70%
 
75


TOTAL POSSIBLE POINTS
 
805




 



   (H)   Cluster development. Clustering of development is allowed
under the following conditions:



      (1)   Built-upon area or storm water control requirements of
the projects shall not exceed that allowed for the critical area or balance
of watershed, whichever applies.



      (2)   All built-upon area shall be designed and located to
minimize storm water runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize
concentrated storm water flow.



      (3)   The remained of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or
natural state.  Where the development has an incorporated property owner
association, the title of the open space shall be conveyed to the association
for management.  Where a property association is not incorporated, a
maintenance agreement shall be filed with the property needs.



   (I)   Buffer areas required.



      (1)   A minimum 30 foot vegetative buffer for development
activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on the most
recent versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5) minute scale topographic maps or
as determined by local government studies.  Desirable artificial stream bank
or shoreline stabilization is permitted.



      (2)   No new development is allowed in the buffer except for
water dependent structures and public projects such as road crossings and
greenways where no practical alternative exists.  These activities should
minimize built-upon surface area; direct runoffs away from the surface waters
and maximize the utilization of storm water Best Management Practices.



   (J)   Additional requirements for variances within watershed areas.



      (1)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify in writing
each local government having jurisdiction in the watershed.  Such notice
shall include a description of the variance being requested.  Local
governments receiving notice of the variance request may submit comments to
the Watershed Administrator prior to a decision by the Watershed Review
Board.  Such comments shall become a part of the record of proceedings of
the Watershed Review Board.



      (2)   If the application calls for the granting of a major
variance, and if the Watershed Review Board decides in favor of granting the
variance, the Board shall prepare a preliminary record of the hearing with
all deliberate speed.  The preliminary record of the hearing shall include:



         (a)   The variance application;



         (b)   The hearing notices;



         (c)   The evidence presented;



         (d)   Motions, offers of proof, objections to evidence,
and ruling on them;



         (e)   Proposed findings and exceptions; and



         (f)   The proposed decision, including all conditions
proposed to be added to the permit.



      (3)   The preliminary record shall be sent to the
Environmental Management Commission for its review as follows:



         (a)   If the commission concludes from the preliminary
record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that (1) the
property owner cannot secure a reasonable return from, nor make any practical
use of the property unless the proposed variance is granted, and (2) the
variance, if granted, will not result in a serious threat to the water
supply, then the Commission shall approve the variance as proposed, or
approve, the proposed variance with conditions and stipulations.  The
Commission shall prepare a Commission decision and send it to the Watershed
Review Board.  If the Commission approves the variance as proposed, the
Board shall prepare a final decision granting the proposed variance.  If the
commission approves the variance with conditions and stipulations, the Board
shall prepare a final decision, including such conditions and stipulations,
granting the proposed variance.



         (b)   If the commission concludes from the preliminary
record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that (1) the
property owner can secure a reasonable return from or make a practical use of
the property without the variance or (2) the variance, if granted, will
result in a serious threat to the water supply, then the commission shall
deny approval of the variance as proposed.  The Commission shall prepare a
Commission decision and send it to the Watershed Review Board. The Board
shall prepare a final decision denying the variance as proposed.



         (c)   If the application calls for the granting of a
minor variance, then the Watershed Review Board may grant such variance if it
determines that to do so would not result in a serious threat to the water
supply.



      (4)   Powers of the Planning Board.



         (a)   To act as the Watershed Review Board on proposed
plats of land subdivision and hear major and minor variance request related
to the subdivisions within the designated Water Supply Watershed.



         (b)   To hear cases concerning major variances vested
rights, administrative reviews and appeals regarding the zoning ordinance or
decisions of the Zoning Enforcement Officer in designated Water Supply
Watersheds.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.136  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION OVERLAY.



   (A)   Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and
objectives.



      (1)   Statutory authorization. The Legislature of the State of
North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of
Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of Chapter 160A of the North
Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local governmental units the
responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the Town Council of Wilkesboro, North
Carolina, does ordain as follows:



      (2)   Findings of fact.



         (a)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of
Wilkesboro are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life,
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief,
and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.



         (b)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative
effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and
velocities and by the occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to
floods or other hazards.



      (3)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this
subchapter to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions within flood prone
areas by provisions designed to:



         (a)   restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to
health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result
in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities;



         (b)   require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the
time of initial construction;



         (c)   control the alteration of natural floodplains,
stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodwaters;



         (d)   control filling, grading, dredging, and all other
development that may increase erosion or flood damage; and



         (e)   prevent or regulate the construction of flood
barriers that will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase
flood hazards to other lands.



      (4)   Objectives. The objectives of this subchapter are to:



         (a)   Protect human life, safety, health and general
welfare;



         (b)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly
flood control projects;



         (c)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;



         (d)   Minimize prolonged business losses and
interruptions;



         (e)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities
(i.e. water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines,
streets, and bridges) that are located in flood prone areas;



         (f)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for
the sound use and development of flood prone areas; and



         (g)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that
property is in a special flood hazard area.



   (B)   Definitions. Unless specifically defined below, words or
phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most
reasonable application.



      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE).  A structure
located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use
of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.  Garages,
carports and storage sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.  Pole
barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and
may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop
building.



      ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING).  an extension or increase in
the floor area or height of a building or structure.



      APPEAL.  A request for a review of the Floodplain
Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this subchapter.



      AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING.  A designated Zone AO on a community's
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from
one to three feet.  These areas are located where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident.



      AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.  See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA
(SFHA).



      BASE FLOOD.  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.



      BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  A determination of the water
surface elevations of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance
Study. When the BFE has not been provided in a "Special Flood Hazard Area",
it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state,
or other source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies.  This
elevation, when combined with the "Freeboard", establishes the "Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation".



      BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.



      BUILDING.  See STRUCTURE.



      CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY.  A building, portion of a building,
or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical
or chemically reactive products.



      DEVELOPMENT.  Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials.



      DISPOSAL.  As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge,
deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste
into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part
of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or
discharged into any waters, including groundwater.



      ELEVATED BUILDING.  A non-basement building which has its lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings, or columns.



      ENCROACHMENT.  The advance or infringement of uses, fill,
excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may
impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.



      EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION.  A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of
the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community.



      FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



         (a)   The overflow of inland waters; and/or



         (b)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.



      FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).  An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the
boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas have been defined as Zone A.



      FLOOD INSURANCE.  The insurance coverage provided under the
National Flood Insurance Program.



      FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both
the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community are delineated.



      FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS).  An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  The Flood Insurance
Study report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary
and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published.



      FLOOD PRONE AREA.  See FLOODPLAIN.



      FLOOD ZONE.  A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard
Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type
of flooding in the area.



      FLOODPLAIN.  Any land area susceptible to being inundated by
water from any source.



      FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.  The individual appointed to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.



      FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.  Any type of permit that is
required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the
commencement of any development activity.



      FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT.  The operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving
and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain,
including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control
works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.



      FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS.  This chapter and other
zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police
power.  This term describes federal, state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing
flood loss and damage.



      FLOODPROOFING.  Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.



      FLOODWAY.  The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
one foot.



      FREEBOARD.  The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE)
to account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and
the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood
elevation (BFE) plus the freeboard establishes the "regulatory flood
protection elevation".



      FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY.  A facility which cannot be
used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to
water, limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair.  The term
does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.



      HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. § 130A,
Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.



      HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG).  The highest natural elevation of
the ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed
walls of the structure.



      HISTORIC STRUCTURE.  Any structure that is:



         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places (a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;



         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;



         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of
historic landmarks in communities with a "Certified Local Government (CLG)
Program"; or



         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical
significance of a historic district designated by a community with a
"Certified Local Government (CLG) Program".



      Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the US
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department
of Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as
having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966
as amended in 1980.



      LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG).  The elevation of the ground,
sidewalk or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support,
after completion of the building.



      LOWEST FLOOR.  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement).  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an
area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in
violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.



      MANUFACTURED HOME.  A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. 
The term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a "recreational vehicle".



      MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION.  A parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.



      MARKET VALUE.  The building value, not including the land value
and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. 
MARKET VALUE may be established by independent certified appraisal;
replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction
(actual cash value); or adjusted tax assessed values.



      MEAN SEA LEVEL.  For purposes of this subchapter, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum
used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the
floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are
referenced.  Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used.



      NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the initial
floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.



      NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA.  The channel of a river or other
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study
report.



      POST-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the
"start of construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.



      PRE-FIRM.  Construction or other development for which the
"start of construction" occurred before the effective date of the initial
Flood Insurance Rate Map.



      PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND.  That at least 51% of the actual cash
value of the structure is above ground.



      PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE.  Anything which is injurious to
the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any
considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or
use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream,
canal, or basin.



      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV).  A vehicle, which is:



         (a)   Built on a single chassis;



         (b)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when
measured at the largest horizontal projection;



         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and



         (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.



      REFERENCE LEVEL.  The top of the lowest floor for structures
within Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.



      REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.  The "base flood
elevation" plus the "freeboard".  In "Special Flood Hazard Areas" where base
flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the
BFE.  In "Special Flood Hazard Areas" where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 



      REMEDY A VIOLATION.  To bring the structure or other development
into compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations,
or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. 
Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other
affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement
provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations,
or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other
development.



      RIVERINE.  Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river
(including tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.



      SALVAGE YARD.  Any non-residential property used for the
storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including
but not limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.



      SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY.  Any facility involved in the
disposal of solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).



      SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE.  As defined in G.S. §
130A-290(a)(36), any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by
incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method.



      SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).  The land in the floodplain
subject to a 1% or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as
determined in division (C)(3) of this section.



      START OF CONSTRUCTION.  Includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date.  The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on
a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.  Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading,
and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways;
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.  For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.



      STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home,
or a gas, liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above
ground.



      SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the
structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the
market value of the structure before the damage occurred.  See definition of
"substantial improvement".



      SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any combination of repairs,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, taking place during any one-year period for which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement.  This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work
performed.  The term does not, however, include either:



         (a)   any correction of existing violations of State or
community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been
identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



         (b)   any alteration of a historic structure, provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation
as a historic structure.



      VARIANCE.  A grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter.



      VIOLATION.  The failure of a structure or other development to
be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. 
A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in divisions (D) and
(E) of this section is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.



      WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE).  The height, in relation to mean
sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of riverine areas.



      WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least
periodically.  Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which
substantial flood damage may occur.



   (C)   General provisions.



      (1)   Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall
apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction, including
Extra-Territorial Jurisdictions (ETJs), of Wilkesboro and within the
jurisdiction of any other community whose governing body agrees, by
resolution, to such applicability.



      (2)   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.



         (a)   The special flood hazard areas are those
identified under the cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the
State of North Carolina and FEMA in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), for Wilkes County dated 
March 2nd 2009, which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter.



         (b)   The initial Flood Insurance Rate Maps are as
follows for the jurisdictional areas at the initial date: Wilkes County
Unincorporated Area, dated May 15th 1991.



      (3)   Establishment of floodplain development permit. A
floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with
the provisions of division (C)(2) of this section.



      (4)   Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be
located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full
compliance with the terms of this subchapter and other applicable regulations.



      (5)   Abrogation and greater restrictions. This subchapter is
not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements,
covenants, or deed restrictions.  However, where this chapter and another
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.



      (6)   Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of
this chapter, all provisions shall be:



         (a)   Considered as minimum requirements;



         (b)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing
body; and



         (c)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other
powers granted under state statutes.



      (7)   Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood
protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory
purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration.  Larger
floods can and will occur.  Actual flood heights may be increased by
man-made or natural causes.  This chapter does not imply that land outside
the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages.  This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of Wilkesboro or by any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.



      (8)   Penalties for violation. Violation of the provisions of
this subchapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants
of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor.  Any
person who violates this subchapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50 or
imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.  Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.  Nothing herein contained
shall prevent Wilkesboro from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.



   (D)   Administration.



      (1)   Designation of Floodplain Administrator. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer or his/her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
"Floodplain Administrator", is hereby appointed to administer and implement
the provisions of this subchapter.



      (2)   Floodplain development application, permit and
certification requirements.



         (a)   Application requirements. Application for a
floodplain development permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to any development activities located within special flood hazard
areas.  The following items shall be presented to the Floodplain
Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit:



            1.   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the
proposed floodplain development:



               a.   The nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed
structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage
areas, drainage facilities, and other development;



               b.   The boundary of the special flood
hazard area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in
division (C)(2) of this section, or a statement that the entire lot is within
the special flood hazard area;



               c.   Flood zone(s) designation of the
proposed development area as determined on the FIRM or other flood map as
determined in division (C)(2) of this section;



               d.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or
non-encroachment area(s) as determined in division (C)(2) of this section;



               e.   The base flood elevation (BFE) where
provided as set forth in divisions (C)(2), (D)(3), or (E)(4) of this section;



               f.   The old and new location of any
watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed
development; and



            2.   Proposed elevation and method thereof, of all
development within a Special Flood Hazard Area including but not limited to:



               a.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level
of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures;



               b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level
to which any non-residential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be
floodproofed; and



               c.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level
to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.



            3.   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate
(FEMA Form 81-65) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an
inspection and maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to,
installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.



            4.   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which
shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all
provisions of this chapter are met.  These details include but are not
limited to:



               a.   The proposed method of elevation, if
applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled
foundation, open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and



               b.   Openings to facilitate automatic
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with division
(E)(2)(d)3. of this section when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in
Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30.



            5.   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the
lowest floor.



            6.   Plans and/or details for the protection of
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage.



            7.   Certification that all other local, state and
federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have
been received.



            8.   Documentation for placement of recreational
vehicles and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the
provisions of divisions (E)(2)(f) and (g) of this section are met.



            9.   A description of proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on
the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and
downstream; and a map (if not shown on plot plan) showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation.



         (b)   Permit requirements.  The floodplain development
permit shall include, but not be limited to:



            1.   A description of the development to be
permitted under the floodplain development permit.



            2.   The special flood hazard area determination
for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in
division (C)(2) of this section.



            3.   The regulatory flood protection elevation
required for the reference level and all attendant utilities.



            4.   The regulatory flood protection elevation
required for the protection of all public utilities.



            5.   All certification submittal requirements with
timelines.



            6.   A statement that no fill material or other
development shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any
watercourse, as applicable.



            7.   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones
A, AO, AE or A1-30.



         (c)   Certification requirements.



            1.   Elevation certificates. A final as-built
Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after construction is
completed and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance.  It
shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain
Administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted.  Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately
and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance.  In some
instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected
as-built construction.  Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.



            2.   Floodproofing certificate. If non-residential
floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting
data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are
required prior to the actual start of any new construction.  It shall be the
duty of the permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a
certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and
all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level.  Floodproofing
certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a
professional engineer or architect and certified by same.  The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and
the inspection and maintenance plan.  Deficiencies detected by such review
shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval.  Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be
cause to deny a floodplain development permit.  Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance
of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.



            3.   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone
A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches
in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in
accordance with  the provisions of division (E)(2)(c)2. of this section.



            4.   If a watercourse is to be altered or
relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or
relocation; a professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the
proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the
effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing
the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all
be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit.



            5.   Certification exemptions. The following
structures, if located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the
elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in divisions
(D)(2)(c)1. and 2. of this section:



               a.   Recreational vehicles meeting
requirements of a division (E)(2)(f)1. of this section;



               b.   Temporary structures meeting
requirements of division (E)(2)(g) of this section; and



               c.   Accessory structures less than 150
square feet meeting requirements of division (E)(2)(h) of this section.



      (3)   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain
Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited
to, the following duties:



         (a)   Review all floodplain development applications and
issue permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas
to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.



         (b)   Review all proposed development within special
flood hazard areas to assure that all necessary local, state and federal
permits have been received.



         (c)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina
Department of Crime Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency
Management, State Coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).



         (d)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying
capacity is maintained.



         (e)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and
non-encroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction
provisions of division (E)(6) of this section.



         (f)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant
utilities of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance
with the provisions of division (D)(2)(c) of this section.



         (g)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities
have been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of division
(D)(2)(c) of this section.



         (h)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of division
(D)(2)(3) of this section.



         (i)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular
structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or
architect in accordance with the provisions of divisions (D)(2)(c) and
(E)(2)(b) of this section.



         (j)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, or
non-encroachment areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary
interpretation.  The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
this section.



         (k)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been
provided in accordance with the provisions of division (C)(2) of this
section, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state,
or other source, including data developed pursuant to division (E)(4)(b)2. of
this section, in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.



         (l)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided
but no floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance
with the provisions of division (C)(2) of this section, obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment area data available
from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions
of this chapter.



         (m)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to
the administration of this chapter and make these records available for
public inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the
Privacy Act of 1974, as amended.



         (n)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress.  As
the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the
Floodplain Administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be
necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions
of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit.  In exercising this
power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper
credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the
community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other
enforcement action.



         (o)   Issue stop-work orders as required.  Whenever a
building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or
repaired in violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order
the work to be immediately stopped.  The stop-work order shall be in writing
and directed to the person doing or in charge of the work.  The stop-work
order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for
the stoppage, and the condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. 
Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor.



         (p)   Revoke floodplain development permits as
required.  The Floodplain Administrator may revoke and require the return of
the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing
stating the reason(s) for the revocation.  Permits shall be revoked for any
substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and
specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of
state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in
securing the permit.  Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in
violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked.



         (q)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special
flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community.  The Floodplain
Administrator and each member of his or her inspections department shall have
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour
for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.



         (r)    Follow through with corrective procedures of
division (D)(4) of this section.



         (s)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations
for variance requests.



         (t)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but
not limited to, the FIS Report, FIRM and other official flood maps and
studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of division (C)(2) of this
section, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change,
issued by FEMA.  Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.



         (u)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs,
including letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map
revision (LOMRs).



      (4)   Corrective procedures.



         (a)   Violations to be corrected.  When the Floodplain
Administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall
be his or her duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the
violation.  The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the
violations of law cited in such notification.



         (b)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective
action.  If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt
corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written
notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address or
by personal service, stating:



            1.   That the building or property is in violation
of the floodplain management regulations;



            2.   That a hearing will be held before the
Floodplain Administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten
days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled
to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence
pertaining to the matter; and



            3.   That following the hearing, the Floodplain
Administrator may issue an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building;
or to remove fill as applicable.



         (c)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a
hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain
Administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of
the flood damage prevention ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in
writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a
specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than 180
calendar days.  Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that
corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.



         (d)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to
take corrective action may appeal the order to the local elected governing
body by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator
and the clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order.  In the
absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be
final.  The local governing body shall hear an appeal within a reasonable
time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.



         (e)   Failure to comply with order.  If the owner of a
building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action
for which no appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the
governing body following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.



      (5)   Variance procedures.



         (a)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by
Wilkesboro, hereinafter referred to as the "appeal board", shall hear and
decide requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.



         (b)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal
board may appeal such decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.



         (c)   Variances may be issued for:



            1.   The repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure;



            2.   Functionally dependent facilities if
determined to meet the definition as stated in division (B) of this section,
provided provisions of divisions (D)(5)(i)2., 3., and 5. of th is section
have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety; or



            3.   Any other type of development, provided it
meets the requirements of this section.



         (d)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:



            1.   The danger that materials may be swept onto
other lands to the injury of others;



            2.   The danger to life and property due to
flooding or erosion damage;



            3.   The susceptibility of the proposed facility
and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;



            4.   The importance of the services provided by
the proposed facility to the community;



            5.   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location as defined under division (B) of this section as a functionally
dependent facility, where applicable;



            6.   The availability of alternative locations,
not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;



            7.   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development;



            8.   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management  program for that area;



            9.   The safety of access to the property in times
of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;



            10.   The expected heights, velocity, duration,
rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and



            11.   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems,
and streets and bridges.



         (e)   A written report addressing each of the above
factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance.



         (f)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and
the purposes of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and
objectives of this chapter.



         (g)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall
be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and
that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property,
and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE
will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100
of insurance coverage.  Such notification shall be maintained with a record
of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.



         (h)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the
records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request.



         (i)   Conditions for variances.



            1.   Variances shall not be issued when the
variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or
local laws, regulations, or ordinances.



            2.   Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway or non-encroachment area if the variance would result in
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge.



            3.   Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.



            4.   Variances shall only be issued prior to
development permit approval.



            5.   Variances shall only be issued upon:



               a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;



               b.   A determination that failure to grant
the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and



               c.   A determination that the granting of a
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to
public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.



         (j)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal
facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards,
and chemical storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard
areas provided that all of the following conditions are met.



            1.   The use serves a critical need in the
community.



            2.   No feasible location exists for the use
outside the special flood hazard area.



            3.   The reference level of any structure is
elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection
elevation.



            4.   The use complies with all other applicable
federal, state and local laws.



            5.   The Town of Wilkesboro has notified the
Secretary of the North Carolina Department of Crime Control and Public Safety
of its intention to grant a variance at least 30 calendar days prior to
granting the variance.



   (E)   Provisions for flood hazard reduction.



      (1)   General standards. In all special flood hazard areas the
following provisions are required:



         (a)   All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement of the structure;



         (b)   All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage;



         (c)   All new construction and substantial improvements
shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages;



         (d)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air
conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection
elevation.  These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water
softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter
panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric
outlets/switches;



         (e)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system;



         (f)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters;



         (g)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located
and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding;



         (h)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained
in this chapter;



         (i)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair,
reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the
effective date of this chapter and located totally or partially within the
floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no
additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in
the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that
such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other
requirements of this chapter;



         (j)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in
division (D)(5)(j) of this section.  A structure or tank for chemical or
fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water
treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special
flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or
floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and
certified in accordance with the provisions of division (D)(2)(c) of this
section;



         (k)   All subdivision proposals and other development
proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;



         (l)   All subdivision proposals and other development
proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood
damage;



         (m)   All subdivision proposals and other development
proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;



         (n)   All subdivision proposals and other development
proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental
agencies for which approval is required by federal or state law, including
Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33
U.S.C. 1334;



         (o)   When a structure is partially located in a Special
Flood Hazard Area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new
construction and substantial improvements; and



         (p)   When a structure is located in multiple flood
hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood
elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone
and the highest base flood elevation (BFE) shall apply.



      (2)   Specific standards. In all special flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in
division (C)(2) or (E)(4) of this section, the following provisions, in
addition to the provisions of division (E)(1) of this section, are required:



         (a)   Residential construction.  New construction and
substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured
homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower
than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in division (B) of
this section.



         (b)   Non-residential construction. New construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other
non-residential structure shall have the reference level, including basement,
elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined
in division (B) of this section.  Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30
Zones may be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in
lieu of elevation provided that all areas of the structure, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood
protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with
division (E)(7)(b) of this section. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this subsection
are satisfied.  Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator as set forth in division (D)(2)(c) of this section, along with
the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance plan.



         (c)  Manufactured homes.



            1.   New and replacement manufactured homes shall
be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower
than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in division (B) of
this section.



            2.   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored
to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in
accordance with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina
Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance
pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15.  Additionally, when the elevation would be
met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the
site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered
foundation.  When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height,
an engineering certification is required.



            3.   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest
floor shall meet the requirements of division (E)(2)(d) of this section.



            4.   An evacuation plan must be developed for
evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or
substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within
flood prone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the
Floodplain Administrator and the local Emergency Management Coordinator.



         (d)   Elevated buildings.  Fully enclosed area, of new
construction and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest
floor:



            1.   Shall not be designed or used for human
habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access,
or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the
premises.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to
allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance
equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or
elevator).  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished
or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;



            2.   Shall be constructed entirely of flood
resistant materials at least up to the regulatory flood protection elevation;
and



            3.   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30,
flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by
allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.  To meet this requirement,
the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria:



               a.   A minimum of two flood openings on
different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding;



               b.   The total net area of all flood
openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding;



               c.   If a building has more than one
enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow
floodwaters to automatically enter and exit;



               d.   The bottom of all required flood
openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade;



               e.   Flood openings may be equipped with
screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the
automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and



               f.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting
are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not
require flood openings.  Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of
structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as
outlined above.



         (e)   Additions/improvements.



            1.   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM
structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any
interior modifications to the existing structure are:



               a.   Not a substantial improvement, the
addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and
must not be any more non-conforming than the existing structure.



               b.   A substantial improvement, both the
existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the
standards for new construction.



            2.   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no
modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the
common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for
new construction.



            3.   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM
structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any
interior modifications to the existing structure are:



               a.   Not a substantial improvement, the
addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new
construction.



               b.   A substantial improvement, both the
existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the
standards for new construction.



          (f)   Recreational vehicles.  Recreational vehicles
shall either:



            1.   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions); or



            2.   Meet all the requirements for new
construction.



         (g)   Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the
issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the
applicant must submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal
of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type
of flood warning notification.  The following information shall be submitted
in writing to the Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:



            1.   A specified time period for which the
temporary use will be permitted.  Time specified may not exceed three
months, renewable up to one year;



            2.   The name, address, and phone number of the
individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;



            3.   The time frame prior to the event at which a
structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a
hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification);



            4.   A copy of the contract or other suitable
instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure;
and



            5.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of
a location outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary
structure will be moved.



         (h)   Accessory structures.



            1.   When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, and the like) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area,
the following criteria shall be met:



               a.   Accessory structures shall not be used
for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or
restroom areas);



               b.   Accessory structures shall not be
temperature-controlled;



               c.   Accessory structures shall be designed
to have low flood damage potential;



               d.   Accessory structures shall be
constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;



               e.   Accessory structures shall be firmly
anchored in accordance with the provisions of division (E)(1)(a) of this
section;



               f.   All service facilities such as
electrical shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of division
(E)(2)(d) of this section; and



               g.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic
equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory
flood protection elevation in conformance with the provisions of division
(E)(2)(d)3. of this section.



            2.   An accessory structure with a footprint less
than 150 square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not
require an elevation or floodproofing certificate.  Elevation or
floodproofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures
in accordance with division (D)(2)(c) of this section.



      (3)   Reserved.



      (4)   Standards for floodplains without established base flood
elevations. Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate
Zone A and established in division (C)(2) of this section, where no base
flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following
provisions, in addition to the provisions of division (E)(1) of this section,
shall apply:



         (a)   No encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted
within a distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or five times the
width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with
supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided
demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and



         (c)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood
protection elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria:



            1.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is
available from other sources, all new construction and substantial
improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and shall be elevated or floodproofed in
accordance with standards in divisions (E)(1) and (2) of this section;



            2.   When floodway or non-encroachment data is
available from a federal, state, or other source, all new construction and
substantial improvements within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall
also comply with the requirements of divisions (E)(2) and (6) of this section;



            3.   All subdivision, manufactured home park and
other development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if
development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured
home sites.  Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by
reference in accordance with division (C)(2) of this section and utilized in
implementing this chapter; and



            4.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not
available from a federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the
reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or
above the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in division (B)
of this section. All other applicable provisions of division (E)(2) of this
section shall also apply.



      (5)   Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood
elevations but without established floodways or non-encroachment areas. Along
rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided by FEMA
or is available from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment
areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the
FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within
such areas:



         (a)  Standards of divisions (E)(1) and (2) of this
section; and



         (b)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment
area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless
certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional
engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the community.



      (6)   Floodways and non-encroachment areas. Areas designated
as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within the special flood
hazard areas established in division (C)(2) of this section.  The floodways
and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity
of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential
projectiles.  The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in
divisions (E)(1) and (2) of this section, shall apply to all development
within such areas:



         (a)   No encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be
permitted unless:



            1.   It is demonstrated that the proposed
encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to
the Floodplain Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development
permit; or



            2.   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR)
has been approved by FEMA.  A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be
obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment;



         (b)   If division (E)(6)(a) of this section is
satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this chapter; and



         (c)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except
replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision, provided the following provisions are met:



            1.   The anchoring and the elevation standards of
division (E)(2)(c) of this section; and



            2.   The no encroachment standard of division
(E)(6)(a) of this section.



      (7)   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO).
Located within the special flood hazard areas established in division (C)(2)
of this section, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas.  These
areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to divisions
(E)(1) and (2) of this section, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall meet the following requirements:



         (a)    The reference level shall be elevated at least as
high as the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), in
feet, plus a freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at
least four feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is
specified.



         (b)   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of
elevation, be floodproofed to the same level as required in division
(E)(7)(a) of this section so that the structure, together with attendant
utility and sanitary facilities, below that level shall be watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with
division (D)(2)(c) and division (E)(2)(b) of this section.



         (c)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around
structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.



   (F)   Legal status provisions.



      (1)   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing
flood damage prevention ordinance.



         (a)   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment
of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted
December 3rd, 1973, as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but
rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such
existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued
thereunder are reserved and may be enforced.  The enactment of this chapter
shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending.  All
provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of Wilkesboro enacted on
December 3rd, 1973, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed.



         (b)   The date of the initial Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance for Wilkes County is November 12th, 2002.



      (2)   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a
floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under
such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date
of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.137  AIRPORT OVERLAY.



   (A)   Intent. It is the intent of these requirements to restrain
influences which are adverse to the property and safe conduct of airport
operations in the vicinity of Wilkes County Airport, to prevent creation of
conditions hazardous to aircraft operation, to prevent conflict with land
development which may result in loss of life and property, and to encourage
development that is compatible with airport use characteristics within the
intent and purpose of zoning.



   (B)   Airport height limitation zones. In order to carry out the
provisions of this section, there are hereby created and established certain
zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces,
transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they
apply to the Airport.  Such zones are shown on the Official Zoning Map.  An
area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only
in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation.  The various zones
are hereby established as subclassifications of the Airport Overlay District
and are defined as follows:



      (1)   Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone (AO-A1). The
inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is 1,000 feet wide.  The approach zone expands outward uniformly
to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the
primary surface.  Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of
the runway.



      (2)   Runway Larger than Utility Visual Approach Surface
(AO-A2). The inner edge of this surface begins at and corresponds with the
width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide.  This surface rises
uniformly at a 20:1 slope to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance
of 5,000 feet from the primary surface along the extended runway centerline.



      (3)   Runway Larger than Utility with a Visibility Minimum as
Low as ¾ Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone (AO-A3). The inner edge
of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
1,000 feet wide.  The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of
4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary
surface.  Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway.



      (4)   Transitional Zone (AO-T). The transitional zones are the
areas beneath the transitional surfaces.



      (5)   Horizontal Zone (AO-H). The horizontal zone is
established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end
of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by
drawing lines tangent to those arcs.  The horizontal zone does not include
the approach and transitional zones.



      (6)   Conical Zone (AO-C). The conical zone is established as
the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.



   (C)   Airport environs height limitations. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, no structure shall be erected, altered, or
maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created under
this section to a height in excess of the applicable height herein
established for such zone.  Such applicable height limitations are hereby
established for each of the zones in question as follows:



      (1)   Precision Instrument Runway Approach Zone (AO-A1).
Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal
distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes
upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional
horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.



      (2)   Runway Larger than Utility Visual Approach Surface
(AO-A2).  The inner edge of this surface begins at and corresponds with the
width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide.  This surface rises
uniformly at a 20:1 slope to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance
of 5,000 feet from the primary surface along the extended runway centerline.



      (3)   Runway Larger than Utility with a Visibility Minimum as
Low as ¾ Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone (AO-A3). Slopes 34 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same
elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.



      (4)   Transitional Zone (AO-T). Slopes seven feet outward for
each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150
feet above the Airport elevation which is 1,301 feet above mean sea level. 
In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping
seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the
same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect
the conical surface.  Where the precision instrument runway approach zone
projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping
seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and the
same elevation as the approach surface and extending a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline
from the edge of the approach surface.



      (5)   Horizontal Zone (AO-H). Established at a height of 150
feet above the Airport elevation or an elevation of 1,451 feet above mean sea
level.



      (6)   Conical Zone (AO-C). Slopes 20 feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet
above the Airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the
Airport elevation, or an elevation of 1,651 feet above mean sea level.



      (7)   Expected height limitations. Nothing in this section
shall be construed as prohibiting the erection, alteration, or maintenance of
any structure or growth of any tree at or to a height which is below the
limitations set forth herein.



   (D)   Regulation related to sanitary landfill location. Due to the
increased attraction of birds in the vicinity of sanitary landfills and the
potential hazards which birds create to aircraft operations (see FAA Order SO
5200.5), the following provisions shall apply:



      (1)   No sanitary landfill shall be located within 10,000 feet
from a runway of any airport.



      (2)   Sanitary landfills which are proposed to be located
further than 10,000 feet from a runway of any airport but within the conical
surface will be reviewed on a case by case basis by the Town Board, which may
in turn consult with the FAA.  If, in the opinion of the Town Board or the
FAA, the proposed landfill poses a threat to safe aircraft operations, then
the landfill shall not be allowed in the proposed location.



   (E)   Use restriction. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established
hereunder in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft,
make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between Airport lights and
others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.



   (F)   Legal nonconformities. The owner of any existing
non-conforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the
installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights
as shall be deemed necessary by the town to indicate to the operators of
aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport
obstruction.  Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and
maintained at the town's expense.



   (G)   Permits and variances.



      (1)   No permit shall be issued with respect to any use within
this overlay district unless said use complies with all of the requirements
of this section provided, however, that:



         (a)   In the area lying within the limits of the
horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any use or
structure except in cases where, because of terrain, land contour, or
topographic features, such use or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones;



         (b)   In areas lying within the limits of the approach
zones, no permit shall be required for any use or structure except in cases
where such use or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed
for such approach zones;



         (c)   In the areas lying within the limits of the
transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall
be required for any use or structure except when such use or structure,
because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above
the height limit prescribed for such transition zones; and



         (d)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing
exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree, in
excess of any of the height limits established in § 156.138 Gateway Overlay
(reserved for future use).



      (2)   Any application for a variance with respect to any use
within this overlay district shall be accompanied by a written determination
from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on
the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of
navigable airspace and the airport.  Such variances shall be allowed where
it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations
will result in unnecessary hardship and relief granted will not be contrary
to the public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the spirit of this
section.  Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of
this section may be considered by the Board of Adjustment unless a copy of
the application has been furnished to the airport manager and the Wilkes
County Airport Board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the
variance.  If the airport manager and/or the Airport Board does not respond
to the application within 30 days after receipt, the Board of Adjustment may
act on its own to grant or deny said application.



      (3)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance
granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of
this section, and is reasonable under the circumstances, be so conditioned as
to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to install,
operate, and maintain, at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as
may be necessary.  If deemed proper by the Board of Adjustment, this
condition may be modified to require the owner to permit the Town of
Wilkesboro, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain the
necessary markings and lights.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.138  GATEWAY OVERLAY - RESERVED.



§ 156.139  US HWY 421 OVERLAY - RESERVED.



HISTORIC OVERLAY DISTRICTS/HISTORIC LANDMARKS



§ 156.150  PURPOSE.



   The historical heritage of our town is one of our most valued and
important assets. The conservation and preservation of historic districts and
landmarks stabilize and increase property values in their areas and
strengthen the overall economy of the town. The purpose of establishing local
historic districts and landmarks is to encourage the restoration,
preservation, rehabilitation and conservation of historically,
architecturally, and archaeologically significant areas, structures,
buildings, sites, objects and their surroundings; and to review new
construction design to ensure compatibility with the character of the
district; and to safeguard against any potentially adverse influences which
may cause the decline, decay, or total destruction of these important assets.
In addition, the preservation of historic districts and landmarks provides
for the education, pleasure and enrichment of the residents of Wilkesboro and
the state as a whole.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.151  ESTABLISHMENT AND JURISDICTION OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION.



   Pursuant to Part 3C of Article 19 of Chapter 160A of the General
Statutes, there is hereby established a commission that shall be known as the
Wilkesboro Historic Preservation Commission. Its jurisdiction shall include
the Town of Wilkesboro and the extraterritorial jurisdiction area of the Town
as shown on the official zoning map and atlas of the Town.  The Commission
will consist of seven members appointed by the Town Board, and will serve
without compensation.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.152  MEMBERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION.



   (A)   Tenure. Members shall be appointed for three-year staggered
terms.  A member may be reappointed for a second consecutive term, but after
two consecutive terms a member shall be ineligible for reappointment until
one calendar year has elapsed from the date of the termination of his or her
second term.  In the case of a vacancy occurring during a term, such vacancy
shall be filled for the unexpired portion of such term.



   (B)   Qualifications. A majority of the members of the Commission
shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in
history, architecture, archaeology, or related fields; and all members shall
reside within the territorial zoning jurisdiction of the Town of Wilkesboro.



   (C)   Meetings. The Historic Preservation Commission shall establish
a meeting time, and shall meet at least monthly, unless there is not
sufficient business to warrant a meeting.  All meetings of the Commission
are subject to the North Carolina Open Meetings Law.



   (D)   Rules of procedure. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
adopt and publish Rules of Procedure to govern the conduct of its business.



   (E)   Meeting minutes. The Historic Preservation Commission shall
keep permanent minutes of all its meetings.  The minutes shall record
attendance of its members, resolutions, findings, recommendations, and
actions.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.153  COMMISSION POWERS.



   The general duties of the Historic Preservation Commission are to
promote, enhance, and preserve the character of the historic overlay district
and designated historic landmarks.  The Commission shall exercise the
following powers as part of their duties:



   (A)   To recommend districts or areas to be designated by ordinance
as historic overlay districts;



   (B)   To recommend individual structures, sites, or objects to be
designated by ordinance as an historic landmark;



   (C)   To recommend that designation of historic overlay districts,
or part thereof, be revoked or removed for cause;



   (D)   To recommend that designation of individual structures, sites,
or objects as historic landmarks be revoked for cause;



   (E)   To consider and grant or deny applications for certificates of
appropriateness in accordance with this chapter;



   (F)   To publish information, or otherwise inform the owners of
property within the historic districts or of designated landmarks, about
matters pertinent to its duties, organization, procedures, duties, or
requirements; and



   (G)   To exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as
are required elsewhere by this chapter and/or state law.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.154  ESTABLISHMENT AND AMENDMENT PROCEDURE - HISTORIC DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Establishment.



      (1)   Requests for establishment of an historic district may
be made by:



         (a)   The Town Board;



         (b)   The Planning Board;



         (c)   Town planning staff; or



         (d)   Any interested person.



      (2)   All requests shall first be presented to the Historic
Preservation Commission.  The requests should include reference to the
historical, architectural, or archaeological significance of the proposed
district.  The Commission will conduct a preliminary investigation to
determine the eligibility of the proposed area.



      (3)   If the Commission determines that the proposed area is
ineligible to become an historic district, the Commission shall report such
determination to the entity that requested the designation.  Such report
shall be made within 30 days of the Commission's consideration of the
request.  The report may also include recommendations of if and how the
request may be amended in order to make the area eligible as an historic
district.



      (4)   If the Commission determines that a proposed area is
eligible to become an historic district, it shall notify property owners
within the area through first class mail that establishment of an historic
district will be considered by the Commission at a specified date and time. 
The Commission shall hold the public informational meetings and receive
questions and comments, after which they shall make refinements to any
proposed boundaries.



      (5)   The Commission shall prepare and submit a report to the
Planning Board, and the Town Board.  The report shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:



         (a)   A boundary description of the area;



         (b)   A map at a scale of not less than one inch
represents 200 feet (1" to 200'), showing the boundaries of the proposed
area; and



         (c)   A description of the significance of the area,
including its buildings, structures, features, sites, or surroundings.



      (6)   Pursuant to review and comment by the Town Board, the
report shall be forwarded to the North Carolina Department of Cultural
Resources who shall make an analysis of and recommendations concerning such
report and description of proposed boundaries to the Town Board.  Failure of
the Department to submit its written analysis and recommendations to the Town
Board within 30 calendar days after a written request for such analysis has
been received by the Department of Cultural Resources shall relieve the Town
of any responsibility for awaiting such analysis, and the Town Board may at
any time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its zoning
ordinance.



      (7)   Once all of the previous procedural steps have been met,
rezoning the proposed area to an historic district shall proceed in the same
manner as would otherwise be required for a change in the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Amendment.



      (1)   The Commission shall prepare and submit a report to the
Planning Board and the Town Board.  The report shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:



         (a)   A boundary description of the area;



         (b)   A map at a scale of not less than one inch
represents 200 feet (1" to 200'), showing the boundaries of the proposed
area; and



         (c)   A description of the significance of the area,
including its buildings, structures, features, sites, or surroundings.



      (2)   Pursuant to review and comment by the Town Board, the
report shall be forwarded to the North Carolina Department of Cultural
Resources who shall make an analysis of and recommendations concerning such
report and description of proposed boundaries to the Town Board.  Failure of
the Department to submit its written analysis and recommendations to the Town
Board within 30 calendar days after a written request for such analysis has
been received by the Department of Cultural resources shall relieve the Town
of any responsibility for awaiting such analysis, and the Town Council may at
any time thereafter take any necessary action to adopt or amend its zoning
ordinance.



      (3)   Once all of the previous procedural steps have been met,
rezoning the proposed area to an historic district shall proceed in the same
manner as would otherwise be required for a change in the zoning ordinance.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.155  HISTORIC DISTRICT OVERLAY REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses. All uses permitted in the underlying zoning
district shall be permitted in the historic overlay district.



   (B)   Regulation of exterior features. No exterior portion of any
building or other structure, nor above-ground utility structure, nor any type
of on-premise sign, nor important landscape, or natural features may be
erected, altered, restored, moved, or demolished within a historic overlay
district until and after a certificate of appropriateness has been approved
by the Historic Preservation Commission according to the requirements of §
156.157.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.156  DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC LANDMARKS.



   (A)   Requests for designation of an historic landmark may be made
by:



      (1)   The Town Board;



      (2)   The Planning Board;



      (3)   Town planning staff; or



      (4)   Any interested person.



   (B)   All requests shall first be presented to the Historic
Preservation Commission.  The requests should include reference to the
historical, architectural, or archaeological significance of the proposed
landmark.  The Commission will conduct a preliminary investigation to
determine the eligibility of the landmark.



   (C)   If the Commission determines that the proposed landmark is
ineligible to become an historic landmark, the Commission shall report such
determination to the entity that requested the designation.  Such report
shall be made within 30 days of the Commission's consideration of the
request.  The report may also include recommendations of if and how the
request may be amended in order to improve it.



   (D)   If the Commission determines that the proposed landmark is
eligible to become an historic landmark, it shall notify property owners
within the area through first class mail that designation of an historic
landmark will be considered by the Commission at a specified date and time. 
The Commission shall hold the public informational meetings and receive
questions and comments.



   (E)   The Commission shall prepare and submit a report to the
Planning Board and the Town Board.  The report shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the current property owner;



      (2)   The location of the property proposed to be designated
historic, including the street address and tax map and parcel numbers;



      (3)   The date of construction and of any later alterations,
if any;



      (4)   An architectural or archaeological description of the
area of the site or structure proposed to be designated.  If outbuildings or
other appurtenant features are proposed for designation, the report shall
contain a description of those features;



      (5)   An assessment and historical discussion of the site or
structure within its type, period, and locality;



      (6)   Photographs that clearly depict the property proposed
for designation, including views of all facades, pertinent details and
siting; and



      (7)   A map clearly showing the location and boundaries of the
property, including any outbuildings and appurtenant features.



   (F)   Pursuant to review and comment by the Town Board, the report
shall be forwarded to the North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources who
shall make an analysis of and recommendations concerning such report and
description of proposed boundaries to the Town Board.  If the department
does not submit its written comments or recommendations in connection with
any proposed designation within 30 calendar days after a written request for
such analysis has been received by the department shall relieve the town of
any responsibility for awaiting such analysis.



   (G)   The Town Board and Historic Preservation Commission shall hold
a joint public hearing on the proposed ordinance.  Notice of the hearings
shall be published at least once in a newspaper generally circulated within
the town. Written notice of the hearings shall also be mailed by the
Commission to all owners and occupants of properties.  All such notices
shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 25 days prior to
the date set for the public hearing.



   (H)   Upon adoption of the ordinance or any amendments thereto, the
owners and occupants of each designated historic property shall be given
written notification of such designation.  One copy of the ordinance and
each amendment thereto shall be filed by the Historic Preservation Commission
in the office of the County Register of Deeds.  Each historic property
designated as an historic landmark in the ordinance shall be indexed
according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantee and grantor
indexes in the Register of Deeds office, and the Historic Preservation
Commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and indexing.  A second
copy of the ordinance and of each amendment thereto shall be kept on file in
the Town Clerk's office and shall be made available for public inspection at
any reasonable time.  A third copy of the ordinance and each amendment
thereto shall be given to the Wilkes County Building Inspector.



   (I)   Upon adoption of the ordinance or any amendments thereto, it
shall be the duty of the Historic Preservation Commission to give notice
thereof to the Wilkes County tax assessor. The designation and any recorded
restrictions upon the property limiting its use for preservation purposes
shall be considered by the assessor in appraising it for tax purposes.  The
fact that a building, structure, site, area, or object has been designated an
historic landmark shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps maintained by
the County for such period as the designation remains in effect.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.157  CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS.



   (A)   Certificate of appropriateness required.



      (1)   No exterior portion of any building or other structure
(including masonry, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps and pavement, or
other appurtenant features) nor above-ground utility structure, nor any type
of outdoor advertising sign, nor important landscape and natural features may
be erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished on a landmark or within
the historic district until and after the property owner or his/her agent has
contacted the Historic Preservation Commission staff to determine whether the
project will require a certificate of appropriateness.  If a certificate of
appropriateness is required, then the applicant will follow the procedures in
division (D) of this section.



      (2)   The Town of Wilkesboro and all public utility companies
shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness for landmarks
and in the historic district prior to initiating any changes in the character
of street paving, sidewalks, utility installations, lighting, walls, fences,
and structures on property, streets, or easements owned or franchised by the
State of North Carolina, Town of Wilkesboro, or public utility companies.



      (3)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued prior
to the issuance of a zoning permit or other permit granted for purposes of
constructing, altering, moving or demolishing structures.  Therefore, a
certificate of appropriateness is a prerequisite to the issuance of such a
zoning permit or such other permits. Any such zoning permits or such other
permits not issued in conformity with this section shall be invalid.



   (B)   Maintenance and repair permitted. No certificate of
appropriateness shall be required for:



      (1)   The routine maintenance or repair of any exterior
architectural feature in an historic district or on an historic landmark that
does not involve a change in design, material, or outer appearance;



      (2)   The Commission shall have no jurisdiction over interior
arrangement and shall take no action unless it is to prevent the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving, or demolition
of buildings, structures, appurtenant features, outdoor advertising signs or
other significant features which would be incongruous with the special
character of a landmark or district;



      (3)   The construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, moving, or demolishing of any such feature that the building
inspector or similar official shall certify to the property owner and to the
Historic Preservation Commission is required by the public safety because of
an unsafe condition; and



      (4)   The routine maintenance or repair of streets, sidewalks,
pavement markings, utility lines, street signs, traffic signs, and/or
replacement of street light fixtures in the event of equipment failure,
accidental damage, or natural occurrences.



   (C)   Minor works. The Historic District Commission may, after
adoption of Design Review Guidelines, allow the review and approval of a
certificate of appropriateness for minor works by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.  However, no denial of a certificate of appropriateness is allowed
without formal action by the Commission.



   (D)   Procedures to obtain a certificate of appropriateness.



      (1)   Applications. Applications for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer no later
than 14 calendar days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Historic Preservation Commission.  The names and addresses of the property
owners filing the application and those of the property owners within 100
feet on all sides of the property that is the subject of the application. 
The Zoning Enforcement Officer is responsible for transmitting the
application to the Historic Preservation Commission.



      (2)   Notice and hearing. The planning staff will notify by
mail the owners of any property located within 100 feet on all sides of the
property that is the subject of the application.  Prior to the issuance or
denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation
Commission will give the applicant and other affected property owners and/or
residents the opportunity to be heard.



      (3)   Time limit for action. The Historic Preservation
Commission shall act upon the application within 60 calendar days after the
filing.  If the Commission fails to act upon the application within this
time shall be deemed to constitute approval and a certificate of
appropriateness shall be issued.



      (4)   Decisions. All actions of the Historic Preservation
Commission shall be set forth in writing.  The Historic Preservation
Commission's final action on an application for a certificate of
appropriateness shall be by the passage of a motion to take one of the
following actions:



         (a)   Approve the application for a certificate of
appropriateness as proposed, and provide in writing the findings on which the
decision is based;



         (b)   Approve the application for a certificate of
appropriateness subject to specific conditions and/or modifications,
providing these conditions of approval in writing;



         (c)   Disapprove the application for a certificate of
appropriateness as proposed, and provide in writing the findings on which the
decision is based.



      (5)   Time limit on approval.



         (a)   The applicant shall have 180 days from the date
the certificate of appropriateness is approved and issued to procure a
building or demolition permit.  Failure to procure the permit in this period
will be a failure to comply with the certificate of appropriateness and it
shall be void.



         (b)   If a building permit is not required, the work
must be completed within the 180 day period.



         (c)   If work is commenced, but discontinued for a
period of 180 days or more, the certificate will be void.



      (6)   Reapplication after denial. If the Historic Preservation
Commission determines that a certificate of appropriateness should not be
issued, a new application affecting the same property may be submitted only
if substantial changes are made in plans for the proposed work.



      (7)   Demolition.



         (a)   An application for a certificate of
appropriateness authorizing the relocation, demolition or destruction of a
designated landmark or a building, structure or site within an historic
district may not be denied, except as provided in division (D)(7)(b) of this
section.  However, the effective date of such a certificate may be delayed
for a period of up to 365 days from the date of approval.  The commission
shall reduce the maximum period of delay authorized by this section where it
finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived
of all beneficial use of or return from such property by virtue of the delay.
During such period the commission shall negotiate with the owner and with any
other parties in an effort to find a means of preserving the building or site.



         (b)   An application for a certificate of
appropriateness authorizing the demolition or destruction of a building, site
or structure determined by the state historic preservation officer as having
statewide significance as defined in the criteria of the National Register of
Historic Places may be denied except where the Commission finds that the
owner would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all
beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial.



         (c)   If the commission has voted to recommend
designation of a property as a landmark or designation of an area as a
district, and final designation has not been made by the Town Board, the
demolition or destruction of any building, site or structure located on the
property of the proposed landmark or in the proposed district may be delayed
by the Commission for a period of up to 180 days or until the Town Board
takes final action on the designation, whichever comes first.



         (d)   In case any building, structure, site, area or
object designated as a landmark or located within the historic district is
about to be demolished whether as a result of deliberate neglect or
otherwise, materially altered, remodeled, removed or destroyed, except in
compliance with the ordinance, the commission or other party aggrieved by
such action may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent
such unlawful action.



      (8)   Appeals. Any aggrieved party may take an appeal from the
actions of the Historic Preservation Commission to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, whether the application was approved or denied.  The appeal
shall be taken within 20 calendar days after the decision of the Commission
and shall be in the nature of certiorari.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.158  STANDARDS FOR DESIGN REVIEW.



   (A)   Design review guidelines required. The provisions for issuing
a certificate of appropriateness shall not become effective until after the
Historic Preservation Commission has prepared and adopted design review
guidelines.  These principles and guidelines shall address new construction,
alterations, additions, moving, and demolition as it applies to designated
landmarks or historic districts.  The design review guidelines shall be
placed on file in the Town of Wilkesboro offices and made available to the
public for review.



   (B)   Design review guidelines amendment. Prior to the amendment of
design review guidelines, any person may be allowed to comment on the
proposal.  Not less than 30 days prior to the public hearing at which the
Historic Preservation Commission proposes to act upon the amendment(s),
copies shall be made available to the Town Board, Planning Board, and any
other interested person upon request. The Commission shall also cause notice
of the meeting to be published in a newspaper of general circulation not less
than ten nor more than 25 days prior to the date set for the public hearing.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



§ 156.159  CONDITIONS FOR CERTAIN APPROVALS.



   (A)   Authentic restoration or reconstruction. In the event that the
Historic Preservation Commission finds that an application for a building
permit covers activity constituting an authentic restoration or
reconstruction in the same location as the original location, said building
or structure may be restored or reconstructed at the same location where the
original building or structure was located.



   (B)   Encroachment into a public right-of-way. Any items restored,
reconstructed, or maintained over, on, or within public sidewalks, public
alleys, or other such public rights-of-way, shall be the responsibility of
the owner.  The owner's restoration, reconstruction, or maintenance of any
such item shall constitute the owner's agreement to protect and hold the Town
of Wilkesboro blameless against any and all liability, cost, damage, or
expense suffered as a result of the restoration, reconstruction, or
maintenance thereof.  The lowest point of any item projecting into these
public areas shall be nine feet above the ground immediately below.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)



DEFINITIONS



§ 156.170  DEFINITIONS.



   Definitions associated with "Signage" (§ 156.081) and "Flood Damage
Prevention Overlay" (§ 156.136) are contained within their respective
sections.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU).  A second dwelling subordinate in size
to the principal dwelling unit located in either the principal dwelling or an
accessory structure. The ADU is constructed so as to maintain the appearance
and essential character of a single family dwelling and/or any accessory
structures.



   ACCESSORY USE.  A use or structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature, customarily associated with and clearly subordinate to the principal
use or structure.



   ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS.  As defined in G.S. § 14-202.10, except for
massage therapists that meet the provisions of G.S. §§ 90-620 through
90-636.



   ALLEY.  A service way providing only a secondary means of access to
abutting property.



   ANTENNA.  A device, dish, or array used to transmit or receive
telecommunications signals.



   BASE FLOOD.  A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.  Also referred to as the 100-year flood.



   BED AND BREAKFAST.  An owner-occupied structure that is residential in
character and offers overnight lodging and meals for a fee.



   BERM.  A mound of earth.



   BUFFER.  A fence, wall, hedges, landscaped area, additional setbacks,
or combination of the above, designed for the purpose of screening or to set
apart one land use from another



   BUILDABLE AREA.  The portion of a lot remaining after setbacks have
been satisfied.



   BUILDING.  Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls
and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, process,
equipment, or goods.



   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the mean
elevation of the finished grade along the side of the building or structure
to the highest point of the building or structure.



   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.  A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is situated.



   CANOPY.  A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal, plastic,
fiberglass or glass on a support, which is supported in total or in part,
from the ground and providing shelter over, for example, a doorway, outside
walk, interior access drive or parking area.



   CLUB OR LODGE.  An establishment operated by an association or
corporation for social, recreational, fraternal, or charitable purposes, but
which is not operated for profit or otherwise conducted as a business.



   CONDITIONAL USE.  A use which would not be appropriate generally
through the zoning district, but which, if permitted only upon issuance of a
conditional use permit and subject to the limitations and conditions
specified therein would be allowed.



   CONDOMINIUM.  A residential development of two or more buildings
designed and built for unit ownership according to the North Carolina Unit
Ownership Act.



   CONGREGATE CARE FACILITY.  A facility composed of residential and
congregate areas and affording health-sustaining services to assist the
residents. The residential components shall be considered as self-contained
dwelling units as defined in the NC Building Code. The facility shall also
have congregate areas for use by or service to the residents which may
include dining, recreation and medical areas. In addition, services may be
provided such as custodial care, physical therapy, and social and recreation
coordination.



   CORNICE.  An architectural decorative horizontal projecting crown of
an exterior building wall.



   CURB-CUTS.  An opening cut in a curb allowing for the construction of
a driveway to a single or multi-retail establishment off a major thoroughfare.



   CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION.  Any use conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes
and does not change the character thereof; and in connection with which there
is not display and not person, not a resident on the premises, is employed
specifically in connection with the customary home occupation.  Provided
further, that no mechanical equipment is installed or used except such that
is normally used for domestic or professional purposes, and that not over 25%
of the total floor space of any structure is used for home occupations.



   DWELLING.  A building designed, arranged, or used for permanent living
quarters for one or more persons.



   DWELLING, DUPLEX.  A detached building with two dwelling units which
may be attached side by side or one above the other.  The two dwelling units
shall be roughly equal in floor area.



   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME.  A dwelling unit that is composed of one
or more components, each of which was substantially assembled in a
manufacturing plant and designed to be installed or joined on the building
site and which meets or exceeds the United States Housing and Urban
Development standards for manufactured homes that went into effect June 15,
1976.



   DWELLING, MOBILE HOME.  A dwelling unit that was fabricated before
June 15, 1976 in one or more modules at a location other than the home site,
by assembly line type production techniques or by other construction methods
unique to an off-site manufacturing process and designed for occupancy by one
family.



   DWELLING, MODULAR HOME.  A dwelling unit consisting of one or more
components constructed in compliance with the North Carolina Uniform
Residential Building Code for One or Two-Family Dwelling Units and comprised
of components substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and
transported to the building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.



   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.  A building arranged to be occupied by three
or more families living independently of each other.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED.  A one-family dwelling attached to
two or more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls.  No dwelling unit
may be located above another unit.



   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED.  A dwelling which is designed for
and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or
yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.



   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.  A single-family dwelling unit in a row of at
least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access
to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls.



   DWELLING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms forming a single independent
habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking, and eating by one family; for owner occupancy or rental,
lease or other occupancy on a weekly or longer basis, and containing
independent cooking, sanitary, and sleeping facilities. Units otherwise
meeting this definition but occupied by transients on a rental or lease basis
for periods of less than one week shall be construed to be lodging units.



   EASEMENT.  A grant of rights by a property owner to another
individual, group, or governmental unit to make limited use of a portion of
real property for a specified purpose.



   EAVE.  The overhanging lower edge created by the intersection of the
of the roof and wall planes.



   ELECTRONIC GAMING OPERATION.  Any business enterprise, whether as a
principal or an accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines,
including but not limited to computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games
of chance, including sweepstakes, and where cash, merchandise or other items
of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the value of
such distribution is determined by electronic games played or by
predetermined odds. This term includes, but is not limited to internet cafes,
internet sweepstakes, beach sweepstakes or cybercafés. This does not include
any lottery approved by the State of North Carolina.



   ENTRANCE.  The front door(s) established as the primary customer
access point.  The area of an entrance shall include the area on either side
of the door for a distance of at least ten feet.



   EXTERIOR WALLS.  The vertical or nearly-vertical planes which form the
exterior envelope of a building



   FAÇADE.  The portion of any exterior building elevation extending
from grade to the top of the parapet, wall or eaves and extending the entire
length of the building.  The FAÇADE includes any artificial or structural
elevation which is primarily visible to the general public.



   FAMILY.  An individual or two or more persons related by blood,
marriage, or adoption living together in a dwelling unit; or a group of not
more than three persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption
living together in a dwelling unit. A FAMILY may include five or fewer foster
children.



   FAMILY CARE HOME.  A facility licensed by the appropriate state agency
as a family care home for one to six unrelated individuals, together with
support and supervisory personnel. FAMILY CARE HOMES shall not be located
less that one-half (½) mile from each other. See also definitions in G.S. §
168-20.



   FARM, BONA-FIDE.  One used for purposes that include the production
and activities relating or incidental to the production of crops, fruits,
vegetables, flowering or ornamental plants, dairy, livestock, poultry, and
all other forms of agricultural products having a domestic or foreign market.



   FASCIA.  A horizontal band or board, often used to conceal the ends of
rafters; the front of an object or other structural roof components.



   FREESTANDING SIGN.  A sign that is attached to, erected on, or
supported by some structure (such as a pole, mast, frame, or other structure)
that is not itself an integral part of or attached to a building or other
structure whose principal function is something other than the support of a
sign.  A sign that stands without supporting elements, such as a "sandwich
sign," is a FREESTANDING SIGN. If the message is moved from the structure
that was originally designed and used as a freestanding sign, this structure
shall still be considered a sign.



   FULL-CUTOFF LIGHT FIXTURE.  A light fixture that allows no emission of
light above a horizontal plane through the fixture.



   GROSS FLOOR AREA.  The total area of a building measured by taking the
outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy
or storage.



   GROUP PROJECT.  Two or more buildings constructed on the same zoning
lot of at least two acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots.



   JUNK.  (G.S. § 136-143(3)) Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags,
batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, waste, or junked, dismantled or
wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel, and other old or scrap
ferrous or nonferrous material.



   JUNKYARD.  An establishment or place of business which is maintained,
operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling junk, or for
maintenance or operation of a motor vehicle graveyard, and the term shall
include garbage dumps and sanitary fills.  An establishment or place of
business which stores or keeps for a period of 15 days or more materials
within the meaning of "junk" as defined in G.S. § 136-143(3) which has been
created as a result of industrial activity shall be deemed to be a JUNKYARD
within the meaning of this definition.



   KENNEL.   Any facility used for the purpose of boarding animals,
excluding horses, cattle, swine, sheep, goats, geese or peafowl. KENNELS may
conduct other such incidental activities, such as the sale of animals,
treatment of the animals, grooming or cleaning, and the sale of pet supplies.



   LARGE RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS.  Any single or multi-tenant retail
establishment with a gross floor area greater than or equal to 30,000 square
feet.



   LOT.  A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a
building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the
customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.



   LOT AREA.  The total horizontal area within the boundary lines of a
lot exclusive of street or highway rights-of-way and easements or access to
other property.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot abutting two or more streets at their
intersection, or upon two parts of the same street, forming an interior angle
of less than 135 degrees as measured at the centerline of the street. The
point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines, or of the street
right-of-way lines as extended, is the corner.



   LOT COVERAGE.  That portion of the lot area, expressed as a percent,
that is covered by impervious surface cover.



   LOT DEPTH.  The depth of a lot is the mean distance of the side lines
of the lot measured from the mid-point of the front lot line to the midpoint
of the rear lot line.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot.



   LOT LINE.  A line or series of connected line segments bounding a lot.



   LOT LINE, FRONT.  The line which separates the lot from a street
right-of-way.  Corner lots shall have only one FRONT LOT LINE.



   LOT LINE, INTERIOR.  A side lot line that separates the lot from
another lot.



   LOT LINE, REAR.  That lot line which is opposite and most distant from
the front lot line, except in the case of a triangular lot, a line ten feet
in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to, and at the maximum distance
from the front lot line, or a chord thereof if the front lot line is curved,
shall be considered as the rear lot line for purposes of determining the
required rear yard. In cases where neither of these conditions is applicable,
the Zoning Officer shall designate the rear lot line.



   LOT LINE, SIDE.  A lot line other than a front or rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which
has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Wilkes County, or
a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so
recorded.



   LOT WIDTH.  The horizontal distance between side lines measured along
a line that is parallel to the front lot line and located the minimum
exterior setback distance from the front line.



   MANUFACTURED HOME.  A dwelling unit that is composed of one or more
components, each of which was substantially assembled in a manufacturing
plant and designed to be installed or joined on the building site and which
meets or exceeds the United States Housing and Urban Development standards
for manufactured homes that went into effect June 15, 1976.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  A contiguous parcel of land under single
ownership which has been developed for the placement of manufactured homes
for non-transient use.  This definition shall not include manufactured home
sales lots on which unoccupied manufactured/mobile homes are parking for
purposed of inspection and sale.



   MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE.  The land in a manufactured housing
development allotted to or designed for the accommodation of one manufactured
home.



   MATERIALS.  Finish materials used on publicly visible walls,
freestanding signage, and pedestrian walkways.



   MOTOR VEHICLE GRAVEYARD.  Any establishment or place of business which
is maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying or selling
wrecked, scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle
parts.  Any establishment or place of business upon which three or more
unlicensed, used motor vehicles which cannot be operated under their own
power are kept or stored for a period of 15 days or more shall be deemed to
be a MOTOR VEHICLE GRAVEYARD within the meaning of this definition (boats
and/or parts of boats are to be included within this definition).



   NONCONFORMITY, LEGAL.  A legal use of a building and/or land that
antedates the adoption or future amendments of these regulations and does not
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located.



   NURSING HOME.  A facility for chronic or convalescent patients that is
designed to provide long-term care for persons who require medical or nursing
care.  NURSING HOMES require skilled nursing personnel and life-support
systems and are licensed by the State of North Carolina.



   OPEN SPACE.  The total gross land area on a development site which is
not covered by buildings or vehicular use areas.



   OUTPARCEL.  A freestanding lot developed separately but linked
functionally to a shopping center.



   PARAPET.  A portion of a vertical wall or architectural railing of a
building that extends above the roofline.



   PEDESTRIAN SITE PLAN.  A plan submitted with a large retail
establishment (over 30,000 square feet) that denotes the location of certain
pedestrian requirements.



   PERSONAL SERVICES.  Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services generally to individuals, such as dry-cleaning and laundry pick-up
facilities, portrait photographic studios, beauty and barber shops,
seamstress shops, shoe repair shops, and clothing rental shops.



   PILASTER.  A vertical projection from a wall generally used for
architectural support, esthetic effect, or ornamental purposes.



   PREFABRICATED METAL BUILDINGS.  A building constructed from metal
components manufactured and fabricated off site and assembled on the building
site.



   PROJECTION.  A portion of the building that extends or juts out from
the main wall to add architectural interest to the façade.



   PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY.  Any structure or facility transmitting a
service provided by a government or public utility, including, without
limitation, fire stations, emergency medical service centers, telephone and
repeater stations, pumping substations, and water towers, but not including
telecommunication towers, antennas, and other telecommunication devices.



   RAFTER.  Any of a number of structural components that support a roof
(includes roof trusses).



   RECESSION.  A depression in a building facade for the purpose of
architectural detail or plan functionality.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.  A vehicular type portable structure without
permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily
designed as a temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and
travel use, including, but not limited to: travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers, self-propelled motor homes, personal watercrafts and boats.



   REST HOMES.  A facility for the care of the aged and infirm whose
principal need is a home with such sheltered and custodial care as their age
and infirmities require.  Medical care is only occasional, such as may be
required in the home of any individual.  The residents of such homes will
not, as a rule, have remedial ailments for which continuing skilled planned
medical and nursing care is indicated.



   REVEALS.  The side faces of a window or door opening (often known as
side lights and transoms).



   ROOF BOOT.  A special piece of flashing designed for installation over
a vent protruding through the roof.



   SALVAGE YARD.  A non-residential property used for the storage,
collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.   



   SETBACK.  The minimum required horizontal distance between a
structure, including any projection thereof, and a lot line or street
right-of-way line, the measurement to whichever is less.



   SPECIAL USE PERMIT.  A document that may be granted by the Wilkesboro
Town Council for a specified land use that is permitted in a given zoning
district under an ordinance provision that authorizes the use when the
Council makes specified findings.  The Council is also authorized to attach
other reasonable and appropriate conditions to its permission for the
protection of both neighboring properties and larger public interests.



   STREET.  A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular
traffic that affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.



   STREET, ARTERIAL.  A street used or designed to be used for through
traffic, usually on a continuous route, commonly referred to as a
thoroughfare.



   STREET, COLLECTOR.  A street whose function consists of both carrying
traffic from local residential streets to thoroughfares and providing access
to abutting properties.



   STREET, LOCAL.  A street used primarily for providing direct access to
abutting property.



   STREET, PRIVATE.  One that is privately maintained.



   STREET, PUBLIC.  One that has been accepted for maintenance by the
State of North Carolina or the Town of Wilkesboro.



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected above grade, the use of
which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is
attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground
(excluding swimming pools, fences, walkways, and patios).



   TEXTURED CONCRETE MASONRY UNITS.  Architectural concrete masonry is
made up of various face textures known to the industry as Split Face Block,
Split Scored, Fluted or Ribbed and Ground Face Masonry Units.  These units
are manufactured under controlled conditions in a variety of materials,
colors and texture combination.



   THOROUGHFARE.  See STREET, ARTERIAL.



   TOWNHOUSE.  A single-family dwelling unit on its own lot that is
attached to one or more similar units by a party wall.  Each unit has its
own front and rear access and is not located over another unit.



   TRAFFIC ANALYSIS/PLAN.  A plan that addresses the existing and current
traffic problems with a site and provides solutions to address adverse
traffic conditions.



   VACATED BUILDING(S) OR ABANDONED DEVELOPMENT.  A building and/or site
vacated for at least six months without an active renovation/rehabilitation
building permit for either the site or structures.



   VARIANCE.  A departure from any provisions of the zoning requirements
for a specific parcel, except use, without changing the zoning ordinance or
the underlying zoning of the parcel.  A VARIANCE usually is granted only
upon demonstration of hardship based on the peculiarity of the property in
relation to other properties in the same zone district.



   VENEER.  Various non structural exterior finishes that are attached to
the exterior of a building for improved aesthetics.



   YARD.  An open space, unobstructed from the ground upward, extending
fully across the lot while situated between the front lot line, side lot line
or rear lot line and the established front building line, side building line
or rear building line.



   YARD, FRONT.  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between
the street right-of-way line and the front line of the building, projected to
the sidelines of the lot.



   YARD, REAR.  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between
the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building, projected to the
sidelines of the lot.



   YARD, SIDE.  An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a
principal building, situated between the side line of the building and the
side line of the lot, and extending from the rear line of the front yard to
the front line of the rear yard.



(Am. Ord. passed 9-14-2016)


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2018 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




PARALLEL REFERENCES



References to North Carolina General Statutes



References to Resolutions



References to Ordinances



REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES



 

G.S. Reference
 
Code Section




Ch. 7A
 
156.136


14-4
 
156.022


14-202.10
 
156.170


Ch. 47A
 
156.123


90-620 - 90-636
 
156.170


Ch. 130A, Art. 9
 
156.136


130A-290(a)(6)
 
156.136


130A-290(a)(35)
 
156.136


130A-290(a)(36)
 
156.136


136-143(3)
 
156.170


Ch. 143, Art. 21, part 6
 
156.136


143-143.15
 
156.136


160-385.1
 
156.025


Ch. 160A, Art. 8
 
156.136


Ch. 160A, Art. 19
 
156.002


Ch. 160A, Art. 19, parts 3, 5, 8
 
156.136


Ch. 160A, Art. 19, part 3C
 
156.151


160A-296
 
156.081


160A-364
 
156.025, 156.042


160A-384
 
156.042


160A-388
 
156.026


160A-400.52(f)
 
156.120


168-20
 
156.170


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section


 
 
 
 
 



 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




2016-01
 
9-12-2016
 
156.062


—
 
9-14-2016
 
156.001-156.009, 156.020-156.026, 156.040-156.046, 156.060-156.064,
156.075-156.087, 156.100-156.123, 156.135-156.139, 156.150-156.159, 156.170


2017-02
 
3-6-2017
 
156.062


—
 
10-2-2017
 
156.062


2018-04
 
4-9-2018
 
156.062


2018-05
 
6-4-2018
 
156.120


2018-06
 
6-4-2018
 
156.124


2018-14
 
9-10-2018
 
156.105


05/10/2007
Planning and Community Development Department 203 West Main Street | PO Box 1056 | Wilkesboro NC 28697 P 336-838-3951 ext. 241 | F 336-838-7616 planning@wilkesboronorthcarolina.com
TOWN OF WILKESBORO SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 1
Town of Wilkesboro Subdivision Ordinance Table of Contents
Article I. Purpose, Authority, Jurisdiction, Legal Provisions ……………………….. 2-5
1.1 Purpose…………..……….……………………………………………………. 2
1.2 Authority………………………………………………………………………. 2
1.3 Jurisdiction and Applicability…………………………………………………. 2
1.4 Severability……………………………………………………………………. 2-3
1.5 Compliance with Ordinance…………………………………………………… 3
1.6 General Procedure for Plat Approval …………………………………………. 3
1.7 Statement by Owner …………………………………………………………… 3
1.8 Fees for Filing, Review, and Approval ………………………………………. 3
1.9 Issuance of Building Permits on Subdivision Lots……………………………. 3
1.10 Enforcement and Penalties for Violation……………………………………… 3-4
1.11 Streets and Public Utilities……………………………………………………... 4
1.12 Effective Date………………………………………………………………….. 5
Article II. Definitions and Word Interpretation………………………………………. 6-11
2.1 Word Interpretation Section …………………………………………………… 6-11
Article III. Decision Making and Administrative Bodies……………………………. 11-12
3.1 Subdivision Administrator………………………………………………………. 11-12
3.2 Planning Board…………………………….……………………………………. 12-13
3.3 Town Board of Commissioners………………………………………………… 13
3.4 Technical Review Committee…………………………….…………………… 13
3.5 Appeals…………………………………………………………………………. 13-14
3.6 Modifications. ………………………………………………………………….. 14
3.7 Amendments………………………………………………………………….. 14-15
Article IV. Subdivision Approval Procedures ………………………………………... 15-18
4.1 Approval Necessary .……………………………………………………………. 15
4.2 General Review Criteria .………………….………………………………….. 15-17
4.3 Subdivision Plat Submittal Requirements………………………………………. 17
4.4 Review Process for Minor Subdivisions………………………………………… 17
4.5 Review Process for Major Subdivisions………………………………………… 17-19
Article V. Subdivision Development Requirements ………………..………………… 19-38
5.1 General…………………………………………………………………………… 19
5.2 Suitability of Land………………………………………………………………. 19-20
5.3 Subdivision Design Requirements………………………………………………. 20-32
5.4 Required Subdivision Improvements on the Ground……………………………. 32-37
5.5 Financial Guarantee in Lieu of Immediate Installation of Required Improvements for Approval of Final Plat………………….……………. 37-38
Appendix A. SUBDIVISION PLAT CHECKLIST…………………………………… 39-41
Appendix B. SUBDIVISION CERTIFICATES…………………………………….…. 42-44
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 2
Article 1
Purpose, Authority, Jurisdiction, Legal Provisions
1.1 Purpose
The purpose of these subdivision regulations is to guide and regulate the subdivision of land within the Town of Wilkesboro and its extraterritorial planning jurisdiction, for sale or building development, in order to insure the public health, safety, and welfare, and to provide for the sound use of land. The regulations included herein are designed to insure adequate planning of street systems; to avoid overcrowding of land, prevent fire, panic, and other dangers; insure that water and sewage systems be safe and adequate; to prevent flood damage; to facilitate an orderly use of land; to insure the proper legal description and monument of subdivided land; and to encourage the proper management of Wilkesboro’s natural resources.
It is expressed for the purpose of this Ordinance to provide for, in addition to the above, the protection of water resources in Wilkesboro, through the use, alone or in combinations, of buffer zones, varying lot sizes, slope restrictions, vegetation, or other equally effective techniques. Innovative techniques on the part of the developers are encouraged where these techniques can be shown to be as effective as the specific requirements of the Ordinance.
1.2 Authority
The Town of Wilkesboro hereby establishes and adopts these regulations governing the subdivision of land pursuant to the authority granted it by the General Statutes of North Carolina, Chapter 160A, and Articles 371-376.
1.3 Jurisdiction and Applicability
These regulations shall govern each and every subdivision or re-subdivision of land within the Town of Wilkesboro corporate limits and within the Town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction. Any subdivision for which a preliminary plat has been approved by Wilkes County prior to being subject to the Wilkesboro Subdivision Ordinance may have the option to be developed in its entirety in accordance with the Wilkes County Subdivision Ordinance provided completion of the subdivision occurs within two years from the date of approval. Any subdivision for which a preliminary plat has been submitted to Wilkes County, but not approved prior to becoming subject to the Wilkesboro Subdivision Ordinance, shall comply with Wilkesboro ordinance standards.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 3
1.4 Severability
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision of this ordinance is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication will apply only to such section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, or provision so adjudged and the remainder of this ordinance will be deemed valid and effective.
1.5 Compliance with Ordinance.
All plats for the subdivision of land must conform to the requirements of this ordinance, and be submitted in accordance with the procedures and specifications established herein. The description by metes and bounds in an instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring land will not exempt the transaction from compliance with this ordinance. No utility shall be extended nor any permit be issued by an administrative agent of the Town of Wilkesboro for the construction of any building or other improvement upon any land for which a plat is required until the requirements of this ordinance have been met and the final plat approved.
1.6 General Procedure for Plat Approval.
After the effective date of this Ordinance, no subdivision plat of land within the Town’s jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded in the Office of the Wilkes County Register of Deeds until it has been submitted and approved as set forth in Section 4 of this Ordinance.
1.7 Statement by Owner.
The owner of land within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, whose land is shown on a subdivision plat submitted for recording, shall himself, or through his authorized agent, sign a notarized statement on that plat stating that the land shown thereon is within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of the Town of Wilkesboro, North Carolina.
1.8 Fees for Filing, Review, and Approval.
From time to time the Town Board of Commissioners shall establish a schedule of fees for plat filing, review, and approval, which must be paid upon plat submission.
1.9 Issuance of Building Permits on Subdivision Lots.
No zoning permit, building permit, fire permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any lot which was created by subdivision after the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance without having first been approved in accordance with this Ordinance and recorded at the Wilkes County Register of Deeds Office and, where applicable, an Improvements Permit has been issued by the Wilkes County Health Department.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 4
1.10 Enforcement and Penalties for Violation.
(A) After the Effective Date of this Ordinance, any person who, being the owner or authorized agent of the owner of any land located within the territorial jurisdiction of this Ordinance, thereafter subdivides his or her land in violation of this Ordinance or transfers or sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under the terms of this Ordinance and recorded in the Wilkes County Register of Deeds Office shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Violators of this Ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) calendar days, as provided by G.S. 14-4.
(B) The violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each calendar day a violation exists, which may be recovered by the Town in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within five (5) days after he has been cited for violation of this Ordinance.
(C) Any provision of this Ordinance may also be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. In such case, the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be an acceptable defense to application of the Town for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.
(D) Any provision of this Ordinance that makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement, and the General Court of Justice shall have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such provision occurs, the Town may apply to the appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful conditions upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 5
In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from the buildings on the property; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for contempt, and the Town may execute the order of abatement.
The Town shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing the order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic’s and material man’s lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all cost of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the appropriate Clerk of Superior Court in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant’s full compliance with terms of the order of abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
(E) The provisions of this Ordinance may be enforced by any one, all or combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this Section.
(F) Except as otherwise specifically provided, each and every calendar day of continuing violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be a separate and distinct offense.
(G) The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the transaction from this Section
(H) The Zoning Administrator shall not issue zoning permits for property in violation of this Ordinance.
1.11 Streets and Public Utilities.
No Street shall be maintained by the Town, nor shall any street dedication be accepted for ownership and maintenance in any
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 6
subdivision by virtue of enactment of this Ordinance. Pursuant to North Carolina General Statute 160A-374, approval of a plat required under this Ordinance shall not be deemed to constitute or effect acceptance by the Town of the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility or other public facility shown on the plat. Rather such acceptance, if and when granted, will be separate Ordinance or similar action on the part of the Board of Commissioners.
1.12 Effective Date
These regulations shall become effective upon the date of their adoption by the Town Board of Commissioners of the Town of Wilkesboro
Article 2
Definitions and Word Interpretation
2.1 Word Interpretation Section.
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words shall be interpreted as follows:
 Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
 Words used in the singular number include the plural and words used in the plural number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the wording clearly indicates otherwise.
 The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust, and company as well as an individual.
 The word “used for” shall include the meaning “designed for”.
 The word “structure” shall include the word “building”.
 The word “lot” shall include the words “plots”, “parcel” and “tract”.
 The words “shall”, “must”, or “will” are always mandatory and not merely directory.
 The word “he” shall include the word “she”.
 The word “may” is directory and not mandatory.
 The work “day” shall mean a normal business day unless otherwise specified.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 7
 The word “Town” and the like denote the Town of Wilkesboro.
 All words not specifically defined herein shall be assigned their customary definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following words shall, for the purpose of this ordinance, have the following definitions. Words used in the singular shall be understood in the plural.
Administrator, Subdivision. Responsible for the administration of the subdivision ordinance. This person is normally part of the planning department.
Alley. A vehicular way used for providing service access along rear or side property lines of lots which are also served by one of the listed street types defined herein. An alley may be accepted for public maintenance only if it serves a broad public function. Residential alleys will generally remain private.
Appeal. An action requesting reversal or modification of an interpretation or decision made by town staff or administrative agent in the application of these regulations.
Block. A piece of land bounded by streets or roads.
Build-To-Line. A line extending through a lot which is generally parallel to the front property line and marks the location from which the principle vertical plane of the front of the building elevation must be erected; intended to create an even building façade line on a street. The build-to line is established on the final plat.
Building Face. The dominant structural plane of the elevation of any side of the building. For example, the building face of a two-story dwelling with one-story porch is considered to be the two-story elevation of such structure.
Building Setback Line. A line extending through a lot which is parallel to the front property line and between which and such line no building shall be erected.
Cluster Development. A tract of land planned and developed as an integral unit in a single development operation or a definitely programmed series of development operations, and in accordance with an approved site plan. The development on the tract is limited by the overall density or intensity, rather than minimum lot dimensions. Cluster development permits more efficient development by creating lots with gross land areas smaller than those required for conventional lot-by-lot development, yet maintains application of normal lot density standards to the subdivided tract as a whole by requiring that land area saved by the lot size reductions can be reserved as permanent open space.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 8
Common Open Space. That area within a development that is not covered with a structure or impervious surfaces, which has been set aside for resource protection, amenities, and/or buffers (including water quality buffers on streams and required land use buffers), and that may be held by the developer, property owners’ association, or non-profit entity. Buffers and building setbacks that are privately held on individual lots are not included in the open space calculation. Stormwater control devices, including swales and ponds, recreation areas, reserved right-of-way, and easements for above ground activities or utilities are not considered open space. Common open space shall be designated as such on the preliminary and final plans.
Dedication. A gift, by the owner, of land for a specified purpose, or purposes. Because a transfer of property is entailed, dedication must be made by written instrument and is completed with an acceptance.
Easement. A grant by the property owner for use by the public, a corporation, or person(s) of a strip of land for specified purposes.
Lot. A parcel of land or any combination of several parcels of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a principal use or structure, together with any accessory structures or uses and such access ways, parking area, yards, and open spaces required in these regulations.
Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, or abutting a curved street or streets in such a way that the front building line meets either side lot line at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
Lot, Double Frontage. A lot having frontage and access on two or more public streets. A corner lot shall not be considered as having double frontage unless it has frontage and access on three or more streets.
Lot, Flag or Panhandle. An irregularly shaped lot where the buildable portion of the lot is connected to its required street frontage by a narrow strip of land.
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, described by plat or by metes and bounds which has been recorded in the office of the Wilkes County Register of Deeds prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
Lot, Zoning. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which is indicated by the owner at the time of application for a building or zoning permit as being land which is proposed for development under a single development plan.
Open Space. Land used for recreation, natural resource protection, amenities, and protection of important rural and town vistas and/or buffer yards. Open space may
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 9
include, but is not limited to lawns, walkways, active recreation areas, playgrounds, wooded areas, and greenways. Open space shall be designated on the preliminary and final plats.
Planning Area. The land located within the boundaries of the most recently adopted Wilkesboro zoning map, and generally consistent with the town’s extraterritorial jurisdiction. (ETJ)
Planning Board. The Planning Board of the Town of Wilkesboro
Plat. A surveyed map or plan of a parcel which is to be, or has been subdivided.
Private Driveway. A vehicular access way serving two (2) or fewer lots, building sites, or other division of land not intended for public ingress or egress.
Sidewalk. Public pedestrian way of concrete within the public road right-of-way separated from the vehicular travel way by a landscaped area no less than five feet wide.
Street. A right-of-way for vehicular travel.
Street, Arterial. A federal and/or state highway designed primarily for the movement of large volumes of vehicular traffic from one area or region to another; a thoroughfare. Also referred to as a major thoroughfare.
Street, Collector. A public way designed primarily to connect minor streets with arterial streets and/or to provide a direct connection between two or more arterial streets and which may be designed to carry significant volumes of vehicular traffic having neither origin nor destination on the street.
Street, Minor residential. Those streets whose primary function is to provide direct access to residential property.
Street, Minor non-residential. Those streets whose primary function is to provide direct access to commercial/industrial property.
Street, Private. An interior circulation road designed and constructed to carry vehicular traffic from public streets within or adjoining a site to parking and service areas; it is not maintained nor is it intended to be maintained by the public.
Street, Public. A right-of-way or fee simple tract of land which has been set aside for public travel, dedicated to the public by recording of a subdivision plat, built to public street standards, and eligible for maintenance by either the Town of Wilkesboro or the State of North Carolina.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 10
Street Right-of-Way. Street right-of-way shall mean any public right-of-way set aside for public travel which is accepted or eligible to be accepted for maintenance by the State of North Carolina or the Town of Wilkesboro, if so authorized; or has been dedicated for public travel by the recording of a plat or subdivision which has been approved or is subsequently approved by the Town of Wilkesboro; or has otherwise been established as a public street prior to adoption of this ordinance.
Structure. Anything constructed, erected, or placed on the land, at grade or below grade. It includes, but is not limited to, buildings, signs, load bearing walls, docks, columns, pools, and parking areas.
Subdivider. Any person or persons, firm or corporation subdividing land within the jurisdiction of this ordinance.
Subdivision. A subdivision will include all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other division for the purpose (whether immediate or future) of sale or building development and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets provided, however, that the following shall not be included within this definition:
(1) The combination or recombination of portions of parcels platted and recorded prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or portions of lots platted in compliance with this ordinance after its effective date, where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of this ordinance and the appropriate zoning classification.
(2) The division of land into parcels greater than 10 acres where street right-of-way dedication or reservation is not involved.
(3) The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets or the location of public utility rights-of-way.
(4) The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no greater than two acres into no more than three lots, where street right-of-way dedication or reservation is not involved and where resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the appropriate zoning classification.
(5) The division of land into plots or lots for use as a cemetery.
(6) The division of land for the use of water or sanitary sewer pumping stations.
(7) Proceedings to partition interest in lots or parcels pursuant to Chapter 46 of the North Carolina General Statutes (or any successor statute) resulting in the division of a
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 11
lot or parcel into two or more lots or parcels except where the partition proceeding is brought to circumvent the provisions of this ordinance.
Subdivision, Major. A subdivision not otherwise exempt from these regulations that involves any of the following:
(1) The creation of any new public street or street right-of-way, or improvements to an existing street.
(2) A future public school, park, greenway, or open space site shown in any adopted plan or policy document.
(3) The extension of any needed right-of-way or easement for the water or sewer system operated by the Town of Wilkesboro
(4) The installation of drainage improvements through one or more lots to serve one or more other lots.
(5) The installation of a private wastewater treatment plant or a private water supply system for more than one lot or building site.
(6) The division of land into five (5) or more lots where new right-of-way may or may not be created.
Subdivision, Minor. A subdivision that is not otherwise exempt from the provisions of this ordinance and that does not meet the criteria for the definition of a major subdivision. A minor subdivision should have five or fewer lots.
Technical Review Committee. The Technical Review Committee shall meet as needed to review all preliminary and final subdivision plats as required by the Subdivision Ordinance. This committee shall be comprised of the following members:
1. Town Manager
2. Designated Town Engineer
3. Planning Director
4. Fire Department Representative
5. Public Works Department Representative
6. Water Treatment Plant Representative
7. Waste Water Treatment Plant Representative
8. Police Department Representative
9. NCDOT Representative
The Technical Review Committee shall review the plans for adherence to the Subdivision Regulations with regard to land subdivision, streets, utilities and location, ingress and egress point(s), open space, etc.
Thoroughfare Plan. The most recent map adopted by the town board which indicates the system of roads expected to serve major access and travel needs with regard to auto, truck, and transit transportation.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 12
Town Engineer. A North Carolina registered Engineer chosen by the Town of Wilkesboro to provide engineering services to the Town.
Article 3
Decision Making and Administrative Bodies
3.1 Subdivision Administrator.
In addition to any authority granted to the Planning Director by other ordinances of the Town of Wilkesboro, the Planning Director and the employees under his or her direction, and such agent as may, from time to time, be designated by the Board of Commissioners to administer the subdivision ordinance will have the following duties with these regulations:
(A) To review all requests for subdivision within the town’s jurisdiction and
decide whether such requests meet the requirements, intent and goals of this article. If such requirements and intent, are met staff shall approve or recommend approval of the request. If such requests do not meet the requirements, intent and goals of this article and adopted plans, staff shall deny or recommend denial of the request.
(B) To review and provide comments on requests for modifications.
(C) To maintain files and other public records related to the administration and enforcement of these regulations.
(D) To recommend and prepare amendments to the text of these regulations.
(E) To accept and file petitions for modifications.
(F) To accept and file notices of appeal of an administrative interpretation or decision.
(G) To interpret the provisions of these regulations.
(H) To coordinate all local, state, and other appropriate agency review and comment on all subdivisions proposed under these regulations.
(I) To establish such procedures as necessary and proper for the administration of their responsibilities under these regulations.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 13
(J) To approve for recordation in the Wilkes County Register of Deeds those divisions of land which, according to the definition of subdivision in Section 2, are not subject to the requirements of this ordinance.
(K) Chair the Technical Review Committee (TRC) and call TRC meetings as necessary.
(L) To review sketch plans and preliminary plans along with the TRC as needed.
(M) Approve final plats for major subdivisions if no significant changes have occurred since approval of the preliminary plat.
(N) Approve preliminary and final plats for minor subdivisions.
(O) To give Planning Board/Board of Commissioners an update of all subdivision(s) to come before the Town of Wilkesboro in a monthly report.
3.2 Planning Board.
In addition to any authority granted to the Planning Board by other ordinances of the Town of Wilkesboro, the Planning Board shall have the following powers and duties in accordance with these regulations.
(A) To hear and make advisory recommendations on proposed amendments to the text of these regulations; to propose, as needed amendments to change the text of these regulations.
(B) To hear requests for approval of preliminary plats for major subdivisions.
(C) To hear requests for approval of final plats, if significant changes have been made to the approved preliminary plat.
(D) To hear requests for approval of final plats for major and minor subdivisions at the request of the Subdivision Administrator.
(E) To hear and decide requests for modifications from sub-dividers.
In all of these matters, the Planning Board may approve the request, deny the request, or approve the request with conditions relating to the intent and standards of this ordinance.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 14
3.3 Town Board of Commissioners.
In addition to all other authority reserved to the town board by other ordinances, the Town Board of Commissioners shall have the following powers and responsibilities in accordance with these regulations.
(A) To hear and decide proposed amendments to the text of these regulations.
(B) To hear and decide appeal/modification requests of sub-dividers.
3.4 Technical Review Committee.
(A) To meet as needed to review technical aspects of sketch plans and preliminary plats.
(B) To make technical recommendations to the Planning Board on plat approval requests.
3.5 Appeals.
(A) Authority. The Planning Board shall decide petitions for appeals from an interpretation or decision made by the Subdivision Administrator or TRC committee member from the requirements of these regulations. Any reversal, modification or affirmation of an interpretation thus authorized will be entered in writing in the minutes of the Planning Board with the justification set forth.
(B) Initiation. A petition for an appeal of an administrative interpretation or decision may be initiated by any person aggrieved or by any officer or department of the Town of Wilkesboro. A petition for an appeal may be initiated only by the owner of the affected property, an agent authorized in writing to act on the owner’s behalf, or a person having a written contractual interest in the affected property.
(1) Filing a Notice of Appeal. A notice of appeal, in the form prescribed by the Planning Director, must be filed with the Planning Department within ten days of the day an administrative interpretation or decision is issued. The notice filed with the Planning Department must be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee as established by the Town of Wilkesboro Board of Commissioners. Failure to timely file such notice and fee will constitute a waiver of any rights to an appeal under this article. The
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 15
filing of such notice will require the officer whose action is appealed to transmit to the Town Manager all administrative papers, records, and other information regarding the subject matter of the appeal.
(2) Standards for granting an appeal. The Planning Board may decide to reverse or modify the decision or interpretation under appeal upon finding an error in the application of these regulations on the part of the officer rendering the decision or interpretation.
3.6 Modifications.
The Planning Board may modify the requirements of this article where, because the size or shape of the tract to be subdivided, its topography, the condition or nature of adjoining areas, or the existence of other unusual physical conditions, strict compliance with the provisions of this article would cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship to the subdivider. In granting modifications, the Board may require such conditions as will secure, insofar as practicable, the objectives or requirements modified. In no case however, shall the Board, acting pursuant to this section, modify the terms or the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance, Watershed Ordinance or the Flood Hazard Ordinance. Violation of any condition shall constitute a violation of this article. A modification granted as part of a plan approval shall have the same duration as the plan approval.
3.7 Amendments.
(A) The planning staff from time-to-time and at the request of the Town of Wilkesboro Board of Commissioners, Planning Board or any interested citizen shall prepare certain improvements to the text of the subdivision ordinance to correct errors, update or modify the requirements, or otherwise improve the operation of the ordinance in regulating the subdivision of land.
(B) Amendments to this ordinance may only be enacted pursuant to public notice and public hearings on the proposed amendments. Notice of such public hearing shall be published once per week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Wilkesboro. The notice shall be first published not less than ten days nor more than twenty-five days prior to the date fixed for the hearing. The notice shall indicate the date, time, and place of the hearing and shall include a statement of the substance of the proposed amendment.
(C) All text amendments must be referred to the Planning Board for a recommendation prior to final action by Board of Commissioners.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 16
Failure of the Planning Board to act within forty-five days following the public hearing will be deemed to constitute an affirmative recommendation on the proposed amendment. An action to defer a recommendation for cause will constitute an action plan for the purpose of this article.
Article 4
Subdivision Approval Procedures
4.1 Approval Necessary
Subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance, no land in the Town of Wilkesboro planning jurisdiction shall be subdivided, or re-subdivided and offered for sale, gift, and exchange or in any other way conveyed until a plat thereof has been approved as herein provided. No plat shall be recorded by the Wilkes County Register of Deeds until this approval has been submitted to and approved by the Town of Wilkesboro in accordance with these regulations.
4.2 General Review Criteria
The following statements provide general criteria and policies to be used in the design, review, and approval of any subdivision under the jurisdiction of this ordinance. The Planning Department will make the initial determination as to whether the proposed subdivision is exempt from the requirements of this ordinance. Questions of interpretation of any of these provisions should be discussed with the Subdivision Administrator or designated administrative agent at the earliest possible time in the development of a subdivision proposal.
(A) Existing land use in the area.
(B) The number and pattern of lots created.
(C) Current use of the tract to be subdivided.
(D) Topography of the tract to be subdivided. In sloping terrain, streets will generally parallel contours of the land insofar as practicable, to avoid steep grades and the concentration of surface of storm water runoff. Variations are allowed to meet design objectives for the development and/or to calm vehicular speeds;
(E) Soil types.
(F) Improvements anticipated.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 17
(G) Consistency with adopted public plans and policies. All subdivision of land approved under these regulations shall be consistent with the most recently adopted public plans and policies for the area in which it is located. This includes general policy regarding development objectives for the area as well as specific policy or plans for public facilities such as streets, parks, and open space, schools, and other similar facilities. Plans and policies for the community are on file in the offices of the Town of Wilkesboro.
(H) Conformity. All proposed subdivisions shall be planned so as to facilitate the most advantageous development of the entire neighboring area. In areas with established development, new subdivisions shall be planned to protect and enhance the stability, environment, health, and character or neighboring areas. The geometry of streets and intersections and the location of street connections will be assessed to minimize the detrimental effects of high volume, high-speed neighborhood through traffic. This assessment will consider the location of large-scale traffic generating uses, as well as the adopted thoroughfare plan and the land development plan.
(I) Access Between Adjoining Properties. To the maximum extent practicable, all streets shall connect to create a comprehensive network of public areas which allows free movement of automobiles, bicyclists, and pedestrians.
(J) Mature Trees and Natural Vegetation. Streets and development sites shall be designed to protect and preserve, to the greatest extent practicable, stands of mature trees and other areas of significant natural vegetation. Minor adjustments of street alignment on the ground is permitted to achieve this objective, so long as standard drainage requirement continue to be met and the actual location of the street on the ground is reflected on the final plat or an amended plat.
(K) Access to Parks, Schools, etc. Streets and sidewalks shall be designed to assure convenient access to parks, greenways, playgrounds, schools, and other places of public assembly.
(L) Traffic Measures. Methods to discourage high volume, high speed through traffic shall consider street geometry, intersection design, and other traffic calming measures.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 18
4.3 Subdivision Plat Submittal Requirements.
Please review appendix A for subdivision plat submittal requirements.
4.4 Review Process for Minor Subdivisions.
(A) Five (5) copies of the sketch Plan/preliminary plan prepared according to the requirements of Section 4.2 and Appendix A must be submitted to the Planning Department for review.
(B) Following review of the sketch/preliminary plan by the Subdivision Administrator and other necessary town departments or state agencies, the Subdivision Administrator shall return a copy of the sketch/preliminary plan with comments to the subdivider.
(C) The subdivider shall then make the necessary revisions to the plan before submitting five (5) copies (two of which shall be printed on mylar suitable for recordation) to the Subdivision Administrator for review.
(D) The Subdivision Administrator shall approve or disapprove the final plat within 30 days from the date the final plat is received. If disapproved, the reasons for disapproval must be stated in writing for the subdivider. The subdivider may appeal the decision to the Planning Board at its next regular meeting. If appealed, the Planning Board shall have final approval authority.
4.5 Review Process for Major Subdivisions.
(A) Sketch Plan.
Prior to submitting a preliminary plan for approval, the subdivider shall submit twelve (12) copies of a sketch plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 4.2 and Appendix A to the Wilkesboro Planning Department for review by the Subdivision Administrator and the Technical Review Committee. A technically deficient sketch plan shall be returned to the subdivider with comments.
(B) Neighborhood Notice and Meeting.
Prior to submitting a preliminary plan, the subdivider shall conduct a neighborhood information session about any proposed development containing 10 or more lots. The Planning Department shall be invited to attend the meeting and shall make town meeting facilities available for the subdivider’s use. The subdivider shall notify in writing via first class mail all property owners directly adjacent to, across a public or private right-of-way from, and within 200 feet of the parcel seeking subdivision at least 10 days prior to the meeting. To ensure participation by working
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 19
neighbors, meetings should begin after 5pm on weeknights or be held on weekends.
Upon submittal of a preliminary plan for major subdivisions containing 6-9 lots, the Planning Department shall send an informational notice to property owners across a public right-of-way from, and within 200 feet of the parcel seeking subdivision at least 10 days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the request will first be considered.
(C) Preliminary Plan.
A completed application checklist shall be submitted along with applicable review fees other required information such as construction drawings and twelve (12) copies of the preliminary plan of a proposed subdivision to the Planning Department. The Subdivision Administrator shall forward a copy of the preliminary plan to members of the Technical Review Committee (TRC) which shall meet and have 30 (thirty days) to review and comment on the plan. The TRC shall forward all comments and recommendations to the subdivider. If subsequent corrections or changes are necessary, the Subdivision Administrator shall have twenty (20) days to review the revised plan. Following review of the plan by the TRC and when the required revisions have been made by the subdivider, the Subdivision Administrator shall request additional copies of the preliminary plan and place the request on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall consider the preliminary plan request and may approve the request, approve the request with conditions, or deny the request. If a preliminary plan request is denied, the Planning Board shall furnish a written notice of the denial and the reasons for the denial upon request of the subdivider.
Preliminary plan approval shall be valid for two years. The Planning Board may extend the approval for a period up to six months from the date when the preliminary subdivision plan would otherwise expire if it concludes that: the preliminary plan has not yet expired, the property owner or agent has proceeded with due diligence and in good faith, and conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant a new application. Successive extensions may be granted for periods up to six months upon the same findings. This paragraph shall be applicable to all preliminary plans approved since the adoption of this ordinance.
(D) Final Plat.
The final plat of a proposed subdivision shall be submitted, with five (5) copies, one digital copy, and a completed checklist to the Subdivision
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 20
Administrator for final approval. If deemed necessary, the Subdivision Administrator will take the final plat to the Planning Board for final approval.
Prior to approval of the final plat, the subdivider shall complete all the required improvements specified in Section 5 or provided the town with an approved financial guarantee in lieu of completing the required improvements. The approval of the final plat of subdivision shall not be deemed to constitute or effect the acceptance by the Town, the public dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line or other public facility shown on the plat. Application for such acceptance, where appropriate, may be made to the Town Board of Commissioners subsequent to the filing and recordation of the plat.
After the approval of the final plat, the plat shall be returned to the subdivider. Approval of the final plat shall be subject to the condition that the plat is filed and recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds within thirty (30) days of the date of the final plat approval. Only after filing and recordation of the approved final plat may the subdivider sell lots.
(E) Certificates of Approval.
Please review Appendix B for the required certificates of approval.
Article 5
Subdivision Development Requirements
5.1 General.
Each subdivision shall contain the improvements specified in this Section, which shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and paid for by the subdivider. Land shall be dedicated and reserved in each subdivision as specified in this Section. Each subdivision shall also adhere to the minimum standards of design established by this Section.
5.2 Suitability of Land.
(A) Land suitability shall be determined by an investigation of site conditions including but not limited to flood prone areas, wetlands, soil drainage, drainage patterns, topography, historic sites and unique natural areas such as the habitat of rare and endangered species or geologic
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 21
formations that may be listed by the North Carolina Heritage Program or North Carolina Natural Areas Advisory Committee.
(B) Land which has been determined by the Planning Board or Board of Commissioners on the basis of engineering or other expert surveys to pose an ascertainable danger to life or property by reason of its unsuitability for the use proposed shall not be platted for that purpose, unless and until the subdivider has taken the necessary measures to correct said conditions and to eliminate said dangers.
(C) Areas that have been used for disposal of solid waste shall not be subdivided unless tests by a structural engineer and a soils expert determine that the land is suitable for the proposed development.
(D) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(E) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas electrical and water systems, if available, located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(F) Each lot not intended for permanent open space or recreation area shall contain a suitable building site.
5.3 Subdivision Design Requirements.
(A) Design Requirements for Streets.
(1) For town maintained streets and streets that are located in the Town of Wilkesboro Extra Territorial Zoning Jurisdiction that will be maintained by NCDOT or the Town of Wilkesboro, the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards, January 2000, as amended shall serve as a minimum guideline for design. In addition, standards as set forth in the Town of Wilkesboro Zoning Ordinance and this section of the subdivision regulations shall control.
(2) Utilities, Street Lights and Storm Drainage Within Streets. Utilities, street lights, sidewalks, storm drainage and other such facilities to be placed within the street right-of-way shall be placed in accordance with Town of Wilkesboro requirements.
(3) Coordination with Existing Street System. The proposed street
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 22
layout shall be coordinated with the existing street system of the surrounding area and with the Town of Wilkesboro Thoroughfare Plan. Where possible, proposed streets shall be an extension of existing streets.
(4) Right-of-Way Required. The width of right-of-way required for proposed subdivisions shall generally be consistent with that of existing streets that are being extended, but in no case shall right-of-way widths be less than the following:
Street Type
Feet
Arterial Street
100
Collector Street
70
Local Street
60
Marginal Access Street
50
Cul-de-sacs
100
(5) Additional Right-of-Way May be Required. These standards represent the normally required right–of-way for standard streets. Additional right-of-way may be necessary in the area of interchanges, intersections, cut/fill areas, or areas where horizontal or vertical alignments must be improved and will be determined on a case-by-case basis. When a subdivider elects to establish a roadway divided with a center landscaped strip or median, the right-of-way width must be increased by at least the proposed width of the center strip or median.
(6) Along existing streets, neither right-of-way dedication nor reservation is required unless:
(a) An existing street has a right-of-way less than sixty (60) feet wide and will provide access to the subdivision, in which case a right-of-way up to thirty (30) feet on each side of the centerline may be required to be dedicated; or
(b) An existing street will provide access to the subdivision and the volume of traffic projected to be generated by the subdivision necessitates intersection and/or other improvements, in which case dedication of right-of-way sufficient for the subdivision developer to make intersection and/or other improvements to serve said subdivision may be required.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 23
(7) Dedication of Right-of-Way for Planned Arterials Required. Whenever a tract of land to be subdivided includes any part of a planned arterial or extension of an existing arterial street shown on the adopted thoroughfare plan, and whenever a right-of-way for such a street has been further defined by acceptable locational procedures sufficient to identify properties to be affected, a right-of-way for the arterial street must be platted in the location and to the width specified in the plan. The subdivider is responsible for the dedication and/or reservation of the right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of this section. The entire right-of-way (that which has been reserved and that which has been dedicated) must be shown as such on the final plat. All measurements involving minimum lot standards under this ordinance and under the zoning ordinance will be made at the edge of the full right-of-way.
(8) Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs (streets designed to be permanently closed at one end), may not be longer than 550 feet (measured to the center of the turnaround) unless a modification is granted by the Planning Board or Board of Commissioners during the plat approval process. Cul-de-sacs must be terminated with a circular right-of-way not less than 90 feet in diameter for curb and gutter streets and not less than 100 feet for streets without curb and gutter. Cul-de-sacs shall not be used to avoid the extension of an existing street or to prohibit future connection to adjoining properties.
(9) Access to Adjacent Properties. Where it is deemed desirable by the Planning Board or Board of Commissioners, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and a temporary turn-around provided. Any such turn-around shall comply with the standards for cul-de-sacs, and upon further extension of street(s), the turn-around shall be removed and the adjacent property restored to its original state, to the maximum extent feasible.
(10) Street Off-Sets and Intersections. Whenever possible, proposed intersections along one side of a street shall coincide with existing or proposed intersections on the opposite side of such street. In any event, where a centerline offset (jog) occurs at an intersection, the distance between centerlines of the intersecting streets shall not be less than 150 feet. Except when no other alternative is practicable or legally possible, no two streets may intersect with any other street on the same side at a distance of
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 24
less than 400 feet measured from centerline to centerline of the intersecting street. When the intersected street is an arterial, the distance between intersecting streets shall be at least 1000 feet.
(B) Design Requirements for Lots.
(1) General. The shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the location of the subdivision and the intended development. Commercial and industrial lots shall be of sufficient size to include off-street service facilities and off-street parking of all vehicles used by all patrons and employees.
(2) Required Street Frontage. Each lot shall abut a publicly dedicated street. Each lot must abut the street or road with frontage of at least seventy (70) and thirty (35) feet in a turn around. Except where reverse frontage is desirable, double frontage lots should be avoided.
(3) Minimum Lot Size and Dimensional Requirements. All lots shall conform to each and all of the requirements of the Town of Wilkesboro Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which they are located.
(4) Panhandle Lots and Other Irregularly Shaped Lots. Panhandle lots and other irregular shaped lots may be approved in cases where such lots would (1) not be contrary to the purpose of this Ordinance, (2) heighten the desirability of the subdivision, and (3) where necessary, enable a lot to be served by a public water and waste disposal system. All panhandle lots shall have a minimum road frontage width of thirty (30) feet thereby providing access to the lot. The length of said access shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet. Said access shall not be used to determine lot area or minimum lot width or building setback lines.
(5) Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall, as nearly as practicable, be at right angles or radial to street lines. Where side lot lines intersect at the rear of the lot, the angle of intersection shall not be less than sixty (60) degrees.
(6) Driveway and Street Connections. Prior to the construction of any driveway, new street or other connection within the right-of-way of a public street, a permit must be secured from the North Carolina Department of Transportation or the Town of Wilkesboro, for a state or local road respectively. However, in a
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 25
residential major subdivision, access to individual lots from streets constructed as part of the subdivision shall be reviewed and approved at the time each building permit is issued and individual driveway permits will not be required on a lot-by-lot basis.
(7) Lots Subject to Flooding.
(a) If any part of a proposed lot is subject to flooding, the subdivider shall make a determination of the crest elevation of the flood expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, of one time in one hundred years (the “100-Year Flood”) in accordance with generally accepted surveying/engineering practice, which is to be submitted with the seal and signature of a professional surveyor to the Town of Wilkesboro. This determination must reflect the actual conditions imposed by the completed subdivision, and must give due consideration to the effects of urbanization and obstructions.
(b) No proposed building lot that is wholly or partly subject to flooding shall be approved unless there is established on the final plat a line representing an actual contour, as determined by field survey, at an elevation one foot above the 100-year flood crest. Such line shall be known and identified on the final plat as the building restriction floodline. In addition, a “flood protection elevation” for each lot subject to flooding shall be noted on the final plat as determined by the Town Engineer/surveyor based on the building restriction floodline, or for lots upstream of street crossings, the low elevation of the street plus one (1) foot, whichever is greater.
(c) All habitable buildings or structures shall be located outside the building restriction floodline, or the lowest usable and functional part of the structure shall not be below the flood protection elevation. “Usable and functional part of the structure” shall be defined as being inclusive of living areas, basements, sunken dens, basement utility rooms, crawlspaces, attached carports, and mechanical appurtenances such as furnaces, air conditioners, water pumps, electrical conduits and wiring, but shall not include water lines or sanitary sewer traps, piping and clean-outs; provided, openings serving the structure are above the flood protection elevation.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 26
(d) Where only a portion of a proposed lot is subject to flooding as defined herein, such lot may be approved only if there will be available for building a usable lot area of not less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet. The usable lot area shall be determined by deducting from the total lot area the area of all yards and setbacks required by the applicable zoning district regulations and any remaining area of the lot lying below the building restriction floodline.
(e) During the construction of a subdivision, the developer shall maintain the streambed of each stream, creek or backwash channel contiguous to the subdivision in an unobstructed state and shall remove from the channel and bank of the stream all debris resulting from the land development process, including logs, timber, junk and other accumulations of a nature that would, in time of flood, clog or dam the passage of waters in their downstream course. Installation of appropriately sized stormwater drains, culverts, bridges or erosion control devices will not be construed as obstructions in the stream. In areas of the town that are covered by the provisions of the floodway regulations, the floodway regulations will supersede the provisions of this ordinance regarding land within the regulated floodplain.
(C) Dedication of Land for and/or Fees in Lieu of Park, Recreation and Open Space Purposes.
(1) Dedication of Land.
(a) General Provisions. Every subdivider who proposes a subdivision for land for residential purposes shall dedicate a portion of land or pay a fee in thereof, in accordance with this section, for public park, greenway, recreation, and open space sites to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the subdivision or the development.
(b) Amount of Land to be Dedicated. At least one-thirty-fifth (1/35) of an acre shall be dedicated for each dwelling unit planned or proposed in the subdivision plat or development.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 27
The minimum amount of land which shall be dedicated for a public park, recreation, or open space site shall be no less than two (2) acres in size. When the area to be provided is less than two acres, the subdivider shall be required to make a payment in lieu of the dedication to be used for the acquisition or development of recreation, park, or open space sites which would serve the needs of the residents of the subdivision.
(c) Nature of Land to be Dedicated. Except as otherwise required by the Board of Commissioners at the time of preliminary plat approval, all dedications of land shall meet the following criteria:
i. Unity. The dedicated land shall form a single parcel of land, except where the Board of Commissioners determines that two or more parcels would be in the best interest of the public, given the type and distribution of open spaces needed to adequately serve the proposed development. In such cases, the Board of Commissioners may require that such parcels be connected by a dedicated strip of land at least thirty (30) feet in width.
ii. Usability. Two-thirds (2/3) of the dedicated land shall be useable for active recreation. Furthermore, lakes and other bodies of water may not be included in computing any of the dedicated land area.
iii. Shape. The shape of the portion of dedicated land which is deemed suitable for active recreation shall be sufficiently square or round to be usable for any or all recreational facilities and activities, such as athletic fields and tennis courts, when a sufficient amount of land is dedicated to accommodate such facilities. Land dedicated only for greenways need not follow the requirements of this sub-section.
iv. Location. The dedicated land shall be located so as to reasonably serve the recreation and open space needs of residents of the subdivision.
v. Access. Public access to the dedicated land shall be
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 28
provided either by adjoining public street frontage or by a dedicated public easement, at least thirty (30) feet wide, which connects the dedicated land to a public street or right-of-way. Gradients adjacent to existing and proposed streets shall allow for reasonable access to the dedicated land. Where the dedicated land is located adjacent to a street, the developer or subdivider shall remain responsible for the installation of utilities, sidewalks, and other improvements required along that street segment. Public access or dedicated walkways to greenway dedications only shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
vi. Topography. The average slope of the portion of dedicated land deemed usable for active recreation shall not exceed the average slope of the entire subdivision to be developed. In no case shall a slope on the usable portion of dedicated land exceed fifteen (15) percent.
vii. Landscaping. Dedicated parks, recreation, and open space areas shall have a sufficient natural or manmade buffer or screen to minimize any negative impacts on adjacent residents.
(2) Payments of Fees in Lieu of Land Dedication.
(a) General. The payment of fees, in lieu of the dedication of land under Subsection (C)(1) above, may occur at the request of the subdivider or developer. However, the decision to require the dedication of land for recreational purposes, or a payment of a fee in lieu, shall be made by the Board of Commissioners after having received a recommendation from the Planning Board and Parks and Recreation Board having evaluated the proposed dedication and the relationship such dedication would have with the Town’s overall recreational needs.
The Planning Board shall have the right to approve any preliminary plat except for those plats that would require two acres or greater of land to be dedicated for recreational purposes. In those instances, preliminary plat approval and the decision to either accept land for
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 29
recreational purposes or fee in lieu of shall rest with the Board of Commissioners.
(b) Time of Payment. The fees in lieu of dedication shall be paid prior to final plat approval by the Planning Board or Board of Commissioners.
(c) Amount of payment. The amount of the payment shall be the product of:
1. The number of acres to be dedicated, as required by subsection (C)(1) above;
2. The assessed value for property tax purposed of the land being subdivided, adjusted to reflect its current fair market value at the time such payment is due to be paid.
Procedures for determining the amount are as follows:
1. An appraisal of the land in the development shall be performed by a professional land appraiser selected by the developer from an approved list maintained by the Subdivision Administrator. The appraisal shall not be done prior to submission of the preliminary plat. The cost of the appraisal shall be borne by the developer.
2. Professional land appraiser refers to a land appraiser who, in the opinion of the Subdivision Administrator, has the expertise and/ or certification to perform an adequate appraisal.
(3) Procedures.
(a) At the time of filing a preliminary plat, the subdivider shall designate thereon the area or areas to be dedicated pursuant to Section (C). If the subdivider desires to make a payment in lieu of the dedication of land, a letter to that effect shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The Board of Commissioners reserves the right to refuse to accept dedication of parcels for public-park, recreation, or open space.
(b) Where a dedication of land is required, such dedication shall be shown on the final plat when submitted, and such
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 30
plat shall be accompanied by an executed general warranty deed conveying the dedicated land to the Town. Where a payment in lieu of dedication is approved by the Board of Commissioners or Planning Board, such payment will be made before the final plat is signed and recorded.
(4) Provisions of Equivalent Facilities under Neighborhood or Community Home Owners Association of Management.
The Town encourages neighborhood or homeowner associations or management to construct, operate, and maintain private parks and recreation. The construction, operation, or maintenance of such private facilities shall not, however, diminish or eliminate the responsibility and obligations of the subdivider under subsection (C)(1), et seq.
(5) Greenways.
Greenways may be credited against the requirements of Section (C) provided that such greenways are part of the Town’s or County’s greenway plan and dedicated to public use.
(D) Easements and Public Dedications.
(1) To provide for electric, cable, telephone and gas service, community antenna television distribution systems, water and sewer lines and other such facilities within the subdivision, appropriate utility easements shall be provided on the final plat. The locations of such easements shall be determined by the Subdivision Administrator and based upon the approved construction plans. In addition, storm drainage easements may be required in order to carry the storm drainage improvements located outside street rights-of-way.
(2) In any case where it is necessary for town forces to enter the property proposed for subdivision for purposes of public facilities construction prior to the recording of the final plat, the subdivider shall furnish the town an easement for such purposes in a form acceptable to the town.
(3) To allow for planned, orderly growth of the town’s utility systems, the subdivider shall be required to dedicate general public utility easements of sufficient width and placement to accommodate town utility extensions. Such easements shall be platted to the
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 31
property line of the subdivision. Generally, a utility easement of not less than ten (10) feet in width shall be provided to the side and rear of each lot and in other locations where deemed necessary. Lots in Minor Subdivisions are exempt from this requirement upon certification that they may be serviced by existing utilities along the public rights-of-way. Wider easement widths may be required if determined necessary by the Subdivision Administrator after consultation with all private and public utility company(ies) involved.
(4) Easements may be required across residential lots as a condition of plat approval when such easements are deemed necessary by the town for provision of public streets and utilities to serve the proposed subdivision.
(5) To ensure adequate drainage of the site, the subdivider shall dedicate public storm drainage easements of sufficient widths and placement when deemed appropriate by the town.
(6) All property shown on the plat as dedicated for a General Public Utility Easement (GPUE) shall also be deemed to be dedicated for any public utility use authorized by the town.
(7) Utility easements may be graveled for walking paths throughout the subdivision, if the topography lends itself to paths.
(E) Retention of Existing Vegetation.
The Town of Wilkesboro encourages the retention of existing vegetation to help assure a future environment in keeping with the current character of the Town. In particular, the retention of mature trees and large shrubs throughout all proposed minor and major subdivisions may enhance the approval process and will increase the desirability of such attractively – developed properties.
(F) Landscape Buffers Along Thoroughfares.
(1) Natural Buffer Required. Where side or rear lot lines abut along a major, minor, or local thoroughfare as designated in the Town of Wilkesboro Thoroughfare Plan, the subdivider shall provide a natural buffer between the lot lines paralleling the thoroughfare and the thoroughfare road right-of-way. The natural buffer shall materially screen all principal and accessory uses from public view from thoroughfare. The buffer shall consist of natural plantings.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 32
Any walls, fences or other constructed devices allowed within the buffer area by this Ordinance and/or the Town of Wilkesboro Zoning Ordinance shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator/Planning Director.
The subdivider is encouraged to propose the use of existing natural vegetation and/or topography or a combination of existing features as prescribed in this Section when the purpose and intent of this Section can be fully or partially met by utilizing such methods.
Such buffer shall be located on the property with the use with which it is associated or required, and shall materially screen the subject use from the view of the adjoining properties. When a natural buffer must be planted with new vegetation, a buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be planted. This strip shall be free of all encroachments by buildings, parking areas or impervious coverage.
(2) New trees and shrubs within the buffer shall meet the following standards:
(a) Forty percent (40%) of the required trees within the buffer shall be large canopy trees.
(b) Twenty-five percent (25%) of all trees shall be evergreen.
(c) All trees shall have a minimum caliper of one and one-half (1 1/2) inches measured six (6) inches above ground, and the minimum height of all trees shall be six (6) feet at the time of planting.
(d) Shrubs shall be evergreen and at least three (3) feet tall when planted with the average height of six (6) feet in three (3) to four (4) years. However, twenty-five percent (25%) of the shrubs may vary from the above standard.
(e) All specifications for the measurement, quality, and installation of trees and shrubs shall be in accordance with the “American Standards for Nursery Stock: published by the American Association of Nurserymen, and free of disease.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 33
(3) Landscaped buffers shall have an arrangement of trees and shrubs in the buffer area done in a manner that provides a visual separation between abutting land uses.
(4) Shrubs shall be massed in rows or groups to achieve the maximum screening effect.
(5) Berms without landscaping are not suitable for screening.
(6) Required buffers shall not be disturbed for any reason except for required driveways, sidewalks, or other pedestrian or bicycle paths, walls, fences, or required landscaping, landscaping maintenance or replacement, or maintenance and construction of utility lines. However, utility line construction must meet the following requirements:
(a) No utility easements shall run longitudinally within a buffer yard.
(b) To the extent possible, the path cleared for utility lines shall be replaced with plant materials which are consistent with those that existed prior to utility line construction in the buffer yard.
(7) All buffer screening materials shall be properly maintained in order to fulfill the purpose(s) for which it is established. The owner of the property and any tenants shall be jointly and severally responsible for maintenance of all required screening.
(8) All buffers shall be constructed in a manner that shall allow for adequate sight distance where subdivision streets intersect with the thoroughfare.
(9) If above ground utilities are to remain in the buffer yard, then all landscaping must be located outside the easements/right-of-way for the utilities.
(10) The area of the buffer shall be in addition to lot area as required by the Town of Wilkesboro Zoning Ordinance and setbacks as prescribed in said Zoning Ordinance shall be measured from the nearest edge of the buffer to any
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 34
structure of the lot. The buffer area shall become part of the lot on which it is located, or in the case of commonly owned property, shall be deeded to the homeowner’s association.
5.4 Required Subdivision Improvements on the Ground.
(A) Approval of Construction Plans Prerequisite to Installation of Improvements. The subdivider shall install the following improvements and such improvements shall be at no cost to the town, except as set forth herein and except as may be otherwise provided for in the town’s water and sewer extension policies. No improvements shall be installed until construction plans have been approved by the town and any other such agency as may be appropriate or as required by law. A final plat may be recorded prior to installation of any or all required improvements provided that a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the town is given by the subdivider to the town as provided in Section 5.5.
(B) Street Improvements. The following requirements shall apply to all streets within the corporate limits of the Town of Wilkesboro, or if annexation of the subdivision to the town is desired or required by the subdivider.
(1) Grading. All streets shall be graded to provide width for paved surfaces (road and sidewalks). Finished grade, cross section and profile shall be approved by the State of North Carolina DOT standards as established herein.
(2) Paving. Road base and paving shall be installed in accordance with the State of North Carolina DOT standards as established herein.
(3) Curb and gutter. All streets within a subdivision shall be curbed and guttered.
(4) Sidewalks. For subdivisions with a majority of the lots one (1) acre or smaller in size, five (5) foot sidewalks, five inches in thickness shall be required along one side of all residential streets. Sidewalks shall conform to ADA requirements and the Town of Wilkesboro installation and maintenance requirements.
(a) Sidewalks shall be provided along any existing public road directly accessed by the proposed subdivision as follows:
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 35
1. Sidewalks shall extend the length of the property adjacent to the roadway on the same side as the proposed subdivision.
2. The subdivider shall provide any additional right-of-way needed for the sidewalk to either the town or NCDOT, as appropriate.
3. When the adjacent road is an NCDOT facility, the sidewalk shall be built to NCDOT standards.
(5) Multiple Entrances. Multiple entrances are encouraged for all major subdivisions and may be required for some large major subdivisions for emergency service purposes, provision of efficient services and to lessen the impact of the development on adjacent thoroughfares.
(6) Street Names and Signs. Names of streets that duplicate or could be confused with the names of existing streets within Wilkesboro or unincorporated Wilkes County, shall not be approved. New street names will be reviewed with Wilkes County Emergency Management records to confirm non-duplication. Appropriate street name signs which meet the Town of Wilkesboro and Wilkes County specifications shall be placed at all street intersections at the subdivider’s expense following completion of the grading of the streets or issuance of the first building permit, whichever occurs first. If an alternate street sign design is installed by the subdivider, the Town shall replace any damaged or destroyed street sign with a street sign of standard materials and design.
(7) Street Trees. Street trees shall be installed according to the following provisions:
(a) Street trees shall be planted along both sides of all public streets in new residential developments.
(b) Street trees shall be large canopy species and shall be planted forty feet on center. At the time of planting, each tree shall be two (2) inches or greater in diameter measured twelve inches (12) above ground level, and each shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet in height above grade. Small maturing trees planted a maximum of thirty feet on center may be used to meet street tree requirements only
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 36
where overhead utility lines along existing streets prevent or interfere with the maturing of canopy trees.
(c) The planting area for street trees shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width as measured perpendicularly from the street.
(d) On any street for which a streetscape plan has been adopted by the Board of Commissioners, the streetscape plan shall control.
(e) Along streets that are well-forested or new streets that are to be maintained in a forested condition by the developer, the requirements of this section may be reduced or eliminated upon approval of the Subdivision Administrator to minimize grading and enhance preservation of existing, mature trees. Tree planting requirements may be modified where extreme topography would require excessive grading to meet the specific standards above.
(C) Water Supply Improvements.
(1) Any subdivision which has town water system lines available or to be made available within 400 feet of its boundary shall have such available systems extended to each lot within the town limits. Such extensions shall include appropriate valves, hydrants, taps and service to the property line of each lot as determined by the standards of the town. For the purposes of this section, AVAILABLE shall mean legally available and without geographic or topographic features which would make such connection infeasible.
(2) In any case where a public water system intended to serve more than two lots is proposed to be installed in a subdivision as part of the plan approval process, such system shall be considered to be a required improvement within the context of this section regardless of whether such a system is an extension of the town system or not and such system shall be required to be installed by the subdivider, This requirement includes both facilities within the subdivision and off-site facilities which are essential to providing the service to the property.
(D) Sanitary Sewer and Wastewater Improvements. Provisions shall be made for wastewater disposal for each lot platted for sale or
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 37
development as follows:
(1) If the property is located within the town’s corporate limits, it shall be served by town sewer unless waived by the Board of Commissioners. Approvals by the Town Engineer and the Board of Commissioners are required prior to the submission of plans for approval to State officers. All town ordinances and sewer extension guidelines shall be followed. Said system shall be completed according to the approved plans; provided that where said improvements are to be installed or constructed subsequent to the approval of the final plat, plans and specifications for said improvements shall be made a part of the final plat.
(2) Where individual on-site waste disposal systems are proposed, such systems shall be consistent with State laws and local ordinances. These systems are not considered as improvements that are required to be installed by the subdivider.
(E) Stormwater Management. It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to provide a stormwater management design which shall meet the following objectives:
(1) Provides a suitable building area on each lot that is safe from inundation and erosion.
(2) Protects the characteristics and capacity of natural drainage ways, and encourages reliance on natural drainage ways for the removal of runoff by preventing their impoundment, except where there may be a site for intentional stormwater detention;
(3) Protects all roads, driveways, utilities, and other types of development from damage caused by improper stormwater management.
(4) Generally minimizes the disturbance to natural vegetation, minimizes the area of impervious surface and maximizes the infiltration of stormwater into the groundwater system.
To achieve these objectives, the subdivider may use whatever combinations of mechanical devices, natural buffers, large lots, or other technical means that are available. Drainage easements may be required when necessary. Such easements shall be indicated on the final plat. The preliminary plan shall be reviewed by NCDENR, the Department of Transportation, the Planning Board and the Town Engineer.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 38
The installation of any part of a drainage system which is necessary because of proposed improvements as set forth in this section may be installed subsequent to the approval of the Final Plat; provided that plans and specifications of said improvements shall be made a part of the Final Plat.
(F) Street Lights. Inside the town limits the subdivider shall install street lighting at appropriate locations in the subdivision in accordance with town standards.
(G) Monuments. Permanent type monuments of stone or concrete and markers shall be accurately placed according to G.S. Chapter 39, Article 5A and the following:
(1) At least two monuments designated as “Control Corners” shall be placed in each block for the control of that block. There shall be a minimum of two monuments per 10 lots.
(2) Monuments shall be set at least thirty inches in depth. The dimensions shall be no less than four inches at the top and six inches at the bottom. Such monuments shall have a non-corrosive metal plate or pin in the top to mark the location of the designated point.
(3) At least two one “Control Corner” shall be accurately tied to a monument of some U.S. or State Agency survey system as required by G.S. Chapter 47, Article 2, Section 30.
(4) All corners, other than those marked by monuments shall be marked by metal stakes set not less than thirty inches in depth with a half inch in diameter.
(5) Where a corner falls in a right-of-way, or in a stream, a marker should be located at either side of the point in question so that the point may be located accurately on the ground and on the map.
5.5 Financial Guarantee in Lieu of Immediate Installation of Required Improvements for Approval of Final Plat.
(A) In lieu of requiring the completion, installation and inspection of all or any part of the required improvements as described in this ordinance prior to final plat approval, the town may enter into a contract with the
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 39
subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete all required improvements.
(B) Once the agreement is signed by both parties and the security required herein is provided, the final plat may be approved if all other requirements of this chapter are met.
(1) Cash or Equivalent security. The subdivider shall deposit cash, an irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, with the town. The use of any instrument other than cash shall be subject to the approval of the town. The amount of the deposit shall be equal to an amount 110% of the estimated cost as approved by the Subdivision Administrator, of installing all required improvements. The initial cost estimate shall be the responsibility of the subdivider but the approval of the final cost estimate shall be made by the Subdivision Administrator. The Subdivision Administrator may refuse to accept a financial guarantee in an amount less than $10,000 where, in his/her opinion, the present and/or potential administrative cost of accepting such guarantee could result in a loss of money to the town.
(2) Governmental Guarantee. In any case where a required improvement is to be provided by this state or any local government other than the town, the subdivider may provide, in lieu of the types of financial guarantee as provided for above, a letter from the appropriate state or local government official guaranteeing the installation of the improvement in the required manner and within the time allotted. However, in any case where the cost of such improvement exceeds $10,000 as determined by the town, such governmental guarantee shall be in the form of an approved Project Budget Ordinance where local government is to be the provider and an equivalent document where the state is to be the provider.
(C) Duration of Financial Guarantees.
(1) The duration of a financial guarantee shall be of a reasonable period to allow for completion and acceptance of such improvements. In no case shall the duration of the financial guarantee for improvements exceed 18 months.
(2) All subdivisions whose public improvements are not completed and accepted at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 40
financial guarantee shall be considered to be in default, unless the guarantee is extended with the consent of the Subdivision Administrator to a future date no to exceed six months.
(D) Default.
(1) Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the required improvements in a timely manner as specified in the guarantee agreement, the town may take all or any portion of the guarantee fund up to the amount needed to complete the improvements based on an estimate by the town. The town at its discretion may expend such portion of the funds as deemed necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements. The town shall return to the subdivider any funds not spent in completing the improvements.
(2) Default on a project does not release the subdivider from liability/responsibility for the completion of the improvements.
(E) Release of Guarantee Security. The town shall release the security posted after the improvements are completed and approved by the town. The town may provide a one-time release of not to exceed 50% of the security after the completion and approval of not less than 50% of the improvements as determined by the Subdivision Administrator.
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 41
Appendix A
SUBDIVISION PLAT CHECKLIST
Town of Wilkesboro
SUBDIVISION PLAT CHECKLIST
Name of Subdivision
Date:
Name of Subdivider
Contact Phone No:
Name of Preparer
City Department
E=Town Engineer
P=Planning
Item #
Item Description
When Required
F=Final, S=Sketch
P=Preliminary
Preparers check here if complete
Office use only
TITLE BLOCK INFORMATION
1
Title Block is shown containing:
P
A. Name of development
P,F
P
B. Name of map or plan (sketch plan, preliminary plan, or Final Plat)
S,P,F
P
C. Owner’s name with address and daytime phone number
S,P,F
P
D. Location, including address, city, township, county, & state,
S,P,F
P
E. Date(s) map(s) prepared or revised
S,P,F
P
F. Scale of drawing in feet per inch – drawing scale shall not be less than 1” equals 200’
S,P,F
P
G. Name, address, and telephone number of preparer of map
S,P,F
P
H. Developer’s name, address and daytime phone number, if different from owner’s)
S,P,F
ZONING AND LAND USES
P
2
Zoning district(s) within the property and adjacent properties are shown
P,F
P
3
Existing land uses within the property and adjacent properties are noted
P
P
4
Dimensions, location, and use of all existing buildings; distances between buildings measured at the closest point; distance from buildings to closest property lines; buildings to remain on final plat
P,F
STREETS
5
Street data is shown illustrating:
P
A. Existing and proposed rights-of-way within and adjacent to property are shown
P,F
P
1. Total right-of-way width dimensions are shown
P,F
E
2. Right-of-way width dimension from centerline of existing public streets are shown
P,F
P
3. Cul-de-sac right-of-way radius from centerpoint are shown
P
P
B. Pavement or curb lines are shown
P
P
C. Pavement width dimensions are shown
P
P
D. Cul-de-sac pavement radius from centerpoint are shown
P
E
6
All existing streets and proposed streets are named and approved by E-911
F
P
MAP INFORMATION AND DESCRIPTION
P
7
Bar Graph Scale is shown
S,P,F
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 42
City Department
E=Town Engineer
P=Planning
Item #
Item Description
When Required
F=Final, S=Sketch
P=Preliminary
Preparers check here if complete
Office use only
P
8
(Deed or Record) Book or Plat (Book or Cabinet) references to subject property
P,F
P
9
Names of adjoining property owners [or subdivisions or developments of records with Plat (Book or Cabinet) and/or (Deed or Record) Book reference] are shown
P,F
P
10
Tax block and parcel(s) number(s) are shown
P,F
P
11
A vicinity map is shown
P,F
P
12
All jurisdiction lines which adjoin or cross the tract are shown
P,F
P
13
North arrow and orientation (oriented towards top of map where practicable)
S,P,F
14
Boundaries of the tract to be subdivided are shown as follows:
E
A. At least one corner is tied to: (1) N.C. Grid and provide grid coordinates where at least one of two control monuments needed are within 2000’ of the boundary and show the grid factor or (2) tie to the nearest street intersection
F
P
B. All locations of intersecting boundary lines of adjoining properties are shown
P,F
P
C. Distinctly and accurately represent and show all distances; show bearings and distances on final; show bearings and distances and curve data on outside boundaries and street centerlines on preliminary with street centerline tied to boundary
P,F
P
15
Location and descriptions of all monuments, markers, and control corners is shown on plat
F
P
16
Existing “old” property lines on tract to be subdivided are shown as dashed lines and are labeled as “old property lines”
S,P,F
P
17
Existing and proposed topography of tract and 100 feet beyond property showing existing contour intervals of no greater than 5 feet (2 feet where available) and labeling at least two contours per map and all others at 10 foot intervals from sea level
P
ENVIRONMENTAL AND NATURAL FEATURES
P
18
Existing and proposed topography of tract
P
P
19
Marshes, swamps, and other wetlands are shown
P,F
P
20
Water courses, ponds, lakes, and streams are shown
P,F
P
21
Undisturbed, vegetative buffers along perennial streams are shown
P,F
P
23
Areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are shown
P,F
P
24
The name and location of any property or building on the National Register of Historic Places or locally designated historic property is shown
P,F
P
25
Areas designated as a common area or open space under control of a Developer’s or Homeowner’s Association are shown (where applicable)
P,F
FLOOD IMPACT AREAS
P,E
26
The location of floodway and floodway fringe areas (where applicable) are shown referenced from FEMA Flood Hazard Boundary Maps and/or approved Engineering Flood studies
P,F
SITE DATA
27
Site calculations are shown including:
P
A. Acreage in total tract
S,P,F
P
B. Acreage in public greenways and other open space(where applicable)
P,F
P
C. Total number of lots proposed
S,P,F
P
D. Linear feet in streets
P,F
P
E. Area in newly dedicated right-of-way
P,F
P
F. General location of the boundaries of any residual lot (> 10 acres)
S,P
P
28
Proposed lot lines and dimensions, with bearing and distances shown
P,F
P
29
Area in square footage of all proposed lots under one (1) acre in size; area in acres is shown for all lots one acre or more in size; smallest lot is indicated
P,F
P
30
Lots shown are sequenced or numbered consecutively
P,F
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 43
City Department
E=Town Engineer
P=Planning
Item #
Item Description
When Required
F=Final, S=Sketch
P=Preliminary
Preparers check here if complete
Office use only
EASEMENT AND UTILITIES
P
31
Location, dimension, and type of all easements (existing and proposed) are shown
P,F
E
32
General Public Utility Easements are tied to the property lines
P,F
E
33
Public Storm Drainage Easements are shown centered over the creeks, ditches, and/or structures. Ties to property lines are not required.
P,F
P
34
Plat contains a utility layout plan for water, sewer, storm sewer, natural gas, electric, and cable TV (where applicable)
P
P
35
Note that if a septic system is proposed that lots have perked for a septic tank
P
NOTES AND STATEMENTS
P
36
Plat contains NCDOT Construction Standards Certification (where applicable)
P,F
P
37
Plat contains an On-Site Water and/or Sewer Note (where applicable)
P,F
P
38
Plat contains a Special Flood Hazard Area Note
P,F
P
39
Plat contains a Notary Certificate of Owners Signature
F
P
40
Plat contains a Certificate of Ownership and Dedication
F
P
41
Plat contains a Subdivision Administrator Approval Certificate
F
E
42
Plat contains a Certification of Survey and Accuracy
F
E
43
Plat contains a Wilkes County Review Officer’s Statement
F
E
44
Plat contains Storm Drainage Note (where applicable)
P,F
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 44
Appendix B
SUBDIVISION CERTIFICATES
Certificate of Subdivision Approval
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the subdivision regulations for the Town of Wilkesboro, NC and that this plat has been approved for recording in the office of the Register of Deeds of Wilkes County. This plat shall be recorded within sixty days of this date.
Subdivision Administrator Date
Owners Certificate
I, (We) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described heron and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish minimum building lines and dedicate all roads, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites to the Public or Private land as shown heron is within the platting jurisdiction of the Town of Wilkesboro.
Date_______________ ____________________________________
Owner Authorized Agent
Name:______________________________________
Address:____________________________________________________
STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA
COUNTY OF WILKES
I, _____________________, Review Officer of Wilkes County, certify that the map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all statutory requirements for recording.
_____________________________________
Review Officer Date
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 45
Certificate of Survey and Accuracy
I certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book Page , etc.) (other); that the error of closure as calculated by latitudes and departures is 1: ; that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book , Page ; that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended. Witness my hand and seal this day of , 20 .
SEAL
Registered Land Surveyor License or Registration Number
NCDOT Construction Standards Certification
(For all Plats outside Town Limits involving new street right-of-way and any plat inside Town Limits which changes a state system street)
Department of Transportation
Division of Highways
Proposed Subdivision Road
Construction Standards Certificate
Approved: ________________________
District Engineer
Date:____________________
On-Site Water and/or Sewer Note (where applicable)
Note: (ALL LOTS) or (LOTS #___) as shown on this plat are proposed to be served with on-site water and/or sewer systems. The lots as shown meet the minimum size prescribed by the Wilkes County Health Department for such systems(s). This Plat guarantees that such lots meet the requirements for the approval by the Health Department for such on-site systems(s).
W i l k e s b o r o S u b d i v i s i o n O r d i n a n c e | 46
Special Flood Hazard Area Note
(word to represent actual situation)
Note: (Part of) this property (does) (does not) lie in a Special Flood Hazard Area
Reference: Floodway Panel #
Date: _________________ (of Panel)
Register of Deeds Certificate
State of North Carolina, __________ County
Presented for registration and recorded in the Office in Book________
Page____ This _____ day of __________ 20___ at _______o’clock___M
___________________ By____________________________
Register of Deeds Deputy/Ass’t Register of Deeds
 
 
 
 




 


