
CODE OF WOODFIN


_____________________________
Published in 2019 by Order of the Board of Aldermen 
_____________________________
Adopted: September 17, 2019 
Effective: October 23, 2018 
_____________________________
 
 
TOWN OFFICIALS
_____________________________
M. Jerry Vehaun 
Mayor
_____________________________
James "Jim" Angel 
Jackie Pope Bryson 
Debbie Giezentanner 
Donald "Don" Hensley 
Donald "Don" Honeycutt 
Ronnie Lunsford 
Board of Aldermen
_____________________________
Jason Young 
Town Administrator
_____________________________
Joseph A. Ferikes 
Town Attorney

PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1995 Code, as updated through November 17, 2015, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of aldermen. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1995 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been divided into parts, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 

Indexes
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Julie Lovelace, Vice President-Code Department, and Erin McDaniel, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Jason Young and Joseph Ferikes for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the town readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the town's affairs. 
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina. 2019. 
 
The Town of Woodfin 
 90 Elk Mountain Road 
 Woodfin, NC 28804 
 Woodfin-nc.gov 

Passed September 17, 2019
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE TOWN OF WOODFIN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF ALDERMEN OF THE TOWN OF WOODFIN: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Woodfin," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 54, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 23, 2018, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, and shall also be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time after he has been cited for violation of the ordinance. Any person violating an ordinance regulating the operation or parking of vehicles shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance or rule or regulation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except as may be otherwise specifically provided. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenactedin the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Town may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Aldermen to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 23, 2018, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective on October 23, 2018. 
Passed and adopted by the Board of Aldermen this 17th day of September, 2019. 
___________ 
M. Jerry VeHaun 
Mayor 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
Jody Jones 
Town Clerk 
Ayes  6        Nays  0        Abstains     
 
PART I 
CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF WOODFIN, NORTH CAROLINA 
 
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION AND CORPORATE POWERS
 
Sec. 1.1. Incorporation and General Powers.
The inhabitants of the area described in Section 2.1 of this Charter shall be and constitute a body politic and corporate under the name of the Town of Woodfin, and shall be vested with all property which may be acquired by the Town, and all rights herein delegated to it; shall have perpetual succession; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at pleasure; may sue and be sued; may contract; may acquire and hold all such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed to or dedicated to it, or otherwise acquired by it, and may from time to time hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; and shall have and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature. 
 
Sec. 1.2. Exercise of Powers.
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the Town, its officers, agencies, or employees, shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter, or, if this Charter makes no provision, as provided by ordinance or resolution of the Town Board and as provided by the general laws of North Carolina pertaining to Municipal Corporations. 
 
Sec. 1.3. Enumerated Powers Not Exclusive.
The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or these [those] appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the Town of Woodfin shall have and may exercise all powers which are granted to municipal corporations by the general laws of North Carolina and all powers which, under the constitution of North Carolina, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
 
ARTICLE II. CORPORATE BOUNDARIES 
The corporate boundaries of the Town of Woodfin, until changed in accordance with law are as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point in the corporate line of the City of Asheville, and the northwest corner of Asheville By-Products property, in the center of French Broad River, said point being located 1,960.0 feet north of the center line of Pearson Bridge, and runs with the corporate line of the City of Asheville, and North line of said Asheville By-Products property, as extended by the North Carolina Legislature of 1959 as follows: South 76 deg. 00 min. east 450 feet to a point in the center of Riverside Drive; thence with the center of said Riverside Drive North 17 deg. 35 min. east 600 feet to a point in the centerline of the intersection of Riverside Drive and Broadway (N.C. 191); thence with the center of old Broadway South 74 Deg. 00 min. east 625 feet a point in the intersection of said old Broadway and Division Street; thence with the centerline of Division Street as it meanders 1,555 feet to the intersection of Thompson; thence with Thompson Street North 08 deg. 30 min. east 1,190 feet to a point in the centerline of Lookout Road; thence following the centerline of said Lookout Road as it meanders 1,932 feet to a point in said road and in a point of line of the corporate line of the City of Asheville; thence leaving Lookout Road North 17 deg. 15 min. east 875 feet to the top of Lookout Mountain; thence north 68 deg. 20 min. west 3,580 feet to a point in the centerline of the intersection of Burnsville Hill Road (Also known as Elkwood Avenue) and Hickory Lane Road; thence with the centerline of Burnsville Hill Road as it meanders in a northerly direction 4,460 feet crossing Lakeshore Drive and following along and with the corporate line of the City of Asheville, to a point 300 feet south of the junction of Burnsville Hill Road and Merrimon Avenue ( U.S. 19-23); thence with the corporate limits of the City of Asheville passing Monument No. 20, north 37 deg. 35 min. east 5,980 feet to a monument on top of Gooch's Peak, also known as Reynolds Mountain; thence south 75 deg. 30 min. west 3,300 feet to a point in the south margin of Hillcrest Street; thence following along the south margin of said Hillcrest Street as it meanders 2,530 feet to a point in the centerline and intersection of Merrimon Avenue (U.S. 19); said point also being the intersection of Switch Street and Merrimon Avenue; thence following the south margin to Switch Street south 77 deg. 00 min. west 290 feet to a point in the Old Weaverville Highway; thence with the centerline of said Old Weaverville Highway as it meanders 2,590 feet to a point in said highway and the northeast corner of the Asheville Manufacturing Company property; thence following the north line of the Asheville Manufacturing Company property north 88 deg. 56 min. west 640 feet to the east margin of the north bound lane of the Weaverville By-Pass (U.S. 19); thence along with the east margin of said highway north 13 deg. 00 min. west 2,250 feet to a point in said margin, and being located south 46 deg. west 575 feet from the intersection of U.S. 19-23-25-70; thence south 46 deg. 00 min. west 6,475 feet to a point in the center of French Broad River, said point being 2,800 feet north of the centerline of Old Weaver Dam as it crosses the French Broad River; thence with the meanders of French Broad River in a southerly and easterly direction approximately 19,360 feet to the point of BEGINNING. 
 
ARTICLE III. MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
 
Sec. 3.1. Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore.
The Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term by the qualified voters of the town. In a case of a refusal to qualify or a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Board of Alderman shall appoint some qualified voter to be mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term. The mayor shall be the official head of the Town government and shall preside at all meetings of the Town Board. When there is an equal division upon any question, or in the appointment of officers by the Board, the Mayor shall determine the matter by his vote, and shall vote in no other case. The Mayor shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are or may be conferred upon him by the general laws of North Carolina, by this Charter, and by the ordinances of the Town. The Town Board shall choose one of its numbers [members] to act as Mayor Pro Tempore, and he shall perform the duties of the Mayor in the Mayor's absence or disability. The Mayor Pro Tempore as such shall have no fixed office, but shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the remaining members of the Board. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1; Ord. of 3-18-2014)
 
Sec. 3.2. Composition of Town Board.
The Town Board shall consist of six (6) members to be elected by and from the qualified voters of the Town voting at-large in the manner provided by Article IV. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1)
 
Sec. 3.3. Terms; Qualifications; Vacancies.
(a)	Except for the terms of office as specified in Section 10 of the act incorporating the Town of Woodfin, the members of the Town Board shall serve for terms of (4) years, beginning the day and hour of the organizational meeting following their election, as established by ordinance in accordance with this Charter; provided, they shall serve until their successors are elected and qualify. 
(b)	No Person shall be eligible to be elected or appointed as a member of the Board of Alderman or as Mayor, unless he is a resident and qualified voter of the town. 
(c)	If any elected Alderman shall refuse to qualify, or if there shall be any vacancy in the Office of Alderman after election and qualification, the remaining members of the Board shall by majority vote appoint some qualified person to serve for the unexpired term. Any Aldermen so appointed shall have the same authority and powers as if regularly elected. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1)
 
Sec. 3.4. Compensation of Mayor and Aldermen.
The Town Board may fix its own compensation and allowances, and the compensation and allowances of the Mayor, in such sums as may be just and reasonable, effective following the next regular municipal election for seats on the Town Board. The compensation and allowances of the Mayor shall not be reduced during the then-current term of office. Any action taken under this section shall be published at least once in some newspaper having general circulation in Woodfin, as provided by North Carolina General Statutes 1-597 [G.S. 1-597], and shall not be taken after 14 days before the deadline for filing notice of candidacy for the Town Board. 
 
Sec. 3.5. Organization of Board; Oaths of Office.
The Town Board shall meet and organize for the transaction of business at the first regularly scheduled meeting of the Board following each biennial election. Before entering upon their offices, the Mayor and each Alderman shall take, subscribe, and have entered upon the minutes of the Board the oath of office required by Article VI, section 7 of the Constitution. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1)
 
Sec. 3.6. Meetings of Board.
(a)	The Town Board shall fix by ordinance suitable times for its regular meetings, which shall be as often as once monthly. Special meetings may be held on the call of the mayor or a majority of the Aldermen, and those not joining in the call shall be notified in writing. Any business may be transacted at a special meeting that might be transacted at a regular meeting. 
(b)	All meetings of the Town Board shall be open to the public. The board shall not, by executive session or otherwise, formally consider or vote upon any question in private session. 
 
Sec. 3.7. Quorum; Votes.
(a)	A majority of the members elected to the Town board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. The number required for a quorum shall not be affected by vacancies. 
(b)	An affirmative vote equal to a majority of all the members of the Board of Alderman, (including the Mayor's vote in case of an equal division) shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, or any resolution or motion having the effect of an ordinance. All other matters to be voted on shall be decided by a majority vote. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1)
 
Sec. 3.8. Ordinances and Resolutions.
The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading, or proving of ordinances shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of the general laws of North Carolina not inconsistent with this Charter. The ayes and noes shall be taken upon all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the minutes of the Board. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Town Board of the Town of Woodfin." All ordinances and resolutions shall take effect upon adoption unless otherwise provided therein, or unless some provision of the General Statues provides otherwise. 
 
ARTICLE IV. ELECTION PROCEDURE
 
Sec. 4.1. Regular Municipal Elections.
Regular municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year, beginning in 1979. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1)
 
Sec. 4.2. Filling of Candidacy.
Filling of candidacy for the office of Alderman and the office of Mayor shall be as provided in Article 24 of Chapter 163 of the General Statues [G.S. ch. 163, art. 24]. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1)
 
Sec. 4.3. Regulation of Elections.
Municipal elections shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 163 of the General Statutes [G.S. ch. 163, art. 24] except as otherwise herein provided. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1)
 
Sec. 4.4. Officers to be Elected.
(a)	At the regular municipal election in 2015, and quadrennially thereafter, a Mayor shall be elected for a four-year term. 
(b)	At the regular municipal election in 1979, and quadrennially thereafter, three members of the Board of Alderman shall be elected for four-year terms. 
(c)	At the regular municipal election in 1981, and quadrennially thereafter, three alderman shall be elected for four-year terms. 
(Session Laws 1979, ch. 324, § 1; Ord. of 3-18-2014)
 
Sec. 4.5. Conduct of Elections.
Regular municipal elections shall be held in each odd-numbered year in accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina. Beginning in 1995, elections shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis, using the "nonpartisan plurality election" method, as provided in North Carolina General Statute section 163-292 [G.S. 163-292]. The mayor shall continue to be elected directly by the people and have all rights and responsibilities of a member of the board, including the right to vote on all issues before the board. 
(Session Laws 1983, ch. 291, § 1; Ord. of 2-21-1995)
 
ARTICLE V. TOWN ATTORNEY
 
Sec. 5.1. Appointment; Qualifications; Term; Compensation.
The Town Board shall appoint a Town Attorney who shall be an attorney-at-law licensed to engage in the practice of law in North Carolina and who need not be a resident of the Town during his tenure. The Town Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Board and shall receive such compensation as the Board shall determine. 
 
Sec. 5.2. Duties of Town Attorney.
It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to prosecute and defend suits for and against the Town; to advise the Mayor, Town Board, and other Town officials with respect to the affairs of the Town; to draw all legal documents relating to the affairs of the Town; to draw proposed ordinances when requested to do so; to inspect and pass upon all agreements, contracts, franchises and other instruments with which the Town may be concerned; to attend all meetings of the Town Board when requested by the Board; and to perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as Town Attorney. 
 
ARTICLE VI. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
 
Sec. 6.1. Town Clerk.
The Town Board shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the Board and to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the Town, and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the Board may direct. 
 
Sec. 6.2. Town Tax Collector.
The Town Board may appoint a Tax Collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the Town subject to the provision of this Charter and ordinances of the Town, and he shall diligently comply with and enforce all the general laws of North Carolina relating to the collection, sale and foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
 
Sec. 6.3. Town Accountant.
The Town Board may appoint a Town Accountant to perform the duties of the Accountant as required by the Municipal Fiscal Control Act. 
 
Sec. 6.4. Consolidation of Functions.
The Town Board may, in its discretion, consolidate the functions of any two or more positions of Town Clerk, Town Tax collector, and Town Accountant, or may assign the functions of any one or more of these positions to the holder or holders of any other of these positions. The Board may also, in its discretion, designate a single employee to perform all or any part of the functions of any of the named positions, in lieu of appointing several persons to perform same. 
 
Sec. 6.5. Other Employees.
The Town Board may create and fill by appointment such other positions as it deems advisable to ensure the efficient administration of Town's affairs, and may, in its discretion, appoint a person to supervise all Town departments and may delegate to such person the power of appointment and removal of department heads and employees, other than the Town Attorney. 
 
ARTICLE VII. FINANCE
 
Sec. 7.1. Custody of Town Money.
All monies received by the Town for and in connection with the business of the Town government shall be paid at least once weekly into the Town depository or when a sum of $250.00 is collected, whichever comes first in accordance with the laws of the State of North Carolina. Such institution shall be designated by the Town Board in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by the General Statutes of North Carolina. All interest on monies belonging to the Town shall accrue to the benefit of the Town. All monies belonging to the Town shall be disbursed only in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Fiscal Control Act. 
(Ord. of 1-20-2004)
 
Sec. 7.2. Issuance of Bonds.
The Town may issue bonds for the purpose and in the manner prescribed by the General Statutes of North Carolina relating to the issuance of bonds by municipalities. 
 
Sec. 7.3. Purchases and Contracts.
Purchases of apparatus, supplies, materials, and equipment, and contracts for construction or repair work, shall be made in accordance with the General Statutes of North Carolina relating thereto. 
 
Sec. 7.4. Independent Audit.
As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, an independent audit shall be made of all books and accounts of the Town government by a certified public accountant or a qualified public accountant registered under Chapter 93 of the General Statutes of North Carolina [G.S. ch. 93], who shall have no personal interest directly or indirectly in the affairs of the Town or of any of its officers. The Town Board shall select the public accountant, and the results of such audit shall be made available for inspection by any interested citizen of the Town, and may be published if so ordered by the Town Board. 
 
Sec. 7.5. Taxation.
The territory within the corporate limits, and its citizens and property, shall be subject to municipal taxes levied by the Town for the fiscal year 1971-72 and subsequent years. The Town may obtain from Buncombe County, and the Buncombe County Tax Supervisor shall provide upon request a record of property within the corporate limits which was listed for taxation as of January 1, 1971. 
 
ARTICLE VIII. CLAIMS AGAINST THE TOWN
 
Sec. 8.1. Tort Claims
All claims or demands against the Town arising in tort shall be presented to the Town Board in writing, signed by the claimant or his attorney or agent, within ninety (90) days after such claim or demand is due or the cause of action accrues. No suit or action shall be brought on such a claim or demand within thirty (30) days or after the expiration of twelve (12) months from the time such claim or demand is presented. Unless the claim or demand is so presented within ninety (90) days, and unless suit is brought within twelve (12) months thereafter, any action there on shall be barred. 
 
PART II 
CODE OF ORDINANCES
 
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code.
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "Code of Woodfin" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1995, § 10.01)
 
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. The term "generally" means: 
(1)	When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general and the more stringent provision shall always prevail. 
(2)	All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the town board of aldermen can be effectuated. 
(3)	Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
(4)	Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(5)	Scrivener's errors shall be ignored. 
Board of aldermen, town board, board. Wherever the terms "board of aldermen," "town board" or "board" are used, they mean the board of aldermen of the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina. 
Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" means and refers to the "Code of Woodfin" as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default from which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period computed shall be included unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event, the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. When the period of time prescribed or allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. A half-holiday shall be considered as other days and not as a holiday. 
State law reference(s)—For state law as to computation of time, see G.S. 1-593. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that the term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it: 
(1)	The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)	The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	The term "either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Buncombe County, North Carolina. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a power is granted to or a duty is imposed upon a town officer or town employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a designated deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance. 
Following. The term "following" means next after. 
Gender. The term "gender" means any word importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. Words of one gender include words of all other genders. 
G.S., titled acts. The abbreviation "G.S." refers to the North Carolina General Statutes. Any reference to a state law or state act, whether by act number, location in the North Carolina General Statutes or by short title, is to such law or act, as amended. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the provisions giving the authority. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
May not. The term "may not" has a prohibitory effect and states a prohibition. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
NCAC. The abbreviation "NCAC" means the North Carolina Administrative Code, as amended. 
Number. The singular includes the plural. The plural includes the singular. 
Oath. The term "oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" are equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they mean standard time or daylight savings time, as may be in current use in the town. 
Owner. The term "owner," when applied to any real property, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of part of such property. 
Person. The term "person" means and includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. The term "person" means any human being, any governmental or political subdivision or public agency, any public or private corporation or limited liability company, any partnership, any firm, association or other organization, any receiver, trustee, assignee, agent, or other legal representative of any of the foregoing, or any other legal entity. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means every species of property, except real property. 
Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
Property. The term "property" means and includes real property, personal property and mixed property. 
Real property. The term "real property" means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory and not permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curb or, where no such curb exists, from the edge of the paved portion of such street, to the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of North Carolina. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between abutting property lines. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether along or with others. 
Tense. The use of any verb in the past or present tense shall include the future tense when applicable. 
Town. The term "town" means the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina. 
Town officers, employees, boards, committees, commissions, etc. References to officers, employees, boards, committees, and commissions are to town officers, town employees, town boards, town committees, and town commissions. 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" means and includes any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1995, § 10.05)
 
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections; history notes; references.
(a)	The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
(c)	State law references and editor's notes and other references following certain sections or presented in footnote form are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling nor meant to have any legal effect. 
(d)	Unless stated otherwise, all references to sections or chapters are to sections or chapters of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 10.04)
 
Sec. 1-4. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of aldermen that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 10.07)
 
Sec. 1-5. Supplementation of Code.
(a)	By contract or by town personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of aldermen. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of aldermen or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during such period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)	Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in this Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in this Code. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)	Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)	Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in this Code). 
(6)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted into this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 10.10)
 
Sec. 1-6. Official time.
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal business. 
(Code 1995, § 10.11)
 
Sec. 1-7. Reasonable time.
In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt performance of such act or the giving of such notice. 
(Code 1995, § 10.12)
 
Sec. 1-8. Ordinances repealed.
This Code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1995, § 10.13)
 
Sec. 1-9. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed below. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein and are on file in the town clerk's office. 
(1)	Annexing territory into the town, excluding territory from the town, or extending or describing the boundaries of the town. 
(2)	Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the town, or authorizing the issue of any bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(3)	Making any appropriation or providing for a budget or budget amendment or budget transfer. 
(4)	Any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the town. 
(5)	Establishing positions, classifying positions, or setting salaries or benefits of town officers or town employees not codified in this Code. 
(6)	Granting any right or franchise. 
(7)	Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(8)	Accepting or naming any public park or public recreation area. 
(9)	Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street or public way. 
(10)	Establishing and prescribing the grades of any street. 
(11)	Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(12)	Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(13)	Levying or imposing taxes not codified in this Code. 
(14)	Prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations not codified in this Code. 
(15)	Rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map. 
(16)	Adopting, amending or constituting the land usage ordinances of the town. 
(17)	Any ordinance prescribing fees. 
(18)	That is temporary, although general in effect. 
(19)	That is special, although permanent in effect. 
(20)	The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(Code 1995, § 10.14)
 
Sec. 1-10. Effective date of ordinances.
All ordinances passed by the board of aldermen requiring publication shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(Code 1995, § 10.15)
 
Sec. 1-11. Repeal or modification of ordinance.
(a)	Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided. 
(b)	No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly prohibited. 
(c)	When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision unless it is otherwise expressly provided. 
(Code 1995, § 10.16)
 
Sec. 1-12. Ordinances which amend or supplement Code.
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect any section or subsection of this Code, shall be numbered consecutively but shall refer specifically to the section or subsection affected and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions shall be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the board of aldermen. 
(b)	Amendments of any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following manner: "That section _____ of the Woodfin Town Code is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall be then set out in full. 
(c)	In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "The Woodfin Town Code is hereby amended by adding a new section to be numbered section _____, which said section shall read as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full. 
(d)	All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number. 
(Code 1995, § 10.17)
 
Sec. 1-13. General penalty.
(a)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction, a civil infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, an infraction, a civil infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a town officer or town employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, and shall also be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $500.00 to be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a prescribed period of time after he has been cited for violation of the ordinance. 
(d)	Any person violating an ordinance regulating the operation or parking of vehicles shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than $50.00. 
(e)	Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance or rule or regulation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense, except as may be otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1995, § 10.99)
State law reference(s)—Enforcement of ordinances, G.S. 160A-175. 
 
Sec. 1-14. Territorial applicability of Code.
All ordinances of the town are hereby extended to all real property and rights-of-way belonging to or under the control of the town outside the corporate limits of the town, and shall be in full force and effect therein insofar as they are applicable. Any words in any ordinance indicating that the effect of an ordinance provision is limited to the corporate limits of the town shall also be deemed to mean and include outlying real property belonging to or under the control of the town unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
State law reference(s)—Ordinances effective on town property outside limits, G.S. 160A-176. 
 
Sec. 1-15. Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances adopted prior to the adoption of this Code and included herein, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
 
Sec. 1-16. Code not to affect prior offenses, rights, etc.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
 
Sec. 1-17. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages, or any portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except pursuant to ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of aldermen which will cause the law of the town to be misrepresented thereby. 
 
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 2-1—2-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. BOARD OF ALDERMEN
 
Secs. 2-19—2-39. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Secs. 2-40—2-66. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
 
Sec. 2-67. Objectives.
The objective and purposes of the planning and zoning board of adjustment of the town are those set forth in G.S. 160-361 and 160-338 and amendments and supplements thereto, and those powers and duties delegated to the planning and zoning board of adjustment (hereinafter "the board") by the board of aldermen by ordinance of March 15, 1988, in accordance with the enabling law. 
(Code 1995, app., § 1; Ord. of 3-15-1988)
 
Sec. 2-68. Officers and duties.
(a)	Chairperson. The chairperson shall be appointed by the board of aldermen from the regular members of the board. The chairperson's term of office shall be for three years, or until a successor is appointed, beginning on March 1, 1988. The chairperson shall be eligible for one consecutive reappointment. Subject to these rules, the chairperson shall decide upon all points of order and procedure, unless directed otherwise by a majority of the board in session at the time. The chairperson shall appoint any committees found necessary to investigate any matter before the board. The chairperson may discuss and vote on all matters before the board. 
(b)	Vice-chairperson. A vice-chairperson shall be elected by the board from its regular members. The vice-chairperson's term of office shall be for one year, or until a successor is elected. The vice-chairperson shall be eligible for consecutive re-elections. He shall serve as acting chairperson in the absence of the chairperson, and at such times, he shall have the same powers and duties as the chairperson. 
(c)	Secretary. A secretary shall be appointed by the chairperson from among the board's regular members, to hold office during the term of the chairperson or until a successor secretary shall have been appointed. The secretary shall be eligible for consecutive reappointments. The secretary, subject to the direction of the chairperson, shall keep all records, shall conduct all correspondence of the board, shall arrange for all public notices required to be given, and shall generally supervise the clerical work of the board. The secretary shall keep a permanent volume of the minutes of every meeting of the board. These shall be the record of all important facts pertaining to each meeting and hearing, every resolution acted upon by the board, and all votes of members of the board upon any resolution or upon the final determination of any question. The minutes shall indicate the names of members absent or failing to vote. 
(d)	Treasurer. A treasurer shall be appointed by the chairperson from among the board's regular members, to hold office during the term of the chairperson or until a successor treasurer shall have been appointed. The treasurer shall keep accurate record of all board expenditures of funds budgeted to the board by the board of aldermen. Single expenditures exceeding $100.00 shall be submitted in writing for prior approval of the board of aldermen. 
(e)	Clerk. The clerk of the board shall be the zoning administrator of the town. The clerk shall perform such tasks as may be assigned by the chairperson and shall assist the secretary generally in the performance of his duties. 
(Code 1995, app., § 2)
 
Sec. 2-69. Rules of conduct for members.
Members of the board may be removed for cause, including violations of any rule stated below. 
(1)	Faithful attendance at all meetings of the board and conscientious performance of the duties required of members of the board shall be considered a prerequisite of continuing membership on the board. 
(2)	No board member shall take part in the hearing, consideration or determination of any case in which he is personally or financially interested. The term "personally interested" means that a board member or a board member's family either owns, has financial interest in, or has property abutting property being considered by the board. 
(3)	No board member shall vote on any matter deciding on a conditional use, variance, or appeal unless he shall have attended the public hearing on that application or appeal. 
(4)	No board member shall discuss any case with any parties thereto prior to the public hearing on that case; provided, however, that member may receive and/or seek information pertaining to the case from any other member of the board, its secretary or clerk prior to the hearing. Board members shall disclose publicly any contact made by any party to a matter before the board. 
(5)	Members of the board shall not express individual opinions on the proper judgment of any case with any parties thereto prior to the board's determination of that case. Violation of this rule shall be cause for dismissal from the board. 
(Code 1995, app., § 3)
 
Sec. 2-70. Meetings.
(a)	All meetings shall comply with the Open Meeting Law of North Carolina. 
(b)	Meetings of the planning and zoning board of adjustment will normally occur on the second Monday of the month at 7:30 p.m. in the town hall. The meetings will be limited to two hours. The meetings may be extended by a specific vote by the majority of members present. 
(c)	A quorum shall consist of four members of the board, but the board shall not, upon any question relating to an appeal from a decision, order requirement, or determination of the zoning administrator, or an application for a variance or conditional use permit when there are less than six members present. 
(d)	All regular members may vote on any issue unless they have disqualified themselves from one or more of the reasons listed in section 2-69. The required vote to decide appeals and applications shall be as provided in section 2-74 and shall not be reduced by any disqualification. In all other matters, the vote of a majority of the members present and voting shall decide issues before the board. 
(e)	Special meetings may be called by the chairperson. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to call such a meeting upon recommendations of the board. During a special meeting, no other business may be considered except that which was specified by advance notice. The secretary shall notify all members of the board in writing not less than five days in advance of such special meeting. Notice of time, place and subject of such meeting shall be published in a paper of record, which shall comply with the current existing North Carolina General Statutes pertaining to and setting forth the requirements of publications of legal notice and posted on the town notice board located outside town hall at least five days prior to such special meeting, in accordance with G.S. 143-138.12(b). 
(f)	The order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)	Roll call; 
(2)	Approval of previous meeting minutes; 
(3)	Report of committees; 
(4)	Unfinished business; 
(5)	New business; 
(6)	Adjournment. 
(Code 1995, app., § 4; Ord. of 3-15-1988; Ord. of 9-19-2006)
 
Sec. 2-71. Powers and duties.
(a)	Legislative advice. It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning board of adjustment to: 
(1)	Acquire and maintain in current form such basic information and materials as are necessary to an understanding of past trends, present conditions, and forces at work to cause changes in those conditions; 
(2)	Prepare and from time to time amend and revise a comprehensive and coordinated plan for physical development of the area; 
(3)	Establish principles and policies for guiding action in the development of the area within the town; 
(4)	Prepare and recommend to the board of aldermen, ordinances promoting orderly development of the town; 
(5)	Determine whether specific proposed developments conform to the principles and requirements of the comprehensive plan and/or chapter 54 for the growth and improvement of the area; 
(6)	Keep the board of aldermen and the general public informed and advised as to these matters; and 
(7)	Perform any other duties which may lawfully be assigned to it, such as chapter 54 review and subdivision review. 
(b)	Administrative review. It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning board of adjustment to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the zoning administrator or building inspector in the enforcement of any provision found in chapter 54. The concurring vote of five out of seven of the members of the board shall be necessary to: 
(1)	Reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning administrator; 
(2)	Decide in favor of the applicant any matter on which the board is required to consider under chapter 54; or 
(3)	Effect any variance in such ordinance. 
(c)	Conditional uses.
(1)	It shall be the duty of the board to grant, in particular cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, permits for conditional uses, as authorized by chapter 54, under which the conditional use permit is sought, the following: 
a.	A written application for a permit is submitted indicating the section of chapter 54 under which the conditional use permit is sought; 
b.	A public hearing is held by the planning and zoning board of adjustment in compliance with section 2-73; and 
c.	The planning and zoning board of adjustment finds that, in the particular case in question, the use for which the conditional use permit is sought will not adversely affect the health or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use, and will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or public improvements in the neighborhood. 
(2)	In granting such a permit, the planning and zoning board of adjustment may designate such conditions in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, ensure that the proposed use will conform to the requirements and spirit of chapter 54. If at any time after a conditional use permit has been issued the zoning administrator finds that the conditions imposed and agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a conditional use permit, a zoning violation notice shall be issued to the permit holder. Upon issuance of a zoning violation notice, the permit shall be terminated and the operation of such use discontinued. If a conditional use permit is terminated for any reason, it may be reinstated only after a public hearing is held. 
(3)	Group developments. The following checklist shall be completed by the applicant. The applicant shall infer that all information is required at the public hearing, unless prior arrangements have been made. 
CONDITIONAL USE GROUP DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST 
NAME OF PROJECT ___________ 
LOCATION OF PROJECT ___________ W_____, S_____, L_____ 
DATE SUBMITTED _____/_____/_____ 
APPLICANT ___________ 
ADDRESS ___________ PHONE ___________ 
OWNER OF LOT ___________ 
(if different from applicant) 
ADDRESS ___________ PHONE ___________ 
LEGAL RELATIONSHIP TO APPLICANT TO OWNER 


Site plans for conditional uses permits require the following: 
(A)	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
___ 1) Submission of at least three sets of site plans prepared by an appropriate registered professional. 
___ 2) Identification of property by street address and tax map reference. 
___ 3) Site plans shall also contain the following general information: 
a)	North arrow, legend, and seal of registered professional; 
b)	A vicinity map showing relative location of project to surrounding area; 
c)	Adjoining property liens, ownership, and land use; 
d)	Existing and proposed topography at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and 
e)	The plan shall not be drawn to a scale of less than one inch to 100 feet. 
(B)	LAND AND LANDSCAPING, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE PLAN. The following requirements shall be provided on a single detached plan: 
___ 1) If the proposed development is to be located in a designated flood hazard area. All base flood elevation data shall be provided by the developer. 
___ 2) Location of wooded areas and all trees of 12 inches or more in diameter. 
___ 3) Amount of wooded area to be removed. 
___ 4) Existing and proposed contours at intervals of no less than two feet. 
___ 5) Streams, ponds, drainage ditches shall be illustrated. 
___ 6) Location of existing and proposed utilities. 
___ 7) Area to be covered by structures, parking, and streets and the like. 
___ 8) Buffering shall be illustrated, and meet the standards as found in section 54-5. 
___ 9) Location and heights of all fences, walls, and hedges. 
___ 10) Type and location of proposed plantings. 
___ 11) A minimum of 20 feet of open space between individual and unattached buildings in a residential development. 
___ 12) Areas intended for open space and common areas. 
(C)	STRUCTURE AND UTILITY SYSTEM PLAN. The following requirements shall be provided on a single detached plan: 
___ 1) Location and dimension of all existing and proposed structures, including gross floor area and number of stories. 
___ 2) Location of entrances and loading points. 
___ 3) Proposed schedule of development including stages likely to be followed. 
___ 4) Existing and proposed use of all structures. If multifamily use, list number of bedroom units proposed: 1 bedroom ___ 2 bedroom ___ 3 bedroom ___ 4 bedroom ___. 
___ 5) Water and sewer system. 
a)	Location and size of all existing and proposed lines. 
b)	Letter from the Woodfin Water and Sewer District or the City of Asheville Water and Sewer Department stating availability of water and sanitary sewer. The letter shall state the results of a flow and pressure test for water lines and the volume of capacity/current flow for sewer lines. 
c)	Estimated daily and peak demand for water consumption and waste water discharge. 
d)	Location and size meters. 
e)	Rights-of-way and easements. 
___ 6) Underground utility lines including electrical power, telephone, gas, cablevision, fire alarm system and exterior area lighting. 
___ 7) Fire protection system. 
a)	Location of nearest fire hydrant and proposed fire hydrant. 
b)	Letter of adequacy of water pressure from the Woodfin Fire Department. 
c)	Hydrants shall be placed on six-inch water lines and be located within 100 feet of the development. 
d)	A 15-foot area around the hydrant shall be kept clear of all obstructions. 
e)	Only the Woodfin Fire Chief may suggest a change from these standards. 
___ 8) Stormwater drainage system as described in part ___. 
___ 9) Seal and signature of registered professional engineer. 
(D)	STREET, PARKING, AND LOADING AREA PLAN. The following requirements shall be provided on a single detached plan: 
___ 1) An approved North Carolina Department of Transportation (N.C.D.O.T.) Driveway Permit for any driveway or other curb cut on a state system street or highway. 
___ 2) Curb design and material. 
___ 3) Street plans and profiles. 
___ 4) Rights-of-way and pavement widths. 
___ 5) Existing and proposed storm drainage facilities including pipes, drop inlets, catchbasins, junction boxes, man holes, etc. 
___ 6) Location of traffic control devices. 
___ 7) Street lighting. The developer is advised that there is a charge by Carolina Power and Light for each pole required for street lighting utilizing underground wiring. This is a one-time service fee and the Town will not assume responsibility for this payment. 
___ 8) Adequate parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 54-176 and illustrated on plan. 
___ 9) Parking spaces shall be no less 8.5 feet by 18 feet (Handicapped spaces shall be 12.5 feet wide). 
___ 10) Type of surfacing and curbing in all parking and loading areas. 
___ 11) An illustration of the interior flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
___ 12) Fire lanes for commercial development. 
___ 13) Location of dumpsters, illustrating access areas. 
(E)	STORMWATER DRAINAGE PLAN. The following requirements shall be provided on a single detached plan: 
___ 1) The developer should be familiar with Buncombe County's Soil Erosion Control Ordinance. 
___ 2) The stormwater plan shall illustrate the outline of all areas to be cleared, graded, or otherwise disturbed, outline of areas to be cut, and outline of areas to be filled. 
___ 3) If on-site cut and fill do not balance, identify location of borrow and/or spoil areas. 
___ 4) Show approximate location of proposed silt fences and similar work to be installed to protect the site and adjacent property during construction. 
___ 5) Show, by flow lines, direction of runoff of stormwater. 
___ 6) Provide estimate of stormwater runoff rates both before and after development and approximate size and location of retention walls. 
___ 7) Existing and proposed storm drainage facilities including pipes, drop inlets, catchbasins, junction boxes, manholes, etc. 
(d)	Variances.
(1)	It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning board of adjustment to authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of chapter 54 as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of chapter 54 will, in an individual case, result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of chapter 54 shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the planning and zoning board of adjustment that all the following conditions exist: 
a.	There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district; 
b.	Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other residents of the district in which the property is located; 
c.	A literal interpretation of the provisions of chapter 54 would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other residents of the district in which the property is located; 
d.	The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of chapter 54 and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
e.	The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
f.	The variance requested is the minimum variance which will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure; 
g.	The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, building, or structure which is not permitted by right or by special exception in the district involved; and 
h.	That no nonconforming use of neighboring land, structures or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of land, structures or buildings in other districts will be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(2)	A public hearing must be held prior to considering any variance request. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as set forth in section 2-73. 
(3)	The planning and zoning board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of this subsection have been met for all variances granted. A written notice of the decision shall be prepared as prescribed in section 2-74(b). 
(4)	In granting any variance, the planning and zoning board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with chapter 54. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of chapter 54 and punishable under section 1-13. 
(Code 1995, app., § 5; Ord. of 3-15-1988)
 
Sec. 2-72. Appeals and application.
(a)	The board shall hear and decide all appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator or building inspector. It shall also hear and decide upon all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass, in accordance with chapter 54 of the town. In deciding appeals, it may hear both those based upon an allegedly improper or erroneous interpretation of chapter 54 and those based upon alleged hardship resulting from strict interpretation of chapter 54. 
(b)	No appeal shall be heard by the board unless notice thereof is filed within 30 days after the interested party receives notice of the order, requirements, decision or determination by the zoning administrator. The applicant must file his application with the zoning administrator, who is clerk to the board. All applications shall be made upon the form specified by the town for that purpose and all information required thereon shall be complete before an appeal shall be considered filed. 
(c)	A fee of $35.00 shall be paid to the town for each application for a variance, conditional use, or appeal to cover the necessary administrative costs and advertising. 
(d)	The zoning administrator, who is clerk to the board shall submit any application for a variance, conditional use, or appeal properly filed, to the board, at the next regular meeting of the board following the 15th day after the date of application. 
(Code 1995, app., § 6; Ord. of 3-15-1988)
 
Sec. 2-73. Public hearings.
(a)	After receipt of notice of appeal, variance, conditional use, or other matters requiring a hearing before the board, the board chairperson shall schedule a hearing which shall be at a regular or special meeting within 36 days from the filing of such notice. 
(b)	The board shall give public notice of the hearing in a newspaper published in the county by advertisement published at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. The board shall mail notices of the hearing to the parties of the action appealed, to owners of property within 150 feet of the property in question, and to such other persons as the zoning administrator shall direct, at least five days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall state the location of the building or lot, the general nature of the question involved in the hearing application, and the time and place of the hearing. 
(c)	Procedures for hearing. 
(1)	Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney at the hearing. The order of business for the hearing shall be as follows: 
a.	The chairperson, or such person as he shall direct, shall give a preliminary statement of the case; 
b.	The applicant shall present the argument in support of his application; 
c.	Persons opposed to granting the application shall present the argument against the application; 
d.	Both sides will be permitted to present rebuttals to opposing testimony; 
e.	The chairperson shall summarize the evidence which has been presented, giving the parties opportunity to make objections or corrections. 
(2)	Witnesses may be called and factual evidence may be submitted, but the board shall not be limited to consideration of such evidence as would be admissible in a court of law. The board may view the premises before the board shall be placed under oath and the opposing party may cross examine them. 
(d)	An application for a rehearing may be made in the same manner as provided for an original hearing. Evidence in support of the application shall initially be limited to that which is necessary to enable the board to determine whether there has been a substantial change in the facts, evidence, or conditions in the case. The application for rehearing shall be denied by the board if from the record it finds that there has been no substantial change in facts, evidence or conditions. If the board finds that there has been a change, it shall thereupon treat the request in the same manner as any other application. 
(Code 1995, app., § 7; Ord. of 3-15-1988)
 
Sec. 2-74. Decisions.
(a)	Decisions by the board shall be made not more than 40 days from the time of the hearing. 
(b)	Written notice of the decision in a case shall be given to the applicant by certified or registered mail by the secretary as soon as practicable after the case is decided. Also, written notice shall be given to owners of the subject property and to other persons who have made written request for such notice. The final decision of the board shall be shown in the record of the case as entered in the minutes of the board and signed by the secretary and the chairperson upon approval of the minutes by the board. Such record shall show the reasons for the determinations, with a summary of the evidence introduced and the findings of fact made by the board. Where a variance is granted, the record shall state in detail any exceptional difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon which the appeal was based and which the board finds to exist. The decision may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination which was appealed from. Where a conditional use is granted, the record shall state in detail any facts supporting the findings required to be made prior to the issuance of such permit. The record shall state in detail what, if any, conditions and safeguard are imposed by the board in connection with the granting of a variance. 
(c)	Unless otherwise specified, any order or decision of the board granting a conditional use or variance shall expire if a building permit or certificate of occupancy for such use is not obtained by the applicant within six months from the date of the decision. 
(d)	The concurring vote of four out of five of the total members of the board shall be necessary to: 
(1)	Reverse any order, requirements, decision or determination of the zoning administrator; 
(2)	Decide in favor of the applicant on a matter upon which the board is required by ordinance provisions. 
(e)	The decisions of the board, as filed in its minutes, shall be a public record available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1995, app., § 8; Ord. of 3-15-1988)
 
Sec. 2-75. Town application fees.
Application fees will be set by the board of aldermen for the following reviews: 
(1)	Application for a zoning compliance permit. 
(2)	Appeal of zoning enforcement. 
(3)	Application for zoning variance. 
(4)	Application for a conditional use. 
(5)	Application for a rezoning. 
(6)	Subdivision review. 
a.	Minor subdivision. The fee is required upon submittal of the sketch map. 
b.	Major subdivision. All fees must be paid upon the submittal of the preliminary plat. 
(7)	Application for a zoning compliance permit. 
(8)	Application for a sign permit. 
(Code 1995, app., § 9; Ord. of 3-15-1988)
 
Chapter 6 ANIMALS
 
Sec. 6-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal shelter means the place provided and operated for the restraint, care, and disposition of animals, whether such animal shelter is public or private in nature. 
At-large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner, a member of his immediate family, or other responsible person, either by leash, cord, or chains. 
Dog means both male and female, more than six months old. 
Head of household means the person who maintains the household or, if no one person maintains the household, the head of the household shall be the eldest person residing in the household. 
Impounded means having been taken or received into the custody of the animal control officer or any authorized representative thereof. 
Owner means any person, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring a dog. For the purpose hereof, the head of a household shall be deemed to be the owner in respect to any dog owned, kept, or harbored on the premises by any person residing in said household. 
Stray means any dog which does not wear proper identification tags; collar and ID tag, rabies tag and owners name and number. 
Vicious dog means any dog which has bitten one or more persons without provocation, or one in which a propensity to attack humans exists, and such propensity is known or ought to reasonably be known to the owner. 
(Code 1995, § 91.01; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-2. Nonapplicable.
This chapter shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the town for not more than 30 days, nor to dogs brought into the town for the purpose of participating in any dog show; nor to Seeing Eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in going from place to place. 
(Code 1995, § 91.02; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-3. Tag and collar.
No owner of a dog shall own, keep or harbor a dog over the age of six months unless it is identified as herein provided. Every owner of a dog over six months shall cause the dog to wear separate identification in the form of an identification tag containing the name of the dog, the dog's owner's name, address, and telephone number. Every owner is required to see that the tag is securely fastened to his dog's chain, collar, or harness, which the dog must wear at all times unless it is accompanied by its owner or is engaged in hunting or some other sport in which a collar might endanger its safety. 
(Code 1995, § 91.03; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-4. Animal control officer.
The mayor is authorized, in his discretion, to appoint one or more animal control officers. This authority shall include the right to contract with the county for the enforcement of this chapter. This includes the county animal control officers and director of the animal shelter or his agents. 
(Code 1995, § 91.04)
 
Sec. 6-5. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any dog to permit such dog to run at large. 
(Code 1995, § 91.05; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-6. Impoundment of unidentified dogs.
Any dog found running at large within the town, which dog does not have an identification tag affixed to a collar worn by the dog, shall be deemed to be a stray dog and shall be taken by the animal control officer or his agent and delivered to the county dog shelter. The dog then becomes the responsibility of the county and its further disposition shall be under the applicable county or state law. 
(Code 1995, § 91.06; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-7. Impoundment of identified dogs.
Any dog found running at large within the town, which dog is wearing a collar displaying the proper identification tags, shall be apprehended by the animal control officer or his agent and impounded in a pound. The official impounding the dog shall make a complete registry of the dog including breed, color, sex, rabies tag number, and the name and address of the owner. 
(Code 1995, § 91.07; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-8. Notice to owner.
As soon as he impounds a dog whose owner is known to the animal control officer, the animal control officer or his agent shall mail a certified letter, with return receipt requested, to the owner informing him that his dog has been impounded and how he may regain custody of the dog. In the event the certified letter is returned as undeliverable, the county shall be relieved of all responsibility of contacting the owner of the dog. 
(Code 1995, § 91.08; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-9. Redemption of impounded dog.
The owner of any dog impounded which contains the proper identification tags of this chapter may redeem such dog by: 
(1)	Having the dog duly vaccinated for rabies if it has not been currently vaccinated before the redemption date. 
(2)	Paying to the county an apprehension and notice fee imposed by the county. 
(3)	Paying an impoundment fee as imposed by the county per day for each day, or portion thereof, which the dog has been impounded. 
(4)	Paying such other costs and charges which may, from time to time, be imposed by the county board of aldermen. 
(5)	Complying with such rules, regulations, and procedures as may, from time to time, be established by the animal control officer, or his agent, for the orderly operation of the pound. 
(Code 1995, § 91.09; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-10. Unclaimed dogs.
If at the expiration of five days from the date notice is given to the owner of a dog, or five days from the date that the letter is returned undelivered, the dog has not been claimed or redeemed by the owner, the dog shall either be placed for adoption in a suitable home or humanely euthanized. 
(Code 1995, § 91.10; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-11. Protection in lieu of impoundment.
In addition to impounding a properly identified dog found running at large, the animal control officer or his agent may issue to the known owner of the dog a notice of violation of this chapter. The notice shall cite its owner to appear in court to answer to charges of violating this chapter and subject to a fine no less than $10.00 minimum and cost of court. 
(Code 1995, § 91.11; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-12. Dangerous, fierce, or vicious dogs.
When, in the reasonable judgment of the animal control officer or his agent, it is determined that any dog found running at large is dangerous, fierce, vicious, or represents a threat to the safety or health of members of the public, the dog may be slain by the animal control officer or his agent or by any police officer or other designated official forthwith. 
(Code 1995, § 91.12; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-13. Vaccination.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to keep, harbor, or maintain any dog unless it shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinary surgeon or through the county rabies clinic with anti-rabies vaccine as required by the General Statutes of North Carolina and proof of inoculation shall be attached to the collar of the dog. 
(Code 1995, § 91.13; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-14. Barking, howling or whining dogs.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to keep, harbor, or maintain within the town any dog that habitually or repeatedly barks, howls, or whines in such a manner or to such an extent that it is a public nuisance. No dog over six months old may run at large at night unless accompanied by its owner, a member of the owner's family, or a person who has the owner's permission. 
(Code 1995, § 91.14; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-15. Teasing and molesting.
Its shall be unlawful for any person to tease, molest, or in any way bother any dog not belonging to such person or legally under his control. 
(Code 1995, § 91.15; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-16. Dog care.
It shall be unlawful for any owner to fail to provide his dog with sufficient, good and wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather, veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering and with humane care and treatment. No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse any dog. 
(Code 1995, § 91.16; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-17. Abandonment of dogs.
No owner of any dog shall abandon the dog within the town. 
(Code 1995, § 91.17; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-18. Confinement of female dogs in heat.
The owner of any female dog shall, when such is in heat, confine the dog in a building or secure enclosure in such manner that she will not be in contact with another dog or create a nuisance by attracting other dogs; provided, however, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional breeding of animals within an enclosed area on the premises of the owner of an animal being bred. 
(Code 1995, § 91.18; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-19. Muzzling.
Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the dangers of hydrophobia (i.e., rabies), the mayor, if he deems it necessary, shall issue a proclamation ordering every person owning or keeping a dog to confine the dog on the owner's premises unless the dog shall be muzzled with a muzzle of sufficient strength to prevent its biting any person. 
(Code 1995, § 91.18; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-20. Leashing.
All dogs are required to be secured on a leash when taken off of the owner's premises. 
(Code 1995, § 91.19; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-21. Responsibility of owners.
Owners of dogs are responsible for the acts of their dogs. 
(Code 1995, § 91.20; Ord. of 8-19-1980)
 
Sec. 6-22. Spaying and neutering requirements; unaltered animals permit required.
No person shall own or harbor any dog or cat over the age of six months that has not been spayed or neutered unless such person holds an unaltered animal permit issued for such animal by the town, or any successor agency authorized by law to issue such a permit, except: 
(1)	Persons who own or harbor service dogs or police work dogs; 
(2)	Individuals who are non-residents of the county and reside temporarily therein for a period not to exceed 30 days; 
(3)	Animal shelters and veterinary hospitals; and 
(4)	Persons who own or harbor a dog or cat and who are in possession of a certification signed by a licensed veterinarian stating that such animal is unfit to be spayed or neutered because such procedure would endanger the life of such animal. 
(Code 1995, § 91.21; Ord. of 12-16-2014, § 90.21)
 
Sec. 6-23. Obtaining an unaltered animal permit.
(a)	Applicants must apply for permits required by section 6-22 with the town administrator or his designees. The fee for an unaltered animal permit shall be $100.00. A tag will be issued identifying the animal as an unaltered animal and must be displayed at all times. 
(b)	Citations will be issued to owners of unaltered animals not holding a permit. If the animal is altered within 30 days, the citation will be waived. A citation will only be issued under this section if the animal is in violation of another provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 91.22; Ord. of 12-16-2014, § 90.22)
 
Sec. 6-24. Animal care.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hoard animals. An owner, a keeper, possessor, or caretaker shall be guilty of this offense if he possesses five or more animals; fails to provide suitable care for such animals as prescribed by this chapter; keeps the animals in a severely overcrowded or unsanitary environment; and displays an inability to recognize or understand the nature of or has a reckless disregard for the conditions under which the animals are living and the deleterious impact such conditions have on the animals' health and well-being. 
(Code 1995, § 90.21; Ord. of 1-20-2015, § 90.21)
 
Sec. 6-25. Bird sanctuary.
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the town is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1995, § 91.35)
 
Sec. 6-26. Hunting, shooting and the like.
(a)	It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if pigeons, crows, starlings, or English sparrows are found to be congregated in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the county health officer, the health officer shall meet with the representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club or Humane Society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of such clubs. 
(b)	If, as a result of the meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, the birds may be destroyed in such numbers or in such manner as is deemed advisable by the board, and shall be done under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Code 1995, § 91.36)
 
Sec. 6-27. Keeping of livestock.
It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any cow, bull, calf, hog, pig, horse, mule, pony, goat, or sheep, or other livestock, on any parcel of land less than one acre in area within the town, except as provided in section 6-30; provided this section shall not prohibit the assembling of livestock for shipment or from the unloading of the same within the city; provided, further, section 6-30 shall not apply to livestock assembled for fairs and expositions, or to the keeping of household pets on the premises of the owner. Any parcel of land one acre or more in area is allowed two animals per acre. 
(Code 1995, § 91.37)
 
Sec. 6-28. Wild animals or dangerous insects.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any live reptiles, wild animals or insects likely to be dangerous or injurious to human life, within the city, except as provided for in sections 6-30 and 6-32. 
(Code 1995, § 91.38)
 
Sec. 6-29. Keeping fowl.
(a)	Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have, or maintain any chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, geese, pheasants, pigeons or other domestic fowl in the town without first receiving from the town a permit to do so or to continue to have any of such fowl after a permit has been denied. This section shall not apply to, and no permit shall be required for, any agricultural operation within G.S. 106-700, which pertains to nuisance liability of agricultural operation, or to any fowl or bird that is kept exclusively inside its owner's residence. The permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and shall be renewed annually. The annual fee for such permit shall be $0.00 per household. The application shall list all such animals and fowl on the premises. Before a permit is issued an employee of the town shall inspect the premises to determine if the keeping of the fowl on the premises will endanger or is likely to endanger the health, safety, peace, quiet, comfort, enjoyment of or otherwise become a public nuisance to nearby residents or occupants or places of business. 
(b)	Denial. When a permit is denied for any reason, the applicant shall be given a written explanation of the reason for denial. 
(c)	Compliance required prior to issuance. An owner or possessor of such fowl shall comply with the following applicable subsections before a permit is issued. Compliance with the following applicable subsections will create a rebuttable presumption that a permit shall be issued. That presumption may only be rebutted by specific findings supported by competent evidence that, despite compliance with the following, the presence of such fowl is still likely to endanger the health, safety, peace, quiet, comfort, enjoyment of or otherwise become a public nuisance to nearby residents or occupants or places of business: 
(1)	Fowl and other birds. The keeping of chickens, turkeys, ducks, guineas, geese, pheasants or other domestic fowl shall be in compliance with the following: 
a.	Such fowl must be confined in a coop or fowl house not less than 18 inches in height. The fowl must be kept within the coop or fowl house between sunrise and sunset and must be confined to the property of the owner at all times when not actively being transported in a cage or similar device. Failure to confine fowl to the property of the fowl owner will constitute a violation of this chapter for which the permit may be revoked by the town. 
b.	The coop or fowl house must be used for fowl only, and both must be well ventilated. 
c.	The coop or fowl house shall have a minimum of four square feet of floor area for each fowl. 
d.	The run must be well drained so there is no accumulation of moisture. 
e.	The coop or fowl house shall be kept clean, sanitary and free from accumulation of animal excrement and objectionable odors. It shall be cleaned daily, and all droppings and body excretion shall be placed in a flyproof container and double-bagged in plastic bags or composted in accordance with good practices and state and local ordinances. 
f.	The coop or fowl house shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any property line. 
g.	No more than 20 such fowl shall be kept or maintained per acre. The number of fowl should be proportionate to the acreage. 
(2)	Pigeons. Pigeons, while allowed to fly to and from the premises, must be provided with adequate space on the premises, and sanitary conditions must be maintained. 
(3)	Slaughter. Any slaughter of any poultry not regulated by state law or otherwise forbidden or regulated shall be done only in a humane and sanitary manner and shall not be done open to the view of any public area or adjacent property owned by another. 
(4)	Annexation. An owner or possessor of fowl on property that is newly annexed has 90 days from the date of annexation to bring the property into compliance and to have obtained permits required by this section. 
(5)	Exceptions. A permit shall not be required for animals of any kind if the animals are kept by a governmental authority or other appropriately certified and recognized academic institution, museum, raptor center, etc. 
(d)	Revocation. The town may revoke any permit: 
(1)	When the permit has been mistakenly issued without compliance with this section; 
(2)	When the applicant has submitted false information; 
(3)	For a violation of any of the sections of this chapter; 
(4)	When, in the opinion of the town administrator, the health, safety or welfare of any person or property is menaced by the keeping of such animals; or 
(5)	When the birds or fowl become a nuisance. 
If a permit is revoked, the applicant shall be given a written explanation of the reasons for the revocation. Upon the determination of a violation of this section, and if the violation pertains to a correctable condition on the property, the owner shall have 30 days in which to bring the property or condition into compliance with this chapter. All appeals to permit denial or revocation shall be made to the board of aldermen whose determination shall be final. 
(Code 1995, § 91.39; Ord. of 10-18-2011)
 
Sec. 6-30. Special permission to keep animals.
Special permission may be granted by the town administrator for the keeping of any animals, fowl or insects prohibited by this chapter for temporary periods for exhibition, demonstration or experimental purposes, provided that, before granting such special permit, the administrator shall require written approval from the county health department, that the animals, fowl or insects may be kept within the city, with any conditions to be made a part of such special permit. 
(Code 1995, § 91.40)
 
Sec. 6-31. Sale or giving of baby fowl or rabbits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away any baby chickens, ducklings, or other fowl under three weeks of age, or rabbits under two months of age, as pets, toys, premiums or novelties, or to color, dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of baby chickens, ducklings, or other fowl, or rabbits, or to bring or transport the same into the town; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the sale or display of such baby chickens, ducklings, or other fowl, or such rabbits, in proper facilities by breeders or stores engaged in the business of selling for purposes of commercial breeding and raising. 
(Code 1995, § 91.41)
 
Sec. 6-32. Bees.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, construct, reconstruct, alter, maintain or use on any lot or parcel of land within the corporate limits of the town, any hives or other enclosures for the purpose of keeping any bees or other such insects unless every part of such hive or enclosure is located at least 75 feet from a dwelling house located on the adjoining property. 
(b)	On lot sizes of 15,000 square feet or less, no more than four hives (colonies of bees) will be permitted. The hives shall be no closer than 15 feet from any property line. On lots larger than 15,000 square feet, additional hives will be permitted on the basis of one hive for each 5,000 square feet in excess of 15,000 square feet. 
(c)	This section shall pertain only to honey bees maintained in moveable frame hives and it does not authorize the presence of hives with non-moveable frames or feral honey bee colonies (i.e., honey bees in trees, sides of houses and the like). 
(d)	The hives (colonies) of bees may not be manipulated between the hours of sunset and sunrise unless the hives are being moved to or from another location. 
(Code 1995, § 91.42)
 
Sec. 6-33. Penalty.
(a)	Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to a criminal penalty of not more than $500.00. 
(b)	Any person who violates any provision of sections 6-1 through 6-21 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding $50.00. If the violation is continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(c)	Any person who violates section 6-5 shall be given a warning upon the first offense, but shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 upon a second offense. 
(Code 1995, § 91.99)
 
Chapter 10 BUSINESS REGULATIONS
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 10-1—10-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. BUSINESS REGISTRATION
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 10-19. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means the person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer, or distributor. 
Business means any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling of any kind, subject, by the provisions of this article, to the requirement of a business license. 
Dealer means as defined in G.S. 66-406 and any amendments thereto. 
Engaged in the business means engaged in the business as owner or operator. 
Fiscal year means the period beginning with July 1 and ending with June 30 next following. 
Fixed location means any site occupied by a secondhand dealer as the owner or lessee of the site under a lease or rental agreement providing for occupation of the site by the secondhand dealer for a total duration of not less than 364 days. 
Gaming terminal means an electronic screen which may or may not be connected to the Internet, which may or may not be operated by a coin, token or card and which has a display which simulates a game ordinarily played on a slot machine or a video gaming machine as defined in G.S. 14-306 and 14-306.1(a), respectively, or similar machines and which are not prohibited by G.S. 14-306 or 14-306.1(a). 
Pawnbrokers, as defined in G.S. 66-387 and any amendments thereto, means it shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or servant to engage in or carry on a business in the town for which there is required a license, without first having secured a business license as required by this article. 
(Code 1995, § 112.01; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.01))
 
Sec. 10-20. Engaging in or carrying on the business.
For the purpose of this article, the opening of a place of business or offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing in the furtherance of the business shall be construed to be engaging in or carrying on the business; and each day that the person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on the business as aforesaid, shall be construed to be a separate offense. 
(Code 1995, § 112.01; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.01))
 
Secs. 10-21—10-43. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. BUSINESS REGISTRATION
 
Subdivision I. Business Registration Applications
 
Sec. 10-44. Application.
(a)	Every person desiring to obtain a business license pursuant to this article shall apply to the town administrator for each license required by this article prior to beginning operations. The information shall be submitted on a form provided by the town administrator, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation, or some other entity; 
(2)	The address where the business is conducted and a mailing address for the business, if different; 
(3)	All telephone numbers applicable to business; 
(4)	The start date in which the business will begin in the town, along with the application date; 
(5)	The name and address of the person filling out the application and his relationship to the business; 
(6)	The nature of the business. 
(b)	All applications will be forwarded by the town administrator to the town and county departments that require review and/or approval of the application prior to the license being issued. 
(Code 1995, § 112.04; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.04))
 
Sec. 10-45. Refusal or revocation of license.
(a)	The town administrator shall refuse to issue a business license or shall revoke a license for the following reasons: 
(1)	The applicant fails or refuses to provide all information required in the application. 
(2)	Approval of zoning certificate or any other applicable inspections is denied. 
(b)	Upon revocation of any business license, it shall be unlawful for the person to whom such license was granted to continue to conduct such business. 
(Code 1995, § 112.05; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.05))
 
Sec. 10-46. Revocation.
(a)	The town administrator shall revoke a license if a reason exists to revoke it as set forth in section 10-45. Before revoking a license, the town administrator shall give the licensee written notice of the grounds for revocation, in accordance with section 10-45. The licensee, within ten days of receipt of written notice, may require in writing a conference with the town administrator. The request shall specify the reasons why the license should not be revoked. The town administrator shall arrange the conference within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days. 
(b)	If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days of receipt of written notice, the town administrator shall revoke the license. If the licensee requests a conference, the town administrator may not revoke the license until after the conference. If the town administrator revokes a license, the former licensee may apply for a new license at any time thereafter. If the reason for which the license was revoked no longer exists and if no other reason exists for refusing to issue a license, the town administrator shall issue the license in accordance with section 10-44. 
(Code 1995, § 112.06; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.06))
 
Sec. 10-47. Form and content of business license.
A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where the business is conducted (if it is to be conducted at one place), the nature of the business licensed, and the period for which the license is issued. The town administrator shall keep a copy of each license issued. 
(Code 1995, § 112.07; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.07))
 
Sec. 10-48. Assignments.
A license shall not be reassigned or transferable. If a business is sold, the new owner must report the change under section 10-49 and a new license will be issued upon application as required by this article. 
(Code 1995, § 112.08; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.08))
 
Sec. 10-49. Changes in business license during year.
A licensee shall report changes in the information contained in the license application to the town administrator within ten days after the change occurs. 
(1)	If there are no reasons for revoking the license under section 10-45, the town administrator shall reissue a license reflecting the change. 
(2)	If there is a reason for revoking the license under section 10-45, the town administrator shall refuse to reissue a license and shall begin proceedings to revoke the license in accordance with section 10-46. 
(Code 1995, § 112.09; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.09))
 
Sec. 10-50. License shall be for 12 months.
Each business license issued pursuant to this article shall be for 12 months. 
(Code 1995, § 112.10; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.10))
 
Sec. 10-51. Business license required for every separate business.
The obtaining of a business license pursuant to this article for any given business shall not relieve the person obtaining the same from the obligation to obtain a separate license for any other business that person may carry on, it being the intent of this article that business licenses prescribed shall be cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided. 
(Code 1995, § 112.11; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.11))
 
Sec. 10-52. License required for every place of business.
A business license issued pursuant to this article is only valid for the business conducted at that place and by the licensee named therein. Every person doing business in more than one factory, mill, warehouse, store, stall, stand or other place of business shall secure a separate license for each place of business, unless the places of business are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with an opening into each other and are operated as a unit. If the business is moved or if the licensee sells to another, then a new license is necessary. 
(Code 1995, § 112.12; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.12))
 
Sec. 10-53. License must be displayed at the place of business.
Every license must be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of the licensee named in the license, or, if the licensee has no fixed place of business, the licensee must keep the same wherever the business is being operated and where it can be inspected at any time by the proper municipal official. 
(Code 1995, § 112.13; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.13))
 
Sec. 10-54. Fees; no refunds allowed.
Each licensee shall, before a business license may be issued by the town, pay an administrative fee to be set by the town administrator, but not to exceed $35.00. No business license fee shall be refunded, in part or in whole, in any case where the licensee discontinues the business before the end of the period for which the license was issued. 
(Code 1995, § 112.14; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.14))
 
Sec. 10-55. Zoning compliance.
No business license shall be issued unless the business to be engaged in at the location specified shall be in compliance with the town's land use ordinance. The town administrator shall develop a zoning compliance statement to be verified by the planning department on each application for a license pursuant to this article, and no license shall issue until such verification is obtained. In the event that it is determined by the planning department that any licensee or applicant for a business license is conducting or desires to conduct a business activity pursuant to a business license which activity would be in violation of any provision of the land use ordinance with respect to permitted and prohibited uses, the town administrator shall refuse to issue the license, and shall so notify the licensee or applicant in writing. 
(Code 1995, § 112.15; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.15))
 
Sec. 10-56. Registry of businesses licensed.
The town administrator shall maintain a registry of each business licensed pursuant to this article, and the same shall be made available to the town's fire department and police department, in order that emergency response personnel may be informed as to the business uses of property within the town. 
(Code 1995, § 112.21; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.21))
 
Sec. 10-57. Exemptions.
(a)	Any person conducting door-to-door activities of a political of religious nature shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Any recognized house of worship regardless of religious affiliation, creed or denomination shall be exempt from payment of the business registration fee but shall be required to annually file a business registration application for the purposes of ensuring the public health, safety and welfare of the town. 
(Code 1995, § 112.22; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.22))
 
Secs. 10-58—10-87. Reserved.
 
Subdivision II. Pawnbrokers and Currency Converters
 
Sec. 10-88. Pawnbroker's license required.
(a)	Pursuant to G.S. 66-390, any person wishing to operate a pawnshop, or conduct any pawn or pawn transaction shall first obtain a pawnbroker's license. The license shall be obtained through the same procedure set out in this article, except that, in addition to the information required under section 10-44, the petitioner shall submit the following, as required by G.S. 66-390: 
(1)	A statement indicating the amount of net assets or capital proposed to be used by the petitioner in operation of the business (which shall be accompanied by an unaudited statement from an accountant or certified public accountant verifying the information contained in the accompanying statement); 
(2)	An affidavit by the petitioner that he has not been convicted of a felony; and 
(3)	A certificate from the town's chief of police, or the state bureau of investigation that the petitioner has not been convicted of a felony. 
(b)	The petitioner, under this section, may arrange for the SBI to provide the required certificate, which must be sent directly from the SBI by mail addressed to the town administrator. Otherwise, the town administrator shall forward applications for pawnbroker's licenses to the police department for verification. In order to recoup the cost of the certification required under this section, if performed by the police department, the town administrator may establish a fee in addition to the $35.00 maximum business license fee authorized by this article, not to exceed $75.00. 
(Code 1995, § 112.30; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.30))
 
Sec. 10-89. Bond.
Pursuant to G.S. 66-399, any pawnbroker licensed under this article shall, at the time of receiving the license, file with the town a bond payable to the town in the sum of $5,000.00, to be executed by the licensee and by two responsible sureties or a surety company licensed to do business in the state and acceptable in the sole discretion of the town, which shall be for the faithful performance of the requirements and obligations pertaining to the business so licensed. The town may sue for forfeiture of the bond upon a breach thereof. Any person who obtains a judgment against a pawnbroker and upon which judgment execution is returned unsatisfied may maintain an action in that person's own name upon the bond, to satisfy the judgment. 
(Code 1995, § 112.31; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.31))
 
Sec. 10-90. Refusal to issue license; revocations.
The town administrator shall refuse to issue a license required by section 10-88 pursuant to sections 10-45 and 10-46, or in the case that the petitioner fails to supply any additional information as required by section 10-88 or state law. In revoking a license, the town administrator shall follow the same procedure set out in this article, which shall constitute the hearing required by G.S. 66-390(d). 
(Code 1995, § 112.32; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.32))
 
Sec. 10-91. Exemptions.
(a)	The following businesses/persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this article unless otherwise regulated under G.S. 66-385 through 66-399 (pawnbrokers and cash converters), G.S. 66-405 through 66-419 (precious metals) and G.S. 66-420 through 66-439 (secondary metals): 
(1)	A person or business whose only business transactions with secondhand goods in the town consist exclusively of donated items and/or purchases from 501(c)(3) organizations. 
(2)	A person or business whose only business transactions with secondhand goods in the town consist of the sale of personal property acquired for household or other personal use such as garage sales, yard sales, estate sales and/or auctions held by a licensed auctioneer. 
(3)	A person or business whose only business transactions with secondhand goods in the town consist of a display space, booth or table maintained for displaying or selling merchandise at any trade show, convention, festival, fair, flea market, swap meet or similar event that is not in a fixed location. 
(4)	Fixed location antique dealers whose sole business involves the buying, selling and trading of antiques. 
(5)	Businesses whose sole business involves the buying, selling, trading, and selling on consignment of clothing, shoes, books and animals. 
(6)	Auction house businesses whose sole business involves the buying, selling and trading of property by auction open to the public. 
(7)	Businesses whose sole business involves the buying, selling, and trading of property registered by the state department of transportation, division of motor vehicles. 
(b)	Purchase or exchange transactions with a fair market value totaling less than $25.00 shall be exempt from the provisions of this article unless otherwise regulated under G.S. 66-385 through 66-399 (pawnbrokers and cash converters), G.S. 66-405 through 66-419 (precious metals) and G.S. 66-420 through 66-439 (secondary metals). 
(Code 1995, § 112.33; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.33))
 
Sec. 10-92. Electronic recordkeeping required.
(a)	Every secondhand dealer shall obtain the statutorily-required information for each purchase transaction. 
(b)	All secondhand dealers shall further obtain the following information when purchasing or exchanging secondhand goods from a seller at the secondhand dealer's place of business: 
(1)	A clear and accurate description of the property, including model and serial number if indicated on the property; 
(2)	The name, residence address, telephone number and date of birth of the seller; 
(3)	The date and time of the sale; 
(4)	Type of identification and the identification number accepted from the seller; 
(5)	A description of the seller, including approximate height, weight, sex and race; and 
(6)	Amount of consideration given for the property. 
(c)	All secondhand dealers shall, within 48 hours of the transaction, electronically submit the information required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section to the town police department. At the designation of the chief of police, such transmissions shall be made to the agency or company that the police department contracts to provide online data pertaining to reported stolen goods. 
(d)	In the event that a secondhand dealer does not have online access, or a technological failure prevents a secondhand dealer from reporting electronically, the secondhand dealer shall immediately notify the police department of the failure and have physical records of the information required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section submitted each regular business day to the police department. Upon resolution of the technological failure, the secondhand dealer shall submit the required information electronically to the police department from each regular business day the technological failure existed. 
(e)	Any secondhand dealer, with the exception of secondary metal recyclers, convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00. Secondary metal recyclers convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the provisions set forth in G.S. 66-429. 
(Code 1995, § 112.34; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.34))
 
Secs. 10-93—10-112. Reserved.
 
Subdivision III. Video Gaming
 
Sec. 10-113. Registration.
Any business containing or operating the following identified devices will be subject to additional taxation as outlined below, regardless of the nature or type of business or the incidental or direct nature of said devices in the operation of said business. All such devices will be taxed separately and annually as outlined below. 
(Code 1995, § 112.40; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.40))
 
Sec. 10-114. Applicability.
Regardless of any and all additional taxes or regulations mandated by federal, state or local government, the following taxes shall apply and be payable to the town. Such taxes are due on July 1 of each year and must be paid directly to the town on that date unless other arrangements are made in writing with the town tax collector to allow for monthly or quarterly payments. Businesses operating outside of such written arrangements will be considered non-compliant and will be subject to the criminal penalties and remedies outlined within this division. 
(Code 1995, § 112.41; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.41))
 
Sec. 10-115. Payment.
The business pays the business registration fee and registers the gaming terminals with the town as required in this division. 
(1)	An annual video gaming terminal license tax of $500.00 per business location and $2,000.00 per gaming terminal is hereby levied on each business within the town which has one or more gaming terminals. 
(2)	A person shall apply to the tax collector for each license required by this article no less than 30 days before the date the tax is due. 
(Code 1995, § 112.42; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.42))
 
Sec. 10-116. Application.
The application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by the tax collector, shall contain: 
(1)	The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation or some other entity; 
(2)	The nature of the business; 
(3)	Where the business is conducted; 
(4)	An address where notices and statements may be mailed to as required by this article; and 
(5)	Any other information the tax collector determines to be necessary to compute the amount of tax due. 
(Code 1995, § 112.43; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.43))
 
Sec. 10-117. Additional requirements.
(a)	In addition to the application required above, businesses with one or more gaming terminals shall submit a registration form to the tax collector signed under oath and witnessed by a notary public, on a form provided by the town and containing, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner of each gaming terminal; 
(2)	The type of gaming terminal and its serial number; 
(3)	The identity of the manufacturer of each gaming terminal, including the address and telephone number of each manufacturer; and 
(4)	The date the gaming terminal was placed in service at the business location. 
(b)	No gaming terminal may be moved to another location within the town without completion of a new registration form or written notice to the tax collector that the gaming terminal has been removed from service within the town's corporate limits. The tax collector, or his designee, is hereby authorized to enter upon any business premises where gaming terminals are located, during the usual operating hours of the business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with this article. 
(Code 1995, § 112.44; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.44))
 
Sec. 10-118. Penalties.
(a)	Criminal remedies. Conducting business within this town without having paid the privilege license tax imposed by this article, or without a valid license issued in accordance with this article, or without posting a license in compliance with regulations is a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in G.S. 105-109. Failure to provide the registration required by this section shall be a violation of this division and is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. 14-4 and subject to a fine of $500.00. Each day that a person conducts business in violation of this article is a separate offense. Payment of a fine imposed in criminal proceedings in accordance with this section does not relieve a person of the liability for taxes imposed under this article. 
(b)	Equitable remedies. In addition to the criminal remedies set forth in subsection (a) of this section and in compliance with G.S. 160A-175(d), the town may seek an injunction against any person who conducts a business in violation of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 112.45; Ord. of 10-23-2018, exh. A(112.45))
 
Sec. 10-119. Mobile food vendor regulation.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Mobile food site means an individual parcel of land where mobile food vending is permitted to occur on a continuing basis. 
Mobile food vending means commercial food service sales by a mobile food vendor on a parcel of land outside right-of-way areas. Sites approved for mobile food vending are classified as mobile food sites. 
Mobile food vendor means an individual who owns and operates a vehicle (truck or trailer with a maximum of two axles) that includes a mobile kitchen that supports the sale and/or preparation of food and beverages which is licensed and approved for walk-up customers. 
(b)	Temporary mobile food sales. Temporary mobile food vendors, pushcarts or stands may be allowed in all nonresidential districts by special permit only and be meeting the following standards: 
(1)	Display of permit. Any temporary mobile food vendor must possess and prominently display in an area visible to all patrons a valid permit from the county health department attesting to the sanitary nature of the facility. Additionally, all temporary mobile food vendors must possess and prominently display a valid privilege license from the town. 
(2)	Health department approval. Any food service that sells, prepares or serves food must obtain an approved mobile food service permit from the county health department and is subject to inspection in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(3)	Proximity to public right-of-way. All sales shall be conducted at least ten feet away from all public rights-of way. 
(4)	Hours of operation. Temporary food vendors and stands shall be allowed to operate from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. with specific hours of operation indicated on the temporary use permit. Locations within 200 feet of a residential use may be further restricted as deemed appropriate by staff evaluation of conditions. 
(c)	Mobile food vending.
(1)	Use districts: heavy industrial, light industrial, community-shopping, community-shopping type II, mountain village, and transitional. 
No off premises signage or signage visible from any public space or right-of-way will be permissible as part of these mobile food vending operations. Signage in violation of this permitting will be considered grounds for revocation of the mobile food vending permit and/or fines and penalties normally associated with violation of the municipal sign ordinance. 
(2)	Permitting of mobile food vending as a special use category shall be permissible in the following zoning districts: heavy industrial, light industrial, community-shopping, community-shopping mountain village, and transitional. Special use permits may be issued by the board of aldermen or the town administrator on a temporary basis (not to exceed five days) for special events, fairs, festivals, or similar occasions recognized by the town. 
(3)	In all cases, signage attached to a vehicle or trailer shall not exceed 32 square feet per vehicle including lettering and logo. A single attached menu not exceeding six square feet is also permitted. 
(d)	Permitting the mobile food vendor. A mobile food vendor is required to obtain a permit for each separately approved mobile food site. Permits will only be issued where all of the necessary conditions can and are met. The following regulations will apply to all mobile food vendors: 
(1)	A mobile food vendor is permitted to vend at more than one site, but each site must be separately permitted and approved with an individual permit. 
(2)	Mobile food vendor permits must be renewed annually as with all privilege licenses. 
(3)	A copy of a valid, approved permit from the county health department and the town must be prominently displayed so that it is visible to the public at point of sale. 
(4)	Copies of all county health department, department of motor vehicle and other pertinent records will be submitted by the proposed permittee at the time the permit application is submitted. Failure to include this documentation may be used as cause to reject the permit application. 
(5)	Operation of a mobile food vending business without the necessary permits will be considered a criminal Class III misdemeanor and enforceable as such. Violations may also be considered as violation of the chapter 54 and enforceable with the criminal and civil penalties contained therein and as amended from time to time by the board of aldermen. 
(e)	Other requirements for mobile food vendors.
(1)	No mobile food vendors will be permitted to vend in a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way that has not been duly and legally closed by the town as part of a recognized special event. 
(2)	All mobile food vendors will submit a site plan detailing the location, ingress, egress, sanitation, electrical, plumbing, parking and other similar facilities by means of a scale drawing to municipal staff at the time application for a permit is tendered. 
(3)	No mobile food vendor shall be permitted in any space or area in which municipal staff determines that there exists a significant risk to the motoring or pedestrian public from said location. 
(4)	All mobile food vendors are required to maintain current and valid permits necessary for the operation of such facilities as dictated by the county health department and the town at all times during which they are in operation. The town hereby defers to the county health department on issues related to the sanitary preparation and storage of food and beverages. 
(5)	All mobile food vendors will remove their vehicles, equipment and personage from the mobile food site during hours of non-operation. 
(6)	Aside from special events and or festivals that are permitted by the town, mobile food vendors are required to operate at the specific location and during the specific hours outlined on their permit. Requests to modify hours of operation and/or location within the municipality require two full business days for administrative approval. 
(7)	Mobile food vendors will be limited to the sale of food and non-alcoholic beverages. The sale of all other merchandise and items is hereby specifically prohibited. 
(8)	Mobile food vendors will be encouraged to provide recyclable and or compostable containers, cups and utensils to their patrons. 
(9)	Mobile food vendors shall not encroach upon or encourage the use of private or public park or picnic facilities as a dining area unless prior written permission is received from the relevant property owner. 
(10)	Mobile food vendors are prohibited from bringing tables or chairs for the use of their patrons to the site. Any chairs or tables must be exclusively for the use of paid vendor staff. Additionally, shelters or umbrellas to provide shade or elemental protection for patrons are specifically prohibited. 
(11)	Mobile food vendors must provide at least one easily accessible garbage receptacle for their patrons during all hours of operation. This receptacle must be collected by the business owner and disposed of in accordance with law. Mobile food vendors should have no expectation that the town will collect their refuse and are hereby advised that the town will not do so and that dumping such refuse into the municipal waste stream is cause for revocation of permit as well as civil and criminal penalties as outlined in law. 
(12)	In areas in which readily accessible public restrooms are unavailable, the town may require that temporary sanitary facilities be established and maintained. 
(13)	In the event that electrical power is run from an existing business or building to a mobile food vendor, it is a requirement that electrical cords not be placed in a location or manner in which they present an undue hazard to the public by means of electrocution, tripping, or other conspicuous and reasonable danger as determined by town staff. 
(14)	Operation of a generator to provide electrical power for a mobile food vendor, either directly or indirectly, must not take place any nearer than 100 feet from a residential use or district. In addition, noise levels must always maintain compliance with the municipal noise ordinance of the town. 
(15)	All mobile food vendors are specifically required to maintain compliance with the municipal lighting ordinance at all times. 
(16)	Mobile food vendors are subject to random inspection by municipal staff to ensure compliance with any and all portions of this and other applicable local ordinances. 
(f)	Revocation of permit. Failure to maintain, comply or adhere to the standards set forth in this section are grounds for immediate revocation of the mobile food vendor permit. Revocation of said permit will require a minimum of 30 days to elapse before re-application can be accepted by municipal staff. Additional civil and or criminal penalties may apply based upon the specific conditions and violations of local ordinances. 
(Code 1995, § 112.37; Ord. of 7-17-2012)
 
Secs. 10-120—10-136. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. BUSINESS REGISTRATION PERMIT
 
Sec. 10-137. Application of division.
The business permit issued under this division shall apply to persons operating or carrying on any businesses not specifically exempted which are physically located within the town limits. 
(Code 1995, § 113.01)
 
Sec. 10-138. Obtaining business permit.
No person shall engage in any business upon which a business permit is imposed by this division without having first obtained a permit. The fee for business permits shall be $25.00. 
(Code 1995, § 113.02)
 
Sec. 10-139. Due dates.
(a)	The business permit required by this division is issued as of July 1 for each fiscal year. On any business which immediately prior to July 1 has been operating under a duly issued business permit, the permit shall be renewed on or before July 1. 
(b)	The business permit shall be obtained immediately before such business has begun any business activity. Failure to obtain a business permit prior to July 1 of each year or prior to instigating business activity is a violation of this division and may result in fines of $25.00 per day per offense. 
(Code 1995, § 113.03)
 
Sec. 10-140. Separate businesses.
The business permit imposed by this division shall not relieve the person for obtaining any other business permit imposed by this division for any other business he may carry on. Every person doing business in more than one location shall secure a separate permit for each such place of business, unless such places of business are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and open into each other, and are operated as a unit. 
(Code 1995, § 113.04)
 
Sec. 10-141. Applications.
(a)	Every application for a business permit under this division shall be made in writing to the town administrator or his designee upon a form to be provided by the town administrator or his designee. Such application shall be signed either by the applicant or by his agent, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Complete and exact name under which the business is proposed to be operated. 
(2)	If the business is proposed to be operated by an individual under any assumed name, the name of such individual and his address. 
(3)	If the business is a partnership, the name and address of each partner. 
(4)	If the business is a corporation, the name and address of the president and of the secretary of the corporation, and the location of the principal office. 
(5)	Nature of the business for which permit is desired. 
(6)	Proposed location. 
(b)	In addition, the applicant shall furnish to the town administrator or his designee any other information required by the town administrator or his designee in order to enable the town to determine the proper classification of the applicant. 
(c)	Every solicitor applying for a business permit shall furnish to the town administrator or his designee the name and address of the person whom he represents, together with a description of the goods or services offered for sale. 
(d)	Every business or person that prepares or serves food and/or beverages for sale to the general public must provide proof of their county health permit. 
(Code 1995, § 113.05)
 
Sec. 10-142. Notice of quitting business.
All businesses that sell out their business or stock of goods or fixtures or shall quit business for any reason whatsoever, shall notify the town administrator or his designee of that fact within 48 hours immediately prior to the date the business sells out their business or stock of goods or fixtures, or quits business. 
(Code 1995, § 113.06)
 
Sec. 10-143. Term of business permit.
A permit issued to a new business shall be effective on the day it begins operating and shall expire on June 30 of the town's fiscal year. A business permit issued for each subsequent fiscal year shall be effective July 1 and shall expire on June 30 of the town's fiscal year. 
(Code 1995, § 113.07)
 
Sec. 10-144. Procedure if other approval or permit required.
In any case where other approval or permit is required of any permittee, the town administrator or his designee shall not issue a permit until such approval or permit has been presented to the town administrator or his designee. 
(Code 1995, § 113.08)
 
Sec. 10-145. Contents of permit; official copies of same.
Every business permit shall show the name of the permittee, the nature of the business, the location thereof (if it is to be operated at a fixed place), and the time for which issued. The town administrator or his designee shall keep a record of every permit issued. 
(Code 1995, § 113.09)
 
Sec. 10-146. Display of business permit.
Every business permit must be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of the permittee named in the permit, or, if the permit has not a fixed place of business, such permit must keep the same displayed on his chest, hanging from a lanyard or clipped to their garment, so that the name, type of permit and date of expiration is visible wherever such business is being operated and where it can be inspected at any time by any proper town official. 
(Code 1995, § 113.10)
 
Sec. 10-147. Assignments and transfers.
Every business permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be a personal privilege and shall not be assignable or transferred. 
(Code 1995, § 113.11)
 
Sec. 10-148. Change in location of business.
No business permit for a fixed location shall be changed so as to cover the conduct of such business at any other place. When a permittee proposes to move a business to another location in the town, the permittee must obtain a new business permit to conduct business at such proposed new location. 
(Code 1995, § 113.12)
 
Sec. 10-149. Refusal or revocation of business permit, generally.
If it shall be made to appear to the town administrator and/or his designee and the town administrator and/or his designee shall determine that any permittee or applicant for a business permit is conducting or desires to conduct a business activity that is prohibited or unlawful under the state law or would be in violation of any provision of this Code with respect to permitted and prohibited uses or any significant provisions of the building regulations affecting public safety, he shall: 
(1)	Refuse to issue a business permit to such applicant and so notify him in writing. 
(2)	In the case of a permittee, notify such permittee in writing that the business permit is revoked with a statement of the facts which provide a basis therefor. 
(3)	In the event of a violation or revocation, the person shall have seven days in which to file an appeal with the town administrator or his designee to request a hearing before the planning and zoning board of adjustment. Upon appeal, the planning and zoning board of adjustment shall hold a hearing on the appeal and make a final determination thereof with respect to the zoning use, application for a business permit or the revocation thereof. 
(4)	In the case of a permittee, the filing of a timely appeal shall stay the revocation pending hearing and final determination by the board of adjustment. 
(Code 1995, § 113.13)
 
Sec. 10-150. Exemptions.
The following businesses are exempt from the requirements of this division as indicated below: 
(1)	Any not-for-profit business operated for a religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal purpose, if the entire gross income of the business is used for religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal purpose, is exempt from the requirements of this division unless they conduct sales to the general public, or unless this business includes group homes, day cares or other type of care facilities. 
(2)	All not-for-profit religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal organizations who conduct sales to the general public and the proceeds from this organization's sales are used exclusively for nonprofit purposes. No income shall be provided to any individual conducting these sales and no reimbursement shall be provided other than the cost of the merchandise sold and the actual cost to prepare and market these goods. Persons vending under this division shall file with the town administrator or his designee a letter from the religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal organization stating: 
a.	The name and address of the organization. 
b.	A list of its principal officers. 
c.	A brief statement of the religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal purpose for which the proceeds shall be used. 
d.	The names, addresses, locations of the vendors and the dates during which they will vend. 
e.	A statement of the estimated percentage of proceeds that shall be applied to those purposes after deducting the cost of the merchandise sold and the actual cost to prepare these goods. A statement that no income shall be provided to any individual conducting these sales. Such vendors shall comply with all provisions of this division. 
(3)	Any not-for-profit business that operates group homes, day cares or other types of care facilities for a nonprofit religious, educational, civic, patriotic, charitable, or fraternal purpose shall comply with all business permit provisions of this division. 
(Code 1995, § 113.14)
 
Secs. 10-151—10-168. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 10-169. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person who transports goods from place to place and sells or offers for sale the goods, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers for sale any goods from any vehicle or device, provided that any person who separates the acts of sale and delivery for the purpose of evading the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler. 
Solicitor means any person who travels from place to place taking or offering to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance, and any person who uses or occupies any building or premises for the sole purpose of taking or offering to take order for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal services to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance. 
Transient vendor means any person who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods and who, for the purpose, uses or occupies any building or premises, provided that no person shall be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by conducting a transient business in association with any permanently established merchant. 
(Code 1995, § 111.01)
 
Sec. 10-170. Registration.
Each and every person doing business in the town as a peddler, solicitor, or transient vendor shall file with the clerk, on a form to be provided for the purpose, a statement setting forth the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of individual filing the statement; 
(2)	Name and address of principal or employer if individual is an agent or employee; 
(3)	Credentials showing relationship of agent or employee; 
(4)	Description of individual filing statement including height, weight, sex, age, color, and distinguishing characteristics, if any; 
(5)	The goods to be sold or offered for sale, or the type of services to be rendered; 
(6)	The period of time during which the business will be carried on in the town; and 
(7)	Description of automobile or other vehicle to be used in the business, including the make, model, body style, color, and license number. 
(Code 1995, § 111.02)
 
Sec. 10-171. Door-to-door activities prohibited.
Its shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor, or transient vendor or other seller of merchandise to go in, or on, private residences or the premises thereof, in the town without having be requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant, for the purpose of advertising, peddling, or selling merchandise. 
(Code 1995, § 111.03)
 
Chapter 14 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 14-1. Findings of fact.
(a)	The floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the occupancy in floodprone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 1, § B; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-2. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions within floodprone areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 1, § C; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-3. Objectives.
The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(1)	Protect human life, safety, and health; 
(2)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions; 
(5)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that are located in floodprone areas; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas; and 
(7)	Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special flood hazard area. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 1, § D; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure located on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building. 
Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the floor area or height of a building or structure. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated Zone AO on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard. (See Special flood hazard area (SFHA).) 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means a determination of the water surface elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. (See Structure.) 
Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved by the U.S. Department of the Interior in cooperation with the state department of cultural resources through the state historic preservation officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in 1980. 
Chemical storage facility means a building, portion of a building, or exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically reactive products. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials. 
Disposal means, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwater. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of street, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance means the insurance coverage provided under the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published. 
Flood zone means a geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administrator and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain development permit means any type of permit that is required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of any development activity. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combinations thereof, which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Floodprone area. (See Floodplain.) 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities, structures, and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Freeboard means the height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation plus the freeboard establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
Functionally-dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term "functionally-dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Hazardous waste management facility, as defined in G.S. 130A-290 et seq., means a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste. 
Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Registry; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in communities with a certified local government (CLG) program; or 
(4)	Certified as contributing to the historical significance of an historic district designated by a community with a certified local government (CLG) program. 
Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) means the elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the building. 
Lowest floor means lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than the basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Market value means the building value, not including the land value and that of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or adjusted tax assessed values. 
Mean sea level, for purposes of this chapter, means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs) shown of a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum used. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
Non-encroachment area means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as designated in the flood insurance study report. 
Person means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, government, governmental subdivision, agency or instrumentality, public corporation or any other legal or commercial entity. 
Post-FIRM means construction or other development for which the start of construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map. 
Pre-FIRM means construction or other development for which the start of construction occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance rate map. 
Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the structure is above ground. 
Public safety and/or nuisance means anything which is injurious to the safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the fee passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Recreational vehicle (RV) means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Reference level is the top of the lowest floor for structures within special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO. 
Regulatory flood protection elevation means the base flood elevation plus the freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established, this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Salvage yard means any nonresidential property used for the storage, collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, including, but not limited to, vehicles, appliances and related machinery. 
Solid waste disposal facility means any facility involved in the disposal of solid waste as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(35). 
Solid waste disposal site, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(36), means any place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or any other method. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain subject to a one-percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in section 14-6. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation on piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas, liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of the term "substantial improvement." Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)	Any correction of existing violations of state or community health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)	Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in articles II and III of this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation (WSE) means the height, in relation to mean sea level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. The term "watercourse" includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
Zone A designates the flood hazard area without base flood elevations established. 
Zone AE is the one-percent annual chance (100-year) floodplain with base flood elevations established. 
Zone X-shaded is the 0.2 percent annual chance (500-year) floodplain. 
Zone X-unshaded designates areas outside the 500-year floodplain. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 2; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-5. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 3, § A; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-6. Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.
(a)	The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), for the county dated January 6, 2010, which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(b)	The initial flood insurance rate maps are as follows for the jurisdictional area at the initial date: Town of Woodfin, dated 2/1/1980. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 3, § B; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-7. Establishing of floodplain development permit.
A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the provisions of section 14-6. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 3, § C; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-8. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 3, § D; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 3, § E; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the board of aldermen; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 3, § F; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 3, § G; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-12. Penalties for violation.
(a)	Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $25,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 120 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(b)	In addition to revoking or refusing to issue a floodplain development permit, the floodplain administrator or other authorized agent may refuse or cause to be refused a certificate of occupancy for any building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site in question or cause the town permitting office to refuse to issue any permit that has been applied for, or cause the county permitting office to freeze (or suspend) active permits and inspections until the applicant has taken the corrective procedures set forth in the notice and cured the violations described therein. 
(c)	Failure to remove any artificial obstruction or enlargement or replacement thereof, that violates this chapter or the provision of any permit issued under the authority of this chapter, may subject the person in violation of this chapter to a fine of not more than $5,000.00 per day, and such fine shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each day that the failure continues after written notice from the board of aldermen of the town. Any fine imposed hereunder shall be a civil penalty which may be recovered by the town or its authorized agent in a civil action in the nature of a debt. 
(d)	In addition to or in lieu of other remedies, the board of aldermen, by and through its floodplain administrator or other authorized agent, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain or prevent any violation of this chapter or of the provisions of any permit issued under the authority of this chapter, or to require any person, firm or corporation that has committed a violation to remove a violating obstruction or restore the conditions existing before the placement of the obstruction by any manner or means available at law or in equity. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 3, § H; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Secs. 14-13—14-42. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
 
Sec. 14-43. Designation of floodplain administrator.
The zoning administrator or his designee, hereinafter referred to as the floodplain administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 4, § A; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-44. Floodplain development application, permit and certification requirements.
(a)	Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to any development activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall be presented to the floodplain administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit: 
(1)	A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain development: 
a.	The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems, grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and other development; 
b.	The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section 14-6, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard area; 
c.	Flood zone designation of the proposed development area as determined in section 14-6; 
d.	The boundary of the floodway or non-encroachment area as determined in section 14-6; 
e.	The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in sections 14-6, 14-45 or 14-72; 
f.	The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(2)	Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a special flood hazard area including, but not limited to: 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference level (including basement) of all structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and 
c.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed; 
(3)	If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65) with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not limited to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures; 
(4)	A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this article are met. These details include, but are not limited to: 
a.	The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); 
b.	Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with section 14-71(4)c when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zone A, AO, AE, and A1-30; 
(5)	Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor; 
(6)	Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(7)	Certification that all other local, state and federal permits required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received; 
(8)	Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of section 14-71(6) and (7) are met; 
(9)	A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation, when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on the plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation. 
(b)	Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	A description of the development to be permitted under the floodplain development permit. 
(2)	The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed development in accordance with available data specified in section 14-6. 
(3)	The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the reference level and all attendant utilities. 
(4)	The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the protection of all public utilities. 
(5)	All certification submittal requirements with timelines. 
(6)	A statement that no fill material or other development shall encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as applicable. 
(7)	The flood opening requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE, or A1-30. 
(8)	Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if applicable (i.e., parking, building access and limited storage only). 
(c)	Certification requirements.
(1)	Elevation certificates. 
a.	An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is recommended prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to have established an elevation reference level prior to construction. The floodplain administrator can review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the beginning of construction. 
b.	A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after construction is completed, and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy. 
(2)	Floodproofing certificate. If nonresidential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy. 
(3)	If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of section 14-71(3)b. 
(4)	If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit. 
(5)	Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification requirements specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section: 
a.	Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of section 14-71(6)a; 
b.	Temporary structures meeting requirements of section 14-71(7); and 
c.	Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting requirements of section 14-71(8). 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 4, § B; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-45. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
The floodplain administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the following duties: 
(1)	Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to ensure that the requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to ensure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received. 
(3)	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of crime control and public safety, division of emergency management, state coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(4)	Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained. 
(5)	Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of section 14-74 are met. 
(6)	Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and substantially improved structures, in accordance with section 14-44(b)(3). 
(7)	Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of section 14-44(b)(3). 
(8)	Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public utilities in accordance with the provisions of section 14-44(b)(3). 
(9)	When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with the provisions of sections 14-44(b)(3) and 14-74(2). 
(10)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(11)	When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in accordance with section 14-6, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE) data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source including data developed pursuant to section 14-72(2)b, in order to administer the provisions of this article. 
(12)	When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but not floodway or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with section 14-6, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this article. 
(13)	Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of this article and make these records available for public inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended. 
(14)	Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to a floodplain development permit progresses, the floodplain administrator shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(15)	Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation of this article, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reason for the stoppage, and the condition under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(16)	Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The floodplain administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be revoked. 
(17)	May refuse or cause to be refused a certificate of occupancy for any building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site in question, or cause the county permitting office to refuse to issue any permit that has been applied for, or cause the county permitting office to freeze (or suspend) active permits and inspections. 
(18)	Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The floodplain administrator and each member of his inspections department shall have a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action. 
(19)	Follow through with corrective procedures of section 14-46. 
(20)	Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests. 
(21)	Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with section 14-6, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs. 
(22)	Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision (LOMR). 
(23)	Apply and enforce any and all provisions of this article. In determining the amount of any penalty ordered under authority of this article, the floodplain administrator shall give due consideration to the appropriateness of the penalty with respect to the size of the business of the person being charged, the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the person, the record of previous violations, and, in general, the facts and circumstances surrounding the violation. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 4, § C; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-46. Corrective procedures.
(a)	Violations to be corrected. When the floodplain administrator finds violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be in his duty to notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such notification. 
(b)	Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the floodplain administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner's last-known address or by personal service, stating: 
(1)	That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain management regulations; 
(2)	That a hearing will be held before the floodplain administrator at a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and 
(3)	That following the hearing, the floodplain administrator may issue an order affirming, modifying or rescinding the original finding or may enter such other finding or order as the floodplain administrator may deem just and proper consistent with the provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as applicable. 
(c)	Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall find that the building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention ordinance, he shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible. 
(d)	Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may appeal the order to the board of adjustment by giving notice of appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The board of adjustment shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order. Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator may be appealed to the board of adjustment pursuant to the procedure found in section 14-48. 
(e)	Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has been made or fails to comply with an order of the board of aldermen following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 4, § D; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-47. Variance procedures.
(a)	The board of adjustment, as established by the county, hereinafter referred to as the appeal board, shall hear and decide requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	Variances may be issued for: 
(1)	The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and that the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(2)	Functionally-dependent facilities if determined to meet the definition as stated in section 14-4, provided provisions of subsections (i)(2), (3) and (5) of this section have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create not additional threats to public safety. 
(3)	Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements of this section. 
(c)	In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
(1)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined under section 14-4 as a functionally-dependent facility, where applicable; 
(6)	The availability of alternate locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(d)	A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be submitted with the application for a variance. 
(e)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this article. 
(f)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25.00 per $100.00 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance. 
(g)	The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the state upon request. 
(h)	Conditions for variances. 
(1)	Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or ordinances. 
(2)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or non-encroachment area if the variance would not result in any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge. 
(3)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(4)	Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit approval. 
(5)	Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.	A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(i)	A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas, provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)	The use serves a critical need in the community. 
(2)	No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood hazard area. 
(3)	The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation. 
(4)	The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(5)	The county has notified the secretary of the state department of crime control and public safety of its intention to grant a variance at least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 4, § E; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-48. Appeals.
(a)	Types of appeals. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide all appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator. In deciding appeals, it may hear both those based upon an allegedly improper or erroneous interpretation of this article and those based upon alleged hardship resulting from strict interpretation of this article. 
(b)	Procedure for filing appeals. No appeal shall be heard by the board of adjustment unless notice thereof is filed within 30 days after the interested party receives notice of the order, requirement, decision or determination by the floodplain administrator. The applicant must file his application for a hearing with the floodplain administrator, who shall act as clerk for the board of adjustment in receiving this notice. All applicants shall be made upon the form specified for that purpose, and all information required thereon shall be complete before an appeal shall be considered as having been filed. 
(c)	Hearings. Hearings shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)	Time. After receipt of notice of appeal, the board chairperson shall schedule the time for a hearing, which shall be at a regular or special meeting within 31 days from the filing of such notice of appeal. 
(2)	Notice of hearing. The board of adjustment shall mail notices of the hearing to the affected parties to the action appealed from, and to such other persons as the floodplain administrator shall direct, at least five days prior to the hearing. Such notice shall state that location of the building or lot, the general nature of the question involved in the appeal, and the time and place of the hearing. 
(3)	Conduct of hearing. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney at the hearing. The order of business for the hearing shall be as follows: 
a.	The chairperson, or such person as he shall direct, shall give a preliminary statement of the case. 
b.	The applicant shall present the argument in support of his application. 
c.	Persons opposed to granting the application shall present the argument against the application. 
d.	Both sides will be permitted to present rebuttals to opposing testimony. 
e.	The chairperson shall summarize the evidence, which has been presented, giving the parties opportunity to make objections or corrections. 
Witnesses may be called and factual evidence may be submitted, but the board of adjustment shall not be limited to consideration of only such evidence as would be admissible in a court of law. The board of adjustment may view the premises before arriving at a decision. All witnesses before the board of adjustment shall be placed under oath and the opposing party may cross examine them. 
(d)	Rehearings. An application for a rehearing may be made in the same manner as provided for an original hearing. Evidence in support of the application shall initially be limited to that which is necessary to enable the board of adjustment to determine whether there has been a substantial change in facts, evidence, or conditions in the case. The application for rehearing shall be denied by the board of adjustment if, from the record, it finds that there has been no substantial change in facts, evidence or conditions. If the board of adjustment finds that there has been a change, it shall thereupon treat the request in the same manner as any other application. 
(e)	Decisions. Decisions shall be made in the following manner: 
(1)	Time. A decision by the board of adjustment shall be made within 30 days from the time of hearing. 
(2)	Form. Written notice by certified or registered mail of the decision in a case shall be given to the applicant by the floodplain administrator as soon as practical after the case is decided. Also, written notice shall be given to owners of the subject property, if not the applicant, and to other persons who have made written request for such notice. The final decision of the board of adjustment shall be shown in the record of the case as entered in the minutes of the board of adjustment and signed by the floodplain administrator and the chairperson upon approval of the minutes of the board of adjustment. Such record shall show the reasons for the determination, with summary of the evidence introduced and the findings of fact made by the board of adjustment. Where a variance is granted, the record shall state in detail any exceptional difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon which the appeal was based and which the board of adjustment finds to exist. The decision may reverse to affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. The record shall state in detail what, if any, conditions and safeguards are imposed by the board of adjustment in connection with the granting of a variance. 
(3)	Expiration of permits. Unless otherwise specified, any order or decision of the board of adjustment granting a variance shall expire if a floodplain development permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy for such use is not obtained by the applicant within one year from the date of the decision. 
(4)	Voting. The concurring vote of four-fifths of members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the floodplain administrator; to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which the board of adjustment is required by this article to pass; or to grant a variance from the provisions of this article. 
(5)	Public record of decisions. The decisions of the board of adjustment, as filed in its minutes, shall be a public record, available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
(f)	Appeals from decision of board of adjustment.
(1)	Appeals from the board of adjustment may be taken to the courts pursuant to G.S. 153A-345 and 153A-349 as the same is effective on and after January 1, 2010 in accordance with Session Law 2009-421. 
(2)	Every final decision granting or denying a permit under this article shall be subject to review by the superior court of the country, with the right of jury trial at the election of the party seeking review. The time and manner of election of a jury trial shall be governed by G.S. 1A-1, Rule 38(b) of the Rules of Civil Procedure. Pending the final disposition of an appeal, no action shall be taken that would be unlawful in the absence of a permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 4, § F; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Secs. 14-49—14-69. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
 
Sec. 14-70. General standards.
In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(3)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages. 
(4)	Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electrical/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches. 
(5)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(6)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(7)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(8)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this article, shall meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this article. 
(9)	Nothing in this article shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this article. 
(10)	New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not be permitted, except by variance as specified in section 14-47(i). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of section 14-44(c). 
(11)	All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(12)	All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(13)	All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(14)	All subdivisions proposals and other development proposals shall have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. 
(15)	When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and substantial improvements. 
(16)	When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood elevation shall apply. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 5, § A; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-71. Specific standards.
In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in sections 14-6 or 14-72, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of section 14-70, are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section 14-4. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section 14-4. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 zones may be floodproofed to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation, provided that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO zones, the floodproofing elevation shall be in accordance with section 14-70. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set forth in section 14-44(c), along with the operational and maintenance plans. 
(3)	Manufactured homes.
a.	New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section 14-4. 
b.	Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the commissioner of insurance pursuant to G.S. 143-143.15. Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required. 
c.	All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the requirements of subsection (4) of this section. 
d.	An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within floodprone areas. This plan shall be filed with and approved by the floodplain administrator and the local emergency management coordinator. 
(4)	Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor: 
a.	Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas; 
b.	Shall be constructed entirely of flood-resistant materials at least to the regulatory flood protection elevation; 
c.	Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet the requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum design criteria: 
1.	A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
3.	If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and exit; 
4.	The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher than one foot above the adjacent grade; 
5.	Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions; and 
6.	Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above. 
(5)	Additions/improvements.
a.	Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are: 
1.	Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more nonconforming than the existing structure. 
2.	A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction. 
b.	Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction. 
c.	Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to the existing structure are: 
1.	Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction, except that the reference level of a lateral addition may be located at the regulatory flood protection elevation in effect at the time the existing structure was built. 
2.	A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new construction. 
(6)	Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either: 
a.	Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or 
b.	Meet all the requirements for new construction. 
(7)	Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the floodplain administrator a plan for the removal of such structure in the event of a hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood warning notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the floodplain administrator for review and written approval: 
a.	A specified time period for which the temporary use will be permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one year; 
b.	The name, address, and telephone number of the individual responsible for the removal of the temporary structure; 
c.	The timeframe prior to the event at which a structure will be removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or immediately upon flood warning notification); 
d.	A copy of the contract of other suitable instrument with the entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and 
e.	Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved. 
(8)	Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met: 
a.	Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation (including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas); 
b.	Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled; 
c.	Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage potential; 
d.	Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters; 
e.	Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the provisions of section 14-70(1); 
f.	All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of section 14-70(4); and 
g.	Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in conformance with the provisions of section 14-71(4)c. 
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation of floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other accessory structures in accordance with section 14-44(c). 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 5, § B; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-72. Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations.
Within the special flood hazard areas designated as approximate Zone A and established in section 14-6, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of section 14-70, shall apply: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)	The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria: 
a.	When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this article and shall be elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in sections 14-70 and 14-71. 
b.	When floodway data is available from a federal, state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas shall also comply with the requirements of sections 14-71 and 14-74. 
c.	All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance with section 14-6 and utilized in implementing this article. 
d.	When base flood elevation (BDE) data is not available from a federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section 14-4. All other applicable provisions of section 14-71 shall also apply. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 5, § D; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-73. Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without established floodways or non-encroachment areas.
Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas: 
(1)	Standards of sections 14-70 and 14-71; and 
(2)	Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 5, § E; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-74. Floodways and non-encroachment areas.
Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within the special flood hazard areas established in section 14-6. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in sections 14-70 and 14-71, shall apply to all development within such areas: 
(1)	No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless: 
a.	It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice and presented to the floodplain administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or 
b.	A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion of the proposed encroachment. 
(2)	If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all development shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(3)	No new manufactured homes shall be permitted. Replacement manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be permitted, provided the following provisions are met: 
a.	The anchoring and the elevation standards of section 14-71(3); and 
b.	The no encroachment standard of subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)	No new habitable structures, including structures used for working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom facilities, shall be permitted in floodways and non-encroachment areas. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 5, § F; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Secs. 14-75—14-91. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 14-92. Effective on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage prevention ordinance.
This article in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted February 1, 1980 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this article shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 6, § A; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Sec. 14-93. Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits.
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the floodplain administrator or his authorized agents before the time of passage of this article; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1995, § 150.156, art. 6, § B; Ord. of 9-16-1973; Ord. of 6-21-1994; Ord. of 10-20-2009)
 
Chapter 18 HOUSING
 
Sec. 18-1. Title.
These are hereby established rules and regulations for the repair or elimination of unfit and/or unsafe housing conditions in the town, which shall be known as "The Standard Housing Ordinance of the Town of Woodfin." 
(Code 1995, § 153.001)
 
Sec. 18-2. Exercise of police powers; authority.
The board of aldermen hereby find and declare that there exist in the town dwellings, which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities, or due to other conditions rendering the dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town, and that a public necessity exists to exercise the police powers of the town pursuant to G.S. 160A-174 et seq., as now hereafter amended, to repair, close, or demolish such dwellings in accordance with the procedure herein provided. 
(Code 1995, § 153.002)
 
Sec. 18-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is remedy and prevent the decay and deterioration of places of human habitation by providing minimum requirements for the protection of the life, health, welfare, safety, and property of the general public and the owners and occupants of places of human habitation. 
(Code 1995, § 153.003)
 
Sec. 18-4. Scope.
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all existing dwellings and all dwellings hereafter constructed within the incorporated areas of the town, which are used or intended for use for human habitation. Demountable dwellings or demountable dwellings being moved and temporarily stored prior to relocation, when used or intended for use for human habitation within the town, shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 153.004)
 
Sec. 18-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment house means any dwelling which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of two or more families living independently of each other in dwelling units. 
Approved means performed in a manner and/or with materials consistent with the North Carolina State Building Code in effect at the time of construction or substantial renovation unless otherwise provided herein. 
Area, as applied to the dimensions of a dwelling, means the maximum horizontal projected area of the dwelling at grade. The term "area," as applied to the dimensions of a room, means the total square footage of floor area between finished walls. 
Basement means a story having a clear height of at least seven feet from finished floor to finished ceiling, the floor level of which is below finished grade but not less than four feet below the average finished grade, having floor and walls of approved construction. 
Boardinghouse means any dwelling unit or that part of any dwelling unit containing one or more rooms in which space is let by the resident owner or operator to three or more tenants. 
Building means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." 
Ceiling height means the clear vertical distance from the finished floor to the finished ceiling. 
Demolish means the tearing down and disposal of the entire dwelling in a lawful manner, leaving the property free and clear of any debris and without holes or pockets. 
Deteriorated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation or unsafe and can be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the standards by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 50 percent of its value, as determined by findings of the town administrator. 
Dilapidated means a dwelling that is unfit for human habitation or unsafe and cannot be repaired, altered, or improved to comply with all of the standards by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 50 percent of its value, as determined by findings of the town administrator. 
Dwelling means any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, including, but not limited to, single-family housing, duplexes, triplexes, quadriplexes, apartment houses, boardinghouses or roominghouses, hotels, motels and other transient places of habitation. 
Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a habitation unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
Enforcement officer means the zoning administrator of the town or any other employee of the town whose assigned duties include the enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter. 
Exit means a clear and unobstructed way of departure from the interior of the dwelling to the exterior at a street or grade level. 
Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, and other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by other recognized and lawful pest elimination method. 
Family means one or more persons living together and having common housekeeping facilities. 
Garbage means the waste produced by the handling, processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of animal or vegetable products used for human consumption. The term "garbage" means and includes any other matter that is also subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors or which before, during or after decay may serve as feeding or breeding material for animals, flies or other insects. 
Habitable space or habitable room means any room or enclosed floor space in a dwelling used or intended for use in living, sleeping, cooking, or eating, including kitchens, but excluding bathrooms, toilets, halls, corridors, pantries, storage space, closets, laundries, and other spaces not used frequently or during extended periods. 
Inspect means the act of examining areas and parts of a dwelling to determine its compliance with the standards set out in this chapter. 
North Carolina State Building Code means any or all volumes of the North Carolina State Building Code as promulgated by the state building code council. 
Occupant means any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple. 
Parties in interest means all individuals, associations and corporations who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof. 
Pier means a post, pole or column of masonry, concrete, steel or pressure treated wood extending from a concrete or masonry footing to and supporting the building or portion thereof. 
Plumbing means the water supply system, sanitary drainage system, vent system, fixtures, and traps and shall include their respective connections, devices, appliances, and appurtenances within the property lines of the premises. 
Public space or common space means space within any dwelling which is open to use by the general public or to occupants of more than one dwelling. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; including, but not limited to, ashes, wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, leaves, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and dirt. 
Story means the part of the dwelling comprised between a floor and the floor or roof next above having required amount of ceiling height. 
Tenant means any person who alone or jointly or severally with others occupies a dwelling under an oral or written lease or holds a legal tenancy in a dwelling. 
Unfit means not fit for human habitation. 
Unsafe means especially dangerous to like because of a dwelling's liability to fire or because of bad conditions of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay, dangerous wiring or heating system, inadequate means of egress, or other causes or conditions enumerated in section 18-7. 
(Code 1995, § 153.005)
 
Sec. 18-6. Administration.
(a)	Enforcement agency.
(1)	The town administrator is hereby designated the public officer to exercise by and through his duly appointed agents, the powers described by this chapter. 
(2)	The zoning administrator is hereby designated as the enforcement officer. 
(b)	Consulting agency.
(1)	The town administrator shall have the authority to request advice and assistance from any public authority or agency he deems appropriate in performing his duties. 
(2)	The departments of the town or other public agencies may report in writing to the town administrator any dwelling or abandoned dwelling they may encounter which is, may be, or is suspected of being unfit for human habitation or unsafe under the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 153.007)
 
Sec. 18-7. Unsafe conditions.
The town administrator shall determine that a dwelling is unsafe and represents a threat to life and property, if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	No operating heating facilities between November 1 and March 30 of any year; 
(2)	No potable water service; 
(3)	No hot water supply; 
(4)	No electricity; 
(5)	Overloaded, non-isolatable electrical circuits or unsafe or exposed electrical wiring; 
(6)	Failing or failed primary structural members that threaten the stability of the dwelling and/or visible structural defects that appear to render the structural members ineffective; 
(7)	Immediate possibility of collapse; 
(8)	Improperly operating or no sanitary facilities; 
(9)	Presence of raw sewage or open sewer, inside the dwelling, whether from broken, plugged or inoperative fixtures or pipes inside the dwelling or migrating into the dwelling from outside; 
(10)	Presence of raw sewage or open sewer outside the building, whether from broken, plugged or inoperative fixtures or pipes inside or outside the building; 
(11)	Presence of uncontained flammable or combustible liquids or gases, poisonous solids, liquids or gases or life or health threatening depletion of oxygen; 
(12)	Missing roof, or part of roof missing; 
(13)	Chimney flues clogged; 
(14)	The primary means of exit or escape in the event of fire or other emergency is blocked or structurally unsafe; 
(15)	Inadequate light and ventilation; 
(16)	Occupancy of habitable space that does not meet below grade occupancy standards; 
(17)	Internal accumulation of garbage; 
(18)	Interior wall sheathing or sheeting that is not present, or has been removed, to a point where there is little or no protection from spread of fire from story to story, or from other habitable spaces to bedrooms; 
(19)	Exterior wall sheathing that is not present, or has been removed to a point where there is little or no protection from the weather, the spread of fire or vermin and vectors; 
(20)	Missing or inoperative smoke detectors and house numbers. 
(Code 1995, § 153.008)
 
Sec. 18-8. Reference standards.
Without excluding other ways and means of determining that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the enforcement officer may apply the information presented in this section as a reference in determining whether a dwelling is in violation of the standards set forth in section 18-7. 
(1)	Facilities.
a.	Sanitary.
1.	Every dwelling shall be furnished with a potable water supply system. The term "potable water system" means direct connection to a well, to a public water utility or equivalent water service delivery system, and does not include water delivered through a hose or via containers. Every dwelling shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet all in good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. 
2.	Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition free from defects, leaks, and obstruction. The term "properly connected" means connected with approved plumbing materials (no radiator hose, duct tape, etc.). The term "properly installed" means continuous piping that met the North Carolina State Building Code in effect at the time of installation. Any new, additional or repair to plumbing must meet the current requirements of the North Carolina Building Code. Provided, however, that the kitchen sink standards, enumerated herein shall not apply to hotels, motels, and other transient places unless kitchen sinks are otherwise required. 
b.	Location of sanitary facilities. All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet, tub or shower and lavatory shall be located in a room (or adjoining rooms) affording privacy to the user. Required bathrooms shall be accessible from habitable rooms, hallways, corridors or other protected or enclosed areas. 
c.	Bathroom access. Bathroom access shall be provided in a manner that does not require an occupant to leave the dwelling to gain access. Privacy of bathrooms shall be afforded by doors complete with privacy hardware intended by the manufacturer for that purpose. 
d.	Water closet, lavatory and bath facilities for boardinghouses. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a roominghouse whenever such facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within the dwelling so as to be private and reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. 
e.	Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling shall have connected to the kitchen sink, lavatory, and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved distribution system connected to a potable water supply. 
f.	Water heating.
1.	Every dwelling shall have water heating facilities which are properly installed and maintained in a safe and good working condition and are capable of heating water to such a temperature so as to permit hot water to be drawn consecutively at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 116 degrees Fahrenheit. Such water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this subsection when the dwelling's heating facilities required under the provisions of this chapter are not in operation. Apartment houses may use a centralized water heating facility capable of delivering an amount of hot water in the quantity and at the temperature described above. 
2.	Water heaters shall be equipped with approved relief valves, which are piped to a point not more than six inches above the floor. The pipe material for the relief valve shall be threaded pipe approved for interior water service lines. 
3.	Provided, however, that the provision in subsection (1)e of this section for hot water supplies for a kitchen sink shall not apply to hotels, motels and other transient dwellings where kitchen sinks are not required. 
g.	Heating.
1.	Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working conditions, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, and bathrooms in every dwelling regulated herein to a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a distance three feet above the floor level, at an outside temperature of 14 degrees Fahrenheit. Each heating system shall have at least one readily adjustable control for regulation of living space temperature in each dwelling unit. Radiator control knobs in good working order shall be regarded as a readily adjustable control. 
2.	Where a central heating system is not provided for a dwelling, the dwelling shall be provided with properly installed base board electric heat, properly installed and properly vented wood or fossil fuel heater, or unvented natural gas heaters having oxygen deletion sensors listed for residential use by UL, ETL, or other state recognized testing laboratory and installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
3.	The following heating devices do not meet the requirements of subsection (1)g2 of this section: 
(i)	Portable electric heating units; and 
(ii)	Unvented fuel burning heaters. 
4.	The use of unvented fuel burning heaters is prohibited in any bedroom. 
h.	Chimneys.
1.	Chimney inspections shall be conducted by certified chimney sweeps. 
2.	Chimneys must be safe for use as specified and intended. The term "specified" means use in connection with specific heating appliances or systems, or limitations of such use. The term "intended" means use in connection with combustion of fuel, for which the following minimum chimney standards apply: 
(i)	Flue liner intact; 
(ii)	Chimney mortar and bricks secure; 
(iii)	Flue unobstructed; 
(iv)	Fireplace firebricks intact; 
(v)	Stove piping placed and secured with clearances as follows: 
A.	Minimum 12-inch brick clearance separation from combustibles; 
B.	Minimum nine-inch air separation for insulated listed stove piping; 
C.	Minimum one-inch air clearance surrounded by six-inch glass fiber insulation and ventilated thimble assembly; or 
D.	Minimum two-inch air separation for insulated listed stove piping with one inch air space between inner and outer chimney components; and as otherwise described in National Fire Protection Association's Standard 211, "Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances," 1992 edition; and 
(vi)	Heating appliance clearances maintained at 36 inches from combustible materials and/or surfaces, except that clearances may be reduced as provided in National Fire Protection Association's Standard 211, "Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances," in its most recent edition. 
3.	Chimneys that do not meet these standards shall be either repaired or sealed. 
i.	Smoke detectors. Every dwelling shall be provided with a smoke detector listed by Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. or other equivalent national testing laboratory on each level of the dwelling and in stairwells, hallways, and other common areas of multiple unit dwellings. Such detectors shall be installed in accordance with either National Fire Protection Association Standard 72, National Fire Alarm Code, chapter 2 or the minimum protection designated in the manufacturer's instructions, which the owner of the rental property shall retain or provide as proof of compliance. 
j.	Street address. Each dwelling shall bear a street address number of a color contrasting with the surface on which the number is mounted, such number to be sufficient in size to be visible from the nearest public street but not less than two inches in height. If the dwelling is not visible from the nearest public street, a sign or standard bearing the address number shall also be placed on the principle public street access point to the dwelling, such number to meet the standards set forth herein. 
(2)	Electrical systems.
a.	Electrical service. Adequate electric service must be provided to the dwelling. The term "adequate" means a minimum of 60 ampere service with no more than five two-wire branch circuits connected and a total connected load of less than ten kilowatts. If a service has six or more two-wire branch circuits, 100 ampere service at a minimum must be provided. If the connected electrical load exceeds the capacity of a 100 ampere service, a service of sufficient ampere capacity to safely bear the connected electrical load shall be furnished. No more than one two-wire branch circuit shall be connected to any fuse, circuit breaker or other approved over current protection device. Drop cords from a neighboring source, generator or similar source are not adequate for the purposes of this chapter. Each new or additional electrical outlet and fixture required by this chapter shall be installed, maintained and connected to a source of electric power in accordance with the provisions of the North Carolina Building Code. 
b.	Lights and outlets.
1.	Every habitable room or space shall contain at least two separate and remote duplex receptacle outlets. 
2.	Bedrooms shall have, in addition, at least one wall switch controlled lighting outlet or ceiling light fixture or permanent fixture controlled by a pull chain. 
3.	In kitchens, three separate, remote and accessible receptacle outlets shall be provided, and a wall or ceiling lighting outlet controlled by a wall switch or fixture pull chain shall be provided. An outlet dedicated to powering an appliance and/or is not easily accessible because it is blocked by an appliance shall not be counted as a separate outlet. In kitchens with less than six linear feet of counter top, two of the three required outlets may be within the counter top space. 
4.	Every hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one ceiling mounted or wall mounted fixture outlet. For the purposes of this section, a laundry closet shall not be considered a laundry room. 
5.	All outlets, switches, wiring and light fixtures shall be safe and operable. No extension cords shall be spliced or used as fixed wiring of a dwelling. Electrical odor, flickering lights, visibly frayed wiring, broken switch plates or outlet plates or failure of a circuit tester check shall be evidence of an unsafe electrical system. 
(3)	Exterior and interior.
a.	Foundation. The building foundation system shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Beneath the dwelling, there must be firm, reasonably dry ground. The term "reasonably dry" means no mud, standing water, running water or evidence of same. Mobile homes shall be set up and secured as required by the State Building Code's Regulations for Manufactured/Mobile Homes. 
b.	Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be reasonably weather-tight, (free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain, dampness, vermin or air to the wall cavity or to the occupied spaces of the building). All siding material shall be kept in repair. The term "kept in repair" means and includes maintenance of wood or other organic building materials from weather damage, repair of cracks or holes exceeding one-quarter inch in width and replacement of wood or other organic components that show visual signs of rot, are soft to the touch or otherwise show evidence of rotting. 
c.	Roofs.
1.	Roofs shall be structurally sound, and maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the dwelling. The following may constitute evidence of defects: 
(i)	Missing shingles; 
(ii)	Flashing missing; 
(iii)	Roof deflection deeper than one-sixth of the depth of the rafter and/or rafters cracked; 
(iv)	Damage to ceilings (ceiling plaster loose or falling, brown spots, etc.), sheet rock hanging, etc. in rooms below roof; or 
(v)	Fire damage. 
2.	No more than three layers of roofing materials (shingles, shakes, roofing) shall be permitted without certification by an architect or engineer registered in the state that the roof will safely support all required live and dead loads pursuant to requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code. 
d.	Means of egress. In multifamily houses having two or more dwelling units above the first story, every dwelling unit above the first story shall have access to at least two exit ways. One common exit is permitted provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.	Maximum distance of travel to reach the exit or stairs from the entrance door to any dwelling unit shall not exceed 30 feet. 
2.	Maximum number of dwelling units served by the exit shall not exceed four per floor. 
3.	Maximum gross area of the dwelling units shall not exceed 3,500 square feet per floor. 
4.	Maximum building height shall be one story above the level of exit discharge. 
e.	Interior floors, walls, and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially vermin proof, shall be kept in sound condition and good repair and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. Interior finish shall be free of excessive holes and cracks. No cardboard or other highly combustible or improper wall finish or ceiling finish shall be allowed. No rotted, fire damaged, or loose flooring shall be allowed. All floors shall be level enough as not to present a tripping hazard. Every bathroom floor surface and kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be readily kept in clean and sanitary condition. 
f.	Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it incapable of carrying normal loads. Termites, termite damage, fire damage, absence of footings or cracked or split wood structural supports are examples of evidence of deterioration. When additional direct support is required, piers shall be used under girders, at wall or other primary support points. Stiff knees shall not be used under girders, at walls or at other primary support points, but may be used for indirect support only. 
g.	Fire stopping and draft stopping. Fire stopping shall be maintained to cut off all concealed draft openings both horizontal and vertical and to form a fire barrier between floors and between the upper floor and the roof space. Draft stopping shall be maintained to cut off all concealed draft openings in floor/ceiling assemblies and in attics. 
(4)	Light and ventilation.
a.	Windows. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be eight percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such light obstructing structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of such room. 
b.	Ventilation.
1.	Every habitable room (except kitchens with exhaust fans in good working order) shall have at least one window or skylight which can be easily opened. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight type window size, as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation. 
2.	Year-round mechanically ventilating conditioned air systems may be substituted for windows, as required herein, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window type air conditioning units are not included in this exception. 
c.	Bathrooms. Every bathroom shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms equipped with an operable ceiling electrical exhaust fan. 
d.	Lighting in hall and stairways. Every hall and stairway of every dwelling shall be lighted, including exterior stairways and stairways in halls and public space. 
e.	Occupancy below grade. No basement or cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unless: 
1.	The floor and walls are resistant to the leakage of underground and surface runoff water, and show no evidence of recent water leakage or accumulation. 
2.	The total window area, or window well area, is equal to at least the minimum window and ventilation areas described in subsection (4) of this section, except that in non-sleeping rooms, mechanical ventilation and electrical light may be used in place of window ventilation and light. 
3.	An easily accessible means of fire escape in addition to the basement or cellar stair is provided. Windows which are easily accessible and of sufficient size to accommodate occupants escaping a fire are acceptable. 
4.	Sanitation requirements. Every owner of every dwelling or rental lot shall provide a clean, safe and sanitary dwelling and shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean, safe and sanitary condition outbuildings and appurtenances to the extent that such outbuildings and appurtenances are regulated by this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 153.009)
 
Sec. 18-9. Alternate means.
(a)	The town administrator may authorize an alternate means of meeting the requirements of this chapter only under the following circumstances as established by owner: 
(1)	The condition for which the alternate means is sought is an element of the fundamental and original construction of the dwelling. The term "fundamental and original construction" means and includes foundation dimensions, ceiling height, organization of habitable space, and any other condition governed by the original structure of the dwelling; and 
(2)	There exists a demonstrable alternate means of meeting the intent of this chapter. 
(b)	In the event that the enforcement officer withholds approval of one or more plumbing, electrical, mechanical, structural or fire safety components, the enforcement officer may accept approval of such components without further corrections upon receipt of a report from an appropriately licensed contractor, architect or engineer certified in the state, as specified by the enforcement officer in writing. 
(Code 1995, § 153.010)
 
Sec. 18-10. Duties of tenants.
This chapter is not intended to interfere with or abrogate the duties imposed on tenants of rental property by G.S. 42-43, or with lawful written agreements between property owners and tenants. 
(Code 1995, § 153.011)
 
Sec. 18-11. Responsibility of owner.
The owner remains responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter, even though: 
(1)	An obligation is also imposed on the occupants. 
(2)	The owner has an agreement, imposed on the occupant the duty of complying with this chapter. 
(3)	In cases where part of a dwelling unit or dwelling is owned by an association of owners and the balance of such dwelling unit or dwelling is owned by an individual owner, responsibility for compliance lies with the owner of that part of the dwelling unit or dwelling not in compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 153.012)
 
Sec. 18-12. Powers of the town administrator.
(a)	General. The town administrator shall have such powers as may be necessary, lawful, or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this chapter, including (without limiting the generality of the forgoing) the following powers: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the incorporated areas of the town in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation. 
(2)	To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence. 
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections in a manner that will cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession. 
(4)	To appoint and fix the duties, as provided in this chapter, of the enforcement officer and such other officers, agents, and employees, as he deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter. 
(b)	Inspections.
(1)	It shall be the duty of the town administrator or his designees to examine the dwellings located in the town for the purpose of determining the fitness of the dwellings for human habitation, and for the enforcement and administration of this chapter upon receiving a complaint. In exercising this power, the town administrator or his designees shall have a right to enter on any premises within the incorporated areas of the town at all reasonable hours (between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday and at the convenience of the occupant) for the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials. Upon refusal after proper notice, the town administrator or his designees shall have the right to inspect pursuant to G.S. 15-27.2, as amended. 
(2)	If, during the course of the inspection, the town administrator or his designees find evidence of construction in progress that would require a permit pursuant to G.S. 153A-357, the owner shall produce evidence that such permit has been obtained prior to issuance of any housing certificate. 
(3)	It shall be the responsibility of the owner to relocate any moveable obstructions (furniture, boxes, appliances and construction materials, for example) that would otherwise interfere with a complete inspection. The town administrator or his designees shall not be responsible for failure to detect violations of this chapter when such violations are concealed behind, under or above walls, floors, ceilings, or other fixed components of the dwelling. 
(c)	Housing certificates. The intent of the board of alderman of the town is that the enforcement of this chapter be directed toward eliminating threats to the health and safety of the residents of the town. This chapter does not require the periodic inspection of dwellings without cause, nor does it require housing certificates or certificates of occupancy be issued prior to the change of occupancy of dwellings. 
(d)	Reports. Inspection findings will be recorded on standardized correction order forms and provided to the owner. Such standardized forms shall include specific references to sections of this chapter when any violations are recorded. The report shall contain notice of deficiencies under this chapter and inform the owner of any deadline to remedy the deficiencies. Within five days of the owners receipt of such report, the owner shall advise the occupants of the dwelling, if any, of any deficiencies under this chapter that are identified in the order. If any of the deficiencies enumerated in such report are among those set forth in section 18-7, the owner shall advise all occupants of the building of such deficiencies within five days of the owner's receipt of such report. 
(Code 1995, § 153.013)
 
Sec. 18-13. Enforcement.
(a)	Issuance of complaint.
(1)	Whenever a petition or complaint is filed with the enforcement officer by a public authority, by at least five residents of the town, charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the enforcement officer shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties of interest in such dwellings, a complaint stating the charges of violations of this chapter, listing deficiencies under this chapter, and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the town administrator at a place within the town at a time fixed not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the serving of said complaint. The notice shall also notify the owner and parties of interest that they have the right to file an answer to the complaint or appear in person or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the town administrator. All complaints and notices of hearing issued by the enforcement officer shall be filed in a notice of lis pendens in the office of the clerk of superior court for the county. 
(2)	Provided, however, the enforcement officer may, prior to the issuance of the complaint, serve the property owner or property owners agent with a violation notice giving the property owner up to 90 days to correct the violation. 
(b)	Findings of fact and order. If, after such notice and hearing, the town administrator determines that the dwelling under consideration is unsafe or unfit for human habitation, according to the standards of this chapter, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order. All orders issued by the town administrator shall be filled in a notice of lis pendens in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county. 
(1)	Deteriorated. If the repair, alteration or improvement of said building, bringing it up to the standards described herein, can be made at a cost less than 50 percent of the present value of the building, the order shall require the owner, within a specified period of time, but not to exceed 90 days, to repair, to alter or improve such building as to render it fit for human habitation, or it shall require the owner within the specified time therein to repair, alter or improve such building so as to render it safe. Such order may also direct and require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling as a human habitation. Where the enforcement officer finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action to be taken in such lesser period of time as may be necessary. Extensions of the 90-day period may be allowed upon approval of the minimum housing board. 
(2)	Dilapidated. If the repair, alteration or improvement of said building, bringing it up to the standards described herein, cannot be made at a cost of less than 50 percent of the present value of the building, the order shall require the owner, within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days, to either repair, alter, or improve such building as to bring it into compliance with the standards described herein, or to demolish and remove such building. Where the enforcement officer finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may be necessary. Such order will not bar the owners from making such repairs as are necessary to bring the dwelling into compliance with this chapter within the corrective action period imposed by such order. Extensions of the 90-day period may be allowed upon approval of the minimum housing board. 
(3)	Historic district. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the dwelling is located in an historic district of the town and the historic district commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by this chapter, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and closed consistent with G.S. 160A-400.1 and 160A-400.2. 
(c)	Action upon failure to comply with order.
(1)	If the owner of a building found to be deteriorated fails to comply with an order to repair, or improve the building, unless an appeal is taken from such order in accordance with section 18-14, the town administrator may: 
a.	Secure the issuance of a warrant charging such owner with a violation of the standards established by this Code; 
b.	Cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, and pending such repairs, alteration or improvements, may order such building vacated and closed; 
c.	Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed, a placard with the following words, "This building is unfit for human habitation, the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor; and 
d.	Institute a legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking the enforcement of said order. 
(2)	If the owner of a building found to be dilapidated fails to comply with an order to vacate and close, remove or demolish the building unless an appeal is taken from such order in accordance with section 18-14, the town administrator may: 
a.	Secure the issuance of a warrant charging such owner with a violation of the standards established by this Code. 
b.	Cause such building to be vacated and closed and removed or demolished. 
c.	Cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following words, "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. 
d.	Institute a legal action in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking the enforcement of said order. 
(3)	The town administrator shall not cause the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition and removal of any building or perform any other duties set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this section until the board of alderman shall have by ordinance ordered the town administrator to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this chapter with respect to the particular property which the town administrator shall have found to be unfit for human habitation or dangerous and which property shall be described in the ordinance. Such ordinances shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index. 
(4)	The amount of the cost of such repairs, alterations, or improvements or vacating and closing, or demolition and removal by the town administrator shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred; which lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be collected as provided by G.S. 160A-216 et seq. If the building is demolished and removed by the town administrator, he shall sell the materials of such building and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the demolition and removal and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the town administrator, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be dispersed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Repairs, alterations, improvements, or demolitions may be made under supervision of the town administrator or he may let the same contract on competitive bids by private contract if no bids are received. Vacation of the closing buildings shall be done under the supervision of the town administrator. 
(5)	If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling, the town administrator may file a civil action in the name of the town to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-defendant any person occupying such a dwelling. The clerk of the county superior court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-49. The summons shall be returned according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly served, and if at the hearing the town administrator produces a certified copy of an order entered pursuant to subsection (c) of this section, the magistrate shall enter judgement ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The judgement ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgement for summery ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An appeal from any judgement entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of such judgement may be stayed as provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of the summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this section unless such occupant has been served with notice of the order at least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding. 
(6)	Displacement. In enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the town administrator shall make every effort to prevent unnecessary displacement of occupants. 
(7)	Affordable housing. Whenever a determination is made that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, under the provisions of this section, notice of the order shall be given by first class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal or demolition by action of the town administrator, to allow the opportunity of any organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease or purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The town administrator or town clerk shall certify the mailing or the notices, and the certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization that has filed a written request for such notices may raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring the town administrator to wait an additional 45-day period before causing removal or demolition. 
(8)	Determination of value. The enforcement officer is hereby authorized to fix the reasonable value of any dwelling or abandoned dwelling for the purpose of this chapter at the amount set forth in the county property tax listing, not including land value. Such value shall be binding unless the owner provides for delivery of a written appraisal as to the reasonable value of the dwelling prepared by a state certified residential appraiser within 15 days after receipt of an order from the town administrator. Such written appraisal shall be binding and conclusive for the purpose of this chapter. 
(9)	Service of complaints and orders. Complaints and orders issued by the enforcement officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail, and, in conjunction therewith, may be served by regular mail. When the manner of service is by regular mail in conjunction with registered or certified mail, and the registered or certified mail is returned, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten days after mailing, service shall be deemed sufficient. The person mailing such complaint or order by regular mail shall certify that fact and the date thereof, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. If the identities of any owners of the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the enforcement officer, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the enforcement officer makes an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon the unknown owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the town at least once no later than the time at which personal service would be required under this chapter. Where service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. Failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to receive or have served upon him any complaint, notice, or order herein provided for shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any other owner or party in interest or any other person, firm or corporation. 
(Code 1995, § 153.014)
 
Sec. 18-14. Appeal procedures.
(a)	Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or decision of the town administrator in a matter relative to the interpretation or enforcement of any of the provisions of the housing code may appeal from any such decision. 
(b)	An appeal from any decision or order of the town administrator may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or commission of the town. Any appeal from the town administrator shall be taken within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order whichever is later, and shall be taken by filing with the town administrator and with the minimum housing appeals board a written notice of appeal on forms supplied by the town administrator, which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the town administrator shall forthwith transmit to the minimum housing appeals board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the town administrator refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is from a decision of the town administrator requiring the person aggrieved to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the hearing by the minimum housing appeals board, unless the town administrator certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the applicant) a suspension of his requirement would cause imminent peril to life or property, in such case the requirement shall not be suspended except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written notice to the town administrator, by the minimum housing appeals board, or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to this section. 
(c)	The minimum housing appeals board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals, shall give due notice to all parties, and shall render its decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision and order as in its opinion ought to be made in the matter. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the town administrator. In any case where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the board shall have the power to adopt the application of this chapter to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
(d)	Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the board but not otherwise. 
(e)	Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the town administrator or a decision rendered by the board may petition the superior court for an injunction restraining the town administrator from carrying out the order or decision and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the town administrator pending a final disposition within 20 days, and shall be given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require, provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this chapter. 
(f)	In case any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter or any valid order or decision of the town administrator or board may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or use, to restrain, correct or abate such violation to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct or use in or about the premises of the dwelling. 
(Code 1995, § 153.015)
 
Sec. 18-15. Minimum housing appeals board.
The zoning board of adjustment of the town shall serve as the minimum housing appeals board. In the matters of compensation, officers, quorum, and all other matters of procedure the existing rules of the zoning board of adjustment shall apply. The minimum housing appeals board shall meet on the call of the chairperson or vice chairperson. Meetings shall be open to the public. Minutes of meetings shall be accurately recorded. 
(Code 1995, § 153.016)
 
Sec. 18-16. Violations.
(a)	Unless otherwise provided herein it shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the same, or to vacate and close and demolish and remove the same, upon order of the town administrator duly made and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order, and each day any such failure, neglect, or refusal to comply with such order continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	When the town administrator finds that a building is unfit for human habitation or dangerous within the meaning of this chapter and has notified the owner to such effect and the time limit set by the town administrator for the correction of defects or vacating same has expired, no person shall receive rentals, offer for rent or occupy such building unfit as a human habitation and each day such offense continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1995, § 153.017)
 
Sec. 18-17. Other unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to remove (or permit the removal of), damage or deface any complaint, notice, order or certificate posted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless the enforcement officer consents in writing to such action. 
(Code 1995, § 153.019)
 
Chapter 22 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 22-1. Discharge of gun.
The firing or discharging of a gun, squibs, crackers, gunpowder or other combustible substance in the streets or elsewhere for the purpose of making noise which annoys or disturbs humans or is unwanted or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological effect on human beings, or which endangers or injures the health of humans or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, except by permit from the town administrator, is declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary and is in violation of his chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 130.01; Ord. of 11-15-1977)
 
Sec. 22-2. Public possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Malt beverage means beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter, stout, and any other brewed or fermented beverage containing at least 0.06 of one percent, and not more than six percent alcohol by volume. 
Open container means a container whose seal has been broken or a container other than the manufacturer's unopened original container. 
Public street means any highway, road, street, avenue, boulevard, alley, bridge or other way within and/or under the control of the town and open to public use, including the sidewalks of any such street. 
Unfortified wine means wine that has an alcoholic content produced only by natural fermentation or by the addition of pure cane, beet or dextrose sugar, and that has an alcoholic content of not more than 17 percent alcohol by volume. 
(b)	Consumption on the public street and on municipal property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied or controlled by the town, including, but not limited to, public buildings and their appurtenant grounds, municipal parking lots, and public parks and playgrounds. 
(c)	Possession of open containers on the public streets and on municipal property prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on the public streets. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on any property, whether located inside or outside the corporate limits, owned, occupied or controlled by the town, including, but not limited to, public buildings and their appurtenant grounds, municipal parking lots, and public parks and playgrounds. 
(d)	Possession during special events prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess malt beverage and/or unfortified wine on public streets, alleys or parking lots that are temporarily closed to regular traffic for special events, unless operators of the event have been issued a special event license specifically permitting the sale or possession of alcohol by the town's board of aldermen. 
(Code 1995, § 130.02; Ord. of 7-15-2003)
State law reference(s)—Authority to regulate or prohibit the consumption and possession of malt beverages and unfortified wine, G.S. 18B-300(c). 
 
Sec. 22-3. Presence of registered sex offender on or about public parks.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Public park means any publicly-owned or maintained land which is designated by the town as a park or recreational facility. 
Registered sex offender means an individual who is registered by any state or federal agency as a sex offender and whose name is published on any state or federal registered sex offender listing, including, but not limited to, the sex offender registry established in G.S. 14-208.5 et seq. 
(b)	It shall constitute a general offense against the regulations of the town for any person registered as a sex offender with the state and or any other state or federal agency to knowingly enter into or on any public park owned, operated, or maintained by the town. Each and every entry into the park, regardless of the time period involved shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter. 
(c)	The town administrator shall be charged with posting this regulation at the main entrance of each park within 30 days of the passage of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 130.03; Ord. of 4-19-2005)
 
Sec. 22-4. Begging and soliciting.
(a)	No person shall stand in a roadway or median strip for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle. 
(b)	No person shall stand in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway parking lot. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or loiter in any street or highway, including the shoulders or median strip but excluding sidewalks, and to stop or attempt to stop any vehicle for the purpose of soliciting or accepting contributions from the occupants of any vehicle or for the purpose of distributing merchandise to the occupants of any vehicle. It also shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or loiter in any street or highway, including the shoulders or median strip but excluding sidewalks, and to solicit or accept contributions from the occupants of any stopped vehicle or to distribute merchandise to the occupants of any stopped vehicle. 
(d)	If any person is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, such person shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00. Each violation shall constitute a separate offence. 
(e)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accosting means approaching or speaking to someone in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
Ask, beg and solicit mean and include, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms. 
Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to request, beg or solicit alms from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property, or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)	Within 15 feet of an automatic teller machine, provided that, when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)	Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that, when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)	In any public transportation vehicle, or in any bus or subway station, or within 15 feet of any bus stop or taxistand; 
(6)	From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the owner or passengers of such vehicle; 
(7)	From any persons who are waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)	Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility. 
(g)	It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)	By accosting another; or 
(2)	By forcing oneself upon the company of another. 
(Code 1995, § 130.04; Ord. of 3-20-2007)
 
Sec. 22-5. Loitering.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the town to commit the offense of loitering or prowling. 
(b)	A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when one is in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(c)	Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Code 1995, § 130.05; Ord. of 1-20-2009)
 
Sec. 22-6. Feeding of bears.
It shall be unlawful to feed or bait bears in the town in any manner. 
(Code 1995, § 130.06; Ord. of 3-16-2010)
 
Sec. 22-7. Alarm management.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm permit means a permit issued by the police department allowing the operation of an alarm system within the town. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal, either audible or visual, generated by an alarm system being monitored or designed to exteriorly annunciate, requiring the police department to respond. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to monitor and/or exteriorly annunciate the occurrence of an illegal entry, robbery or other activity requiring police response or designed to signal the detection of fire, or products of combustion, in a building, structure, or premises, or to signal an actual fire or initiate a response for medical assistance regardless of whether the call for response comes from a monitoring service, the alarm user, a neighbor, or results from a police officer or firefighter hearing the alarm system. 
Alarm systems coordinator means an employee of the police or administration department designated to administer this section. 
Alarm user means a person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, association, governmental or educational entity or any other entity owning or leasing an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
False alarm means: 
(1)	Any signal communicated by any means that solicits a response from the police department to which the responding units find no evidence of fire or products of combustion or medical emergency or no evidence of unauthorized intrusion, robbery, or other such crime in or on premises. False alarms include, but are not limited to: 
a.	Error or mistake. Any action by any person, firm or corporation, association, or other entity or agency thereof, owning or operating any dwelling, building or place, which results in the activation of any alarm system when no emergency exists. 
b.	Malfunction. Any activation of any alarm system caused by a flaw in the normal operation, design, installation, or maintenance of the system, by faulty equipment, or by a change in the environment or premises upon, or within which the alarm system is operating. 
c.	Intentional misuse. Any activation of an alarm system when one knows, has reason to know, or should have known no fire or other emergency is in progress. 
d.	Failure to notify alarm-monitoring service of testing. Any alarm transmitted to the police while alarm is being tested by personnel without notifying the alarm service of test results. 
(2)	An alarm will not be considered to be a false alarm if it is determined by the responding officer in charge that the alarm was caused by: 
a.	Natural or manmade catastrophe, or an act of God. Such events include, but are not limited to, tornadoes, floods, earthquakes, or other similarly violent conditions or adverse weather conditions. 
b.	The testing of a local/audible alarm system by a licensed alarm business, agent, or employee who is present at the premises servicing, repairing or installing the alarm when the agent or user has contacted the alarm company and informed them of the test. 
c.	Activation by other circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
(b)	Alarm permit required.
(1)	An alarm user must obtain an alarm permit from the alarm systems coordinator. It shall be unlawful for any alarm user to operate an alarm system, as described in subsection (a) of this section, within the corporate limits of the town, without obtaining a permit within ten business days of initial operation or within 30 business days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, whichever comes last. No person shall use an alarm system when the alarm permit for that system has been revoked by the alarm systems coordinator. 
(2)	The police department will establish standard operating procedures for the administration of this chapter. 
(3)	The alarm user must provide complete, accurate information on the alarm permit application, including his name, the address of the premises upon which the system has been or will be installed, the mailing address, the telephone number, the type of alarm system and the business selling, monitoring, inspecting, responding to, and maintaining the alarm system. The alarm user must also provide two persons as means of contact who can respond to the location of the alarm. 
(4)	The alarm user must provide any changes from the information provided on the alarm permit application to the alarm systems coordinator within ten business days of the change. 
(5)	When possession of the alarm system protected premises changes, the person obtaining possession of the property shall file an application for an alarm user permit to the alarm systems coordinator within ten business days of obtaining possession of the property. Alarm permits are not transferable. 
(6)	An alarm user, maintaining multiple alarm systems, whether in the same or different locations, shall be required to obtain an alarm permit for each system. 
(c)	Alarm reset feature.
(1)	An alarm user may not install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound for more than 15 minutes when activated. All alarms must have an automatic reset feature that resets the alarm within 15 minutes. 
(2)	The reset feature does not apply to fire alarm systems. 
(d)	False alarms.
(1)	Response. Whenever an alarm is activated in the town and the police department does respond, an officer on the scene of the activated alarm system shall determine whether the alarm was a false alarm as defined in subsection (a) of this section. Such notification should be given to the chief of police and the alarm systems coordinator by the officer responding to the alarm. 
(2)	Notification. In the case of false alarms, the officer will leave a written notice of the false alarm at, or attached to, the alarm system premises. 
(e)	Appeal of false alarm determination and charges. When requested in writing by the alarm user within ten business days of response to a false alarm, the alarm systems coordinator will review the basis of the officer's determination that an alarm was false. The written request for review of a false alarm determination by the alarm systems coordinator shall include the following information: 
(1)	Alarm user name; 
(2)	Address at which the alarm is installed; 
(3)	Date and time of the false alarm that is being contested; 
(4)	Alarm user permit number; and 
(5)	Facts to establish that the alarm was not false. 
(f)	Civil penalty for false alarms and failure to obtain applicable alarm permit.
(1)	Excessive false alarms. Four or more false alarms within a permit year is excessive. 
(2)	Failure to respond. If a key holder does not respond within 30 minutes of the alarm, this failure to respond will be considered a false alarm. 
(3)	Civil penalties. Excessive false alarms for any alarm system within a permit year shall subject the alarm user to a civil penalty according to the following schedule: 
Number of Police False Alarms	Civil Penalty
Four or five 	$50.00 each 
Six or seven 	$100.00 each 
Eight or nine 	$250.00 each 
Ten or more 	$500.00 each 

(4)	Notification invoice. Upon determination that a permit has exceeded any of the above number of false alarms, the alarm systems coordinator, or his designee, shall issue and deliver, by mail, a notification invoice of the civil penalty to the alarm user. Each civil penalty must be paid within 30 days of notification. Each civil penalty, which is not paid, when due, may be recovered by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt. 
(5)	Failure to obtain applicable alarm permit. Any person or firm who fails to register their alarm system with the town alarm systems coordinator shall be subject to a civil penalty in the nature of a debt in the amount of $100.00. 
(6)	Discontinuance of alarm permit. In addition to any and all legal remedies, including the costs associated with an action for collection, if the alarm user fails to pay civil penalties imposed under this section within 30 days of notification to alarms that may occur at the premises where the alarm user is in arrears for fees incurred, the alarm systems coordinator will notify the police department when such a situation arises, and the police department will cease to respond to any alarm signal with the exception of robbery, hold-up alarms and panic alarms. 
(7)	Revocation of alarm user's permit. The alarm systems coordinator is authorized to revoke the alarm user's permit after the tenth false alarm within a consecutive 12-month period. Police response will be discontinued thereafter with the exception of robbery, hold-up alarms and panic alarms. 
(8)	Reinstatement of alarm permit. An alarm user whose eligibility for police response to alarm calls has been revoked will be reinstated only after payment of all prior unpaid civil penalties assessed and compliance with notification provisions as provided for under this chapter. In addition, permits revoked after the tenth false alarm may be reinstated by the alarm systems coordinator by providing documentation showing the alarm system has been inspected by an individual who is licensed by the state licensing board certifying that the alarm system is in proper working condition. 
(Code 1995, § 130.10; Ord. of 1-20-2015; Ord. of 2-17-2015)
 
Secs. 22-8—22-32. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ABANDONED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 22-33. Abandoned vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any motor vehicle on a public street or on public or private property within the town. Removing and disposing of junked or abandoned motor vehicles shall be according to the procedures prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1995, § 90.01)
 
Sec. 22-34. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a vehicle that: 
(1)	Has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting parking 24 hours after being cited; 
(2)	Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than 24 hours; 
(3)	Is left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant, or lessee thereof for longer than two hours; or 
(4)	Is left on any public street or highway for longer than seven days. 
Junked motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that: 
(1)	Is partially dismantled or wrecked; 
(2)	Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was originally intended to move; 
(3)	Is more than five years old and worth less than $100.00; or 
(4)	Does not display a current license plate. 
Motor vehicle means all machines designed or intended to travel over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle. 
(Code 1995, § 90.02; Ord. of 2-20-1990)
 
Sec. 22-35. Private property.
(a)	Any junked or abandoned motor vehicle found to be in violation of this article may be removed to a storage garage or area, but no such vehicle shall be removed from private property without the written request of the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises unless the commission or a duty authorized town official or employee has declared it to be a health or safety hazard. The town may require any person requesting the removal of a junked or abandoned motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal, storage or sale thereof. When an abandoned or junked motor vehicle is removed, the town shall give notice to the owner as required by G.S. 20-219.11(a) and (b). 
(b)	Hearing procedure. Regardless of whether the town does its own removal and disposal of motor vehicles or contracts with another person to do so, the town shall provide a prior hearing procedure for the owner. For purposes of this subsection, the definitions in G.S. 20-219.9 apply. 
(1)	If the person who tows the vehicle is responsible for collecting towing fees, all provisions of G.S. 20-219.9 et seq. apply. 
(2)	If the town is responsible for collecting towing fees, it shall: 
a.	Provide by contract or ordinance for a schedule of reasonable towing fees; 
b.	Provide a procedure for a prompt fair hearing to contest the towing; 
c.	Provide for an appeal to district court from that hearing; 
d.	Authorize release of the vehicle at any time after towing by the posting of a bond or paying of the fees due; and 
e.	Provide a sale procedure similar to that provided in G.S. 44A-4, 44A-5, and 44A-6, except that no hearing in addition to the probable cause hearing is required. If no one purchases the vehicle at the sale and if the value of the vehicle is less than the amount of the lien, the town may destroy it. 
(Code 1995, § 90.03)
 
Sec. 22-36. Exceptions.
Nothing in this article shall apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building or any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise, or to any vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the town. 
(Code 1995, § 90.07)
 
Sec. 22-37. Penalty.
Violation of any provision of this article or of any obligation imposed by it shall constitute a misdemeanor, in addition to and separate from any of the remedies set forth by this article. Any person cited under the provisions of this article shall be assessed a criminal penalty of up to $500.00 for each day, and every day during which such violations shall continue. Each day shall be a separate and distinct violation of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 90.99)
 
Secs. 22-38—22-62. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. NUISANCES 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 22-63. Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain, allow or create a nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 92.01)
 
Sec. 22-64. Illustrative enumeration.
The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property any of the following items, conditions or actions are declared to be and constitute a nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be exclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)	Any condition which is a breeding place or harborage for mosquitoes or a breeding place or harborage for rats or other pets; 
(2)	Any place of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over 24 inches in height; 
(3)	Any open place of collection of water where insects tend to breed; 
(4)	Any open place of concentration of combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper, automobile tires or tubes, garbage, trash, refuse, brush, old clothes, rags or any other combustible materials or objects of like nature; 
(5)	Any open place of collection of garbage, food, waste, animal waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; 
(6)	Any dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery equipment, building materials, or any similar items not enclosed in a building with functional doors; 
(7)	Any furniture, appliances or other metal products of any kind or nature openly kept which have jagged edges of metal or glass, or areas of confinement; 
(8)	Any motor vehicle located on private property, which is wholly or partially dismantled and any related motor vehicle parts and tools not enclosed in a garage with functional doors or covered with a tarp or canvas when not actively being repaired; 
(9)	Any improper or inadequate drainage on private property which causes flooding, interferes with the use of, or endangers in any way the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public property of any kind; 
(10)	Any condition which blocks, hinders or obstructs, in any way, the natural flow of branches, streams, creeks, surface waters, ditches or drains to extent that lots or properties are not free from standing water; and 
(11)	Any other conditions specifically prohibited in this article, or any other conditions specifically declared to be a nuisance or a danger to the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of inhabitants of the city and a public nuisance by the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1995, § 92.02)
 
Sec. 22-65. Investigation of conditions.
The town administrator, upon notice from any person of the existence of any of the conditions described in this article, shall make or cause to be made such investigation as may be necessary to determine whether, in fact, the conditions constitute a public nuisance as declared. 
(Code 1995, § 92.03)
 
Sec. 22-66. Initiation of proceedings.
Proceedings to declare any condition a nuisance under the provisions of this article may be initiated by the town administrator after giving written notice by personal delivery from the town administrator or other designated personnel, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner and occupant of the premises upon which the condition exists. 
(Code 1995, § 92.04)
 
Sec. 22-67. Order of abatement; notice.
Upon a determination by the town administrator that such conditions constitute a public nuisance, the administrator shall notify, in writing, the owner and occupant or person in possession of the premises in question of the conditions constituting such public nuisance and shall order prompt abatement thereof. 
(Code 1995, § 92.05)
State law reference(s)—Authority to abate health nuisances, G.S. 160A-193; abatement by local health director, G.S. 130-20. 
 
Sec. 22-68. Contents of notice; order to abate.
The notice to abate a nuisance issued under the provisions of this article shall contain: 
(1)	A statement that conditions exist on the property which constitute a public nuisance; 
(2)	The condition existing; 
(3)	The location of such condition; and 
(4)	A statement ordering the owner and the occupant or person in possession of the premises to abate the public nuisance, and that unless the condition is abated within 15 days from the mailing of the notice as specified in section 22-67, which shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, the conditions constituting a nuisance will be abated by the town and the cost of abatement shall constitute a lien against the premises. 
(Code 1995, § 92.06)
 
Sec. 22-69. Appeal notice.
Within the time period stated in the notice to abate, the owner or occupant of the property where the nuisance exists may appeal the findings of the town administrator to the board of aldermen by giving written notice of appeal to such officer, such appeal to stay the abatement of the nuisance by the town until a final determination by the town board of aldermen. In the event no appeal is taken, the town may proceed to abate the nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 92.07)
 
Sec. 22-70. Hearing.
The town board of aldermen, in the event an appeal is taken as provided herein, may, after hearing all interested persons and reviewing the findings, determine that a nuisance exists in the town. If the board of aldermen shall determine that the findings of the town administrator are correct and proper, it shall adopt an ordinance specifically declaring the condition existing on the property to be a danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town and a public nuisance and direct the town administrator to cause the conditions to be abated. 
(Code 1995, § 92.08)
 
Sec. 22-71. Right of entry.
The town administrator and other designated personnel are hereby given full power and authority to enter upon premises upon which a nuisance is found to exist under the provisions of this article for the purpose of abating the nuisance as provided in this article. 
(Code 1995, § 92.09)
 
Sec. 22-72. Cost of abatement declared lien.
After the abatement of a nuisance as provided in this article, the cost of such abatement may become a lien against the premises upon confirmation of the cost thereof by the town board of aldermen, which confirmation shall take place only after ten days' written notice to the owner of the premises where the nuisance existed, of the proposed confirmation. Upon confirmation, the cost of abatement shall be a lien against the premises from which the nuisance was abated, the same to be recorded as provided in G.S. 160A-216 et seq. and to be collected as unpaid tax. 
(Code 1995, § 92.10)
 
Sec. 22-73. Legal action may be taken.
The town board of aldermen may direct the town administrator to pursue the matter of collection of the assessed penalties in a civil action court case. 
(Code 1995, § 92.11)
 
Secs. 22-74—22-104. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES, LITTERING
 
Sec. 22-105. Prohibited conditions, generally.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, agent or person in control of any lot or premises within the town to permit to remain thereon any empty bottles, empty cans, abandoned motor vehicle bodies or parts, household appliances, furniture, trash, or filth of any kind whatsoever; and it shall be the duty of any owner, occupant, agent or person in control of any lot or premises within the town to keep the same in a clean, healthy, wholesome and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Code 1995, § 92.25)
 
Sec. 22-106. Littering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the town any refuse on any public property or on the property of another, without authority, or in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements, upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or other public place, or onto any premises of another within the town. 
(Code 1995, § 92.26)
State law reference(s)—Littering, G.S. 14-399. 
 
Sec. 22-107. Matter not to be burned.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fill any land with or dump upon any land within the town garbage, dead animals, decaying vegetable or animal matter or any offensive material, nor shall any of the aforesaid offensive materials be buried within the town, but shall be disposed of as provided by law. 
(Code 1995, § 92.27)
 
Sec. 22-108. Penalty.
Violation of any provision of this article or any obligation imposed by it shall constitute a misdemeanor, in addition to and separate from any of the remedies set forth by this article. Any person cited under the provisions of this article shall be assessed a criminal penalty of not more than $500.00 for each day, and every day during which such violations shall continue. Each day shall be a separate and distinct violation of this section. 
(Code 1995, § 92.99)
 
Secs. 22-109—22-129. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. NOISE
 
Sec. 22-130. Unnecessary noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to create or assist in creating, permit, continue, or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited. 
(Code 1995, § 93.01; Ord. of 11-15-1977)
 
Sec. 22-131. Noises expressly prohibited.
Subject to the provisions of this section, the creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited, as is also noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of others. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)	Vehicle noises while not in motion; signal devices. 
a.	The sounding of any whistle, horn or signal device or any device on any locomotive, automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; 
b.	The creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and 
c.	The sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)	The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than a police, fire, or other emergency vehicle. 
(3)	The use or operation of any piano, manual or automatic, phonograph, radio, loudspeaker, or any other instrument, or sound-amplifying devices in such a manner or with such a volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person. 
(4)	The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any reasonable person. 
(5)	The use of an automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(6)	The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger. 
(7)	The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationery internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)	The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(9)	The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration, or repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., on weekdays, except in the case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the emergency continues. 
(10)	The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, or court while the same are in session, or within 150 feet of any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, court or hospital street. 
(11)	The creation of any excessive noise on Sunday on any street adjacent to any church which unreasonably interferes with the working of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such street adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street. 
(12)	The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(13)	The sounding of any ball or gong attached to any building or premises which disturbs the quiet and peace of reasonable persons. 
(14)	The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers, and vendors which disturbs the quiet and peace of reasonable persons. 
(15)	The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noises to any performance, show or sale or display of merchandise. 
(16)	The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling station in any residential district so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1995, § 93.02; Ord. of 11-15-1977)
 
Chapter 26 OUTDOOR LIGHTING
 
Sec. 26-1. Intent and purpose.
It is the intent of this chapter to encourage lighting practices and systems that will minimize light pollution, glare, light trespass; conserve energy and resources while maintaining nighttime safety, utility, comfort, security, and productivity; and reduce the degradation of the nighttime visual environment. 
(Code 1995, § 152.001; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 1)
 
Sec. 26-2. Applicability.
(a)	New land uses, buildings and additions. This chapter is applicable to all proposed new land uses, developments, buildings, street lighting (both private and public), parking lots, and structures. For all building additions and expansions and expansion of parking areas, the applicant shall only have to meet the requirements of this chapter for any new outdoor lighting provided. Lighting for single-family and duplex residences, except security lights (also known as pole lights or dusk-to-dawn lights), shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. Improvements to a property in excess of 35 percent of the present value of the improvements located on a property shall constitute a new use for the purposes of this Code. 
(b)	Change of use/intensity. Whenever the use of any existing building, structure, or premises is changed to a new use, or the intensity of use is increased through the incorporation of additional dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified herein, and which change of use or intensification of use creates a need for an increase in the total number of parking spaces of 25 percent or more, then all outdoor lighting facilities shall meet the requirements of this chapter for the entire property, to the maximum extent possible as determined by the town administrator. For changes of use or intensity which require an increase in parking of less than 25 percent, the applicant shall only have to meet the requirements of this chapter for any new outdoor lighting provided. 
(c)	Maintenance. All existing street lights must be brought into compliance with the standards set forth in this section at the time of the ballast failure or other significant maintenance incident. Fixtures in security lights, also known as dusk-to-dawn lights or pole lights, shall be replaced with fully shielded fixtures at time of bulb or ballast replacement or other maintenance for privately-owned fixtures. Security lights leased from a utility shall be replaced with fully shielded fixtures or removed at the time of the expiration of the contract period or by December 31, 2013, whichever comes first. If the town receives a valid complaint for light trespass or glare emitted from a security light or dusk-to-dawn light or pole light, that fixture must be made fully shielded or removed. If the offending fixture is still within its original contract period with an energy supplier, it must be made fully shielded or removed at the end of that original contract period. 
(Code 1995, § 152.002; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 2)
 
Sec. 26-3. Materials and methods of installation/operation.
(a)	Preferred source. High pressure sodium (HPS) lamps are the preferred illumination source throughout the town; their use is to be encouraged, for outdoor illumination whenever its use would not be detrimental to the use of the property. HPS lamps are one of the most efficient lighting sources in terms of energy usage and their light output is at a spectrum that minimizes glare. HPS lamps contain little to no mercury and can be safely disposed of in conventional landfills. Other light fixtures may be used provided they meet both the shielding requirements and meet the maximum lumen criteria set forth in section 26-5. 
(b)	The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any design, material, or method of installation or operation not specifically prescribed herein, provided any such alternate has been approved by the town administrator. The town administrator may approve any such proposed alternate provided he finds that it: 
(1)	Provides at least approximate equivalence to the applicable specific requirements of this chapter; and 
(2)	Is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 152.003; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 3)
 
Sec. 26-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Floodlight means a form of lighting designed to direct its output in a diffuse, more or less specific direction. 
Footcandle (FC) means a quantitative unit measuring the amount of light (illumination) falling onto a given point. One foot candle equals one lumen per square foot. Footcandle measurements are made with a light meter. 
Fully-shielded fixture means an outdoor light fixture shielded in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, is projected at angles below the horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture, and no more than ten percent of the lamp's light intensity is emitted at an angle ten degrees below that horizontal plane, as determined by a photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. This is the equivalent of the IESNA full cutoff fixture. 
 
Horizontal footcandles means a quantity of illumination (footcandles) at a given point that is measured or calculated at a specified height in a plane parallel to the line of sight when looking at the brightest light source in the field of view. 
IESNA means the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, a nonprofit professional organization of lighting specialists that has established recommended design standards for various lighting applications. 
Light fixture (luminaire) means a complete lighting unit consisting of one or more electric lamps, the lamp holder, any reflector or lens, ballast (if any), and any other components and accessories. 
Outdoor light output; total means the maximum total amount of light is measured in lumens from all outdoor light fixtures. For lamp types that vary in their output as they age (such as high pressure sodium and metal halide), the initial output, as defined by the manufacturer, is the referenced lumen value to be considered. 
Partially-shielded fixture means an outdoor light fixture shielded in such a manner that less than five percent of the light emitted directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture is projected at angles above the horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture, and no more than 20 percent of the lamp's light intensity is emitted at an angle ten degrees below that horizontal plane, as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. This is the equivalent of the IESNA semi-cutoff fixture. 
 
Shielded fixture means an outdoor light fixture shielded in such a manner that less than 2½ percent of the light emitted directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture is projected at angles above the horizontal plane drawn through the bottom of the fixture, and no more than ten percent of the lamp's light intensity is emitted at an angle ten degrees below that horizontal plane, as determined by photometric test or certified by the manufacturer. This is the equivalent of the IESNA cutoff fixture. 
 
(Code 1995, § 152.004; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 4)
 
Sec. 26-5. General requirements.
(a)	All outdoor floodlights shall be equipped with a top shield and installed so that the fixture shall be aimed down at least 60 degrees from vertical. No floodlights shall be permitted in residential districts or within 30 feet of a residential district or public street right-of-way. Floodlights and display lights shall be positioned such that any such fixture located within 60 feet of a public street right-of-way or residentially zoned district is mounted and aimed opposite (180 degrees) to the right-of-way or residential district. 
(b)	All light fixtures that are required to be shielded shall be installed in such a manner that the shielding is effective as described in section 26-4. 
(c)	All light fixtures, except street lights, shall be located, aimed, or shielded so as to minimize stray light trespassing across property boundaries. Maximum light trespass limits shall be one-half horizontal maintained footcandles at all residential to commercial property lines. All street lights shall be fully shielded or be full cutoff fixtures to minimize adverse light trespass, light pollution and glare impacts. 
(d)	Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity light shall not be permitted, except in emergencies by police and fire personnel or at their direction; or for meteorological data gathering purposes. 
(e)	All outdoor lighting used for, but not limited to, outdoor sales or eating areas, assembly or repair areas, advertising and other signs, recreational facilities and other similar applications where color rendition is important to preserve the effectiveness of the activity are permitted until 9:00 p.m. or for as long as the area is in active use. This does not pertain to security lighting. It is recommended that security lighting used after 9:00 p.m. utilize motion sensors. 
(f)	Lights emitting infrared radiation used for remote security surveillance systems are permitted with the following restrictions: shielded or partially shielded luminaires are permitted for, but are not limited to, baseball, softball, and football fields. Lights bordering residential areas and residential uses shall be fully shielded or shielded to prevent glare and light trespass onto the residential properties and uses. 
(g)	External illumination for signs, including billboards, shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. Specifically, lights shall be located, aimed, or shielded so as to minimize stray light trespassing across property boundaries and upward lighting of signs is prohibited. Internal sign back lighting is preferred over spot lighting of signs. 
(h)	Pole-mounted lights, when fully shielded, are not to exceed 25 feet above finished grade or the roofline of the residential building, whichever is lower, in residential zoning districts and 30 feet above finished grade in all other zoning districts. A two-foot raised base is allowed in parking areas where needed. 
(i)	The light emitted from outdoor light fixtures is to be included in the total output as follows: 
(1)	Outdoor light fixtures installed on poles (such as parking lot luminaires) and light fixtures installed on the sides of the buildings or other structures and within five feet of the nearest edge of the structure, canopy, overhang, etc., when not shielded from above by the structure itself as defined in subsections (i)(2) and (3) of this section, are to be included in the total outdoor light output by simply adding the lumen outputs of the lamps used. 
(2)	Outdoor light fixtures installed under canopies, buildings, overhangs, or roof eaves where the center of the lamp or luminaire is located at least five feet, but less than ten feet from the nearest edge of the canopy or overhang are to be included in the total outdoor light output as though they produced only one-quarter of the lamp's rated lumen output. 
(3)	Outdoor light fixtures located under the canopy and ten or more feet from the nearest edge of a canopy, building overhang, or eave are to be included in the total outdoor light output as though they produced only one-tenth of the lamp's rated lumen output. 
(j)	Vehicular canopy lighting, including gas stations and car washes. In addition to the calculations for subsections (i)(2) and (3) of this section, the following requirements apply to service station gas station and car wash canopies: 
(1)	All luminaires mounted on the under surface of service station canopies shall be fully shielded and utilize flat glass or flat plastic (acrylic or polycarbonate) covers. 
(2)	The total light output used for illuminating vehicular canopies, defined as the sum of all under-canopy initial bare-lamp outputs in lumens, shall not exceed 40 lumens per square foot of canopy. All lighting mounted under the canopy, including, but not limited to, luminaires mounted on the lower surface of the canopy and auxiliary lighting within signage or panels over the pumps, is to be included toward the total. 
(k)	Neon lighting is permitted, so long as lumen calculations from such lighting are included in the total lumen calculations for the site, required by this section. Lumens are calculated on a per-foot basis, rather than per fixture. Such lighting shall also be subject to the shielding requirements of this section, unless exempted by Table 1. 
(l)	Total outdoor light output (excluding street lights used for illumination of public rights-of-way) of any development project shall not exceed the following lumens per net acre (or square foot) limits average over the entire project: 
Lighting Zone	Description of Area/Activity	Maximum Lumens Per Acre or Per Square Foot Allowed*
LZ0 	No ambient lighting 	65,340 lm/acre or 1.5 lm/sf 
LZ1 	Low ambient lighting (national parks, areas with intrinsically dark landscapes) 	108,900 lm/acre or 2.5 lm/sf 
LZ2 	Moderate ambient lighting (i.e., outer urban and rural residential) 	172,240 lm/acre or 4.0 lm/sf 
LZ3 	Moderately high ambient lighting (i.e., suburban commercial, urban residential) 	348,552 lm/acre or 8.0 lm/sf 
LZ4 	High ambient lighting (i.e., downtown/high vandalism/high crime areas, commercial and residential areas with high levels of nighttime use) 	522,720 lm/acre or 12.0 lm/sf 

*One acre = 43,560 square feet. 
The town administrator will determine the lighting zone for a parcel of property when lighting intersects site drives and public streets or roads. The effective property line, for the purpose of this section, may be extended to include the public right-of-way. Furthermore, no more than 5,500 lumens per net acre may be accounted for by lamps in partially-shielded fixtures permitted in Table 1. 
(m)	Outdoor recreational facilities are not subject to the lumens per net acre limit. However, no such facility shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m. except to conclude a scheduled recreational or sporting event in progress prior to 11:00 p.m. 
(n)	Outdoor internally-illuminated advertising signs shall either be constructed with an opaque background and translucent letters and symbols or with a colored (not white, cream, off-white, or yellow) background and lighter letters and symbols. Lamps used for internal illumination of such signs shall not be included in the lumens per net acre limit set in this section. Such signs shall be turned off at 11:00 p.m. or when the business closes, whichever is later. 
(o)	All wall-mounted fixtures (wall packs, etc.) shall be fully shielded regardless of lumen output. 
(p)	The maximum height for street lights on public or private streets in residential areas shall be 25 feet. The maximum height for street lights in all other areas shall be 30 feet. 
(q)	All lights within the designated lighting zone around the site for the proposed observatory shall be fully shielded or full cutoff and shall not exceed 9500 lumens unless approved by the town administrator. 
Table 1 
Table of Lamp Source and Shielding Standards
Lamp Type	Code
Class 1 General Illumination Lighting: 	
Low-pressure sodium above 4,050 lumens 	F 
Other types above 1,250 lumens and below 4,050 lumens 	S 
All types 1,250 lumens or less 	P 
Security lights (also known as dusk-to-dawn lights or pole lights) 	F 
Class 3 Lighting (Decorative): 	
Low-pressure sodium above 4,050 lumens 	F 
Other types 9,500 lumens or less and mounted 18 feet or less above ground 	S 
All types 1,250 lumens or less 	P 

Use Code: 
F = Allowed, fully shielded or full cutoff. 
S = Allowed, shielded (cutoff). 
P = Partially shielded lights allowed, (partially and/or unshielded lights limited to a maximum of 5,500 lumens per net acre). 
X = Prohibited, except as noted. 
Non-LPS lights are permitted if outdoor light fixtures are fully shielded and located under five or more feet from the nearest edge of a canopy, building overhang, or eave. 
(Code 1995, § 152.006; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 5)
 
Sec. 26-6. Infrared security lighting.
Lights emitting infrared radiation used for remote security surveillance systems are exempt from the filtration requirements of section 26-5(f). Such lighting is permitted with the following restrictions: 
(1)	Fixed lights must be fully-shielded. 
(2)	Movable lights, such as spotlights attached to infrared-sensitive cameras, must be mounted such that the lights cannot be directed higher than 20 degrees below the horizon, measured from the center of the light beam. 
(Code 1995, § 152.007; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 6)
 
Sec. 26-7. Application requirements.
(a)	Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical permit for outdoor lighting or signage, a conditional use permit, subdivision approval, or development plan approval by the town, including all town projects, the applicant shall, as part of said application, submit sufficient information to enable the town administrator to determine whether the proposed lighting will comply with this chapter. 
(b)	The application shall include the following: 
(1)	A written statement that the lighting plan complies with these standards; 
(2)	When requested by the town administrator: 
a.	A site plan indicating the proposed location of all outdoor lighting fixtures and signs with a point x point array showing footcandle values and uniformity ratios; 
b.	A description of each illuminating device, fixture, lamp, support, and shield. This description may include, but is not limited to, manufacturer's catalog cuts and drawings (including sections where required), lamp types, and lumen outputs; 
c.	Photometric data, such as that furnished by manufacturers, or similar, showing the angle of cutoff of light emissions for the proposed luminaires; or 
(3)	If the town administrator determines that the proposed lighting does not comply with this chapter, the permit shall not be issued or the plan approved. 
(Code 1995, § 152.008; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 7)
 
Sec. 26-8. Temporary lighting permits.
(a)	The town administrator may grant a permit for temporary lighting, as defined herein, if he finds the following: 
(1)	The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to extend beyond 30 days; 
(2)	The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light pollution and trespass as much as is feasible; 
(3)	The proposed lighting will comply with the general intent of this chapter; 
(4)	The permit will be in the public interest. 
(b)	The application for the temporary lighting permit shall include the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of applicant and property owner; 
(2)	Location of proposed fixtures; 
(3)	Type, wattage, and lumen output of lamps; 
(4)	Type, shielding of proposed fixtures; 
(5)	Intended use of the lighting; 
(6)	Duration of time for requested exemption; 
(7)	The nature of the exemption; 
(8)	Such other information as the town administrator may request. 
(c)	The town administrator may grant one renewal of the permit for an additional 30 days if he finds that, because of an unanticipated change in circumstances, a renewal would be in the public interest. The town administrator is not authorized to grant more than one temporary permit and one renewal for a 30-day period for the same property within one calendar year. 
(Code 1995, § 152.009; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 8)
 
Sec. 26-9. Nonconforming lighting.
(a)	Any construction permit which invokes certificate of occupancy requirements shall specify and require that any nonconforming sign, as to lighting, located within the boundaries of the development site authorized by said permit, shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	No outdoor lighting fixture which was lawfully installed prior to the enactment of this chapter shall be required to be removed or modified except as expressly provided herein; however, no modification or replacement shall be made to a nonconforming fixture unless the fixture thereafter conforms to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	In the event that any nonconforming sign, as to lighting, is abandoned, or is damaged such that the damage exceeds 50 percent of the reproduction value, exclusive of foundations, to replace it, the sign shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	All security lights, dusk-to-dawn lights, or pole lights, whether installed by the homeowner or under contract with an energy supplier, must be fully shielded fixtures with a mounting height not to exceed 25 feet, if attached to a pole, and 18 feet, if attached to a structure other than a pole, for example, a building. 
(e)	After December 31, 2013, all existing security lights, also known as dusk-to-dawn lights or pole lights, whether installed under contract or otherwise, must be fully shielded or removed. Security lights leased from a utility shall be replaced with fully shielded fixtures or removed at the time of the expiration of the contract period or by December 31, 2013, whichever comes first. 
(f)	If the town receives a valid complaint for light trespass or glare emitted from a security light, also known as a dusk-to-dawn light or pole light, that fixture must be made fully shielded or removed. If the offending fixture is still within its original contract period with an energy supplier, it must be made fully shielded or removed at the end of that original contract period. 
(Code 1995, § 152.010; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 9)
 
Sec. 26-10. Variances.
Any person desiring to install an outdoor lighting fixture which does not meet the requirements of this chapter may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from the regulation in question, as provided for in chapter 54, as amended. 
(Code 1995, § 152.011; Ord. of 10-20-2009, § 10)
 
Chapter 30 SHORT-TERM RENTAL
 
Sec. 30-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Homestay means an owner-occupied single-family home containing at least two bedrooms wherein the owner resides in the residence on a full-time permanent basis wherein the owner rents space to individuals for overnight stays for a period of less than 30 days. 
Short-term rental (STR) means the renting of property for a period of less than 30 days for overnight stays wherein the owner does not reside in the home. 
(Code 1995, § 154.001; Ord. of 11-17-2015; Ord. of 7-1-2016, § 150.175)
 
Sec. 30-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the commercial use of property located in residential zones wherein the owner of the property rents a portion or all of the property for overnight stays of less than 30 days in nature. 
(Code 1995, § 154.002; Ord. of 11-17-2015; Ord. of 7-1-2016, § 150.176)
 
Sec. 30-3. Homestays.
All residential zones within the town would allow for homestays as a right of use. All municipal ordinances shall remain in effect and property owners operating homestays may be held responsible for certain violations of this Code caused by tenants as in the case of traditional tenant-landlord practices. 
(Code 1995, § 154.003; Ord. of 11-17-2015; Ord. of 7-1-2016, § 150.177)
 
Sec. 30-4. Short-term rentals, generally.
Where short-term rentals are permitted: 
(1)	Short-term rentals would be permitted only within the following zoning districts: Residential-7 and Residential-10. 
(2)	Short-term rentals in all other residential zoning districts would be prohibited, excepting the following: short-term rentals would be permitted in subdivisions with a functioning home owners' association or property owners' association wherein no less than 75 percent of the voting property owners endorsed the establishment of short-term rentals. Upon the home owners' association submitting valid proof of such a successful vote, then the planning and zoning board of adjustment would take up a vote on the matter of establishing an overlay zoning district to permit such use until such time as a legal vote of the home owners' association revoked support for short-term rentals. The home owners' association would be required to pay the entirety of costs associated with the legal notices and advertisements associated with such requests. 
(Code 1995, § 154.004; Ord. of 11-17-2015; Ord. of 7-1-2016, § 150.178)
 
Sec. 30-5. Further regulation.
(a)	Registration. Any property owner seeking to offer their property for a short-term rental, as defined by this chapter, would first be required to register such use with the town, prior to commencing operations and/or advertisement for such operation. The town administrator and/or his agent would be required to determine if the property in question qualifies for such use under the terms of this chapter. Such a determination would be due no less than five business days after the registration paperwork was submitted to the town. If denied a registration, the applicant has the right of appeal to the planning and zoning board of adjustment whose decision will be final in such matters. The town administrator will be charged with creating the registration document and application to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)	Responsibilities of property owners upon registration. It is a violation of this Code for any property owner who successfully registers a property under the terms of this chapter to fail to post in a conspicuous location, near the primary entrance to the dwelling, the following: 
(1)	A copy of the registration containing the owner's emergency contact information so that renters can easily contact the owner in the event of an emergency and should the town police department need to contact the property owner relative to a legitimate complaint. In the event that the owner has a responsible agent for the property, then that information shall also be listed on the form. 
(2)	A statement outlining the maximum occupancy of the residence as well as the parking occupancy and parking plan. 
The owner of the property shall be wholly responsible for maintaining the accuracy of such information. 
(c)	Complaints against the property.
(1)	Occupancy in excess of the maximum occupancy and/or parking outside the confines of the approved parking plan shall constitute a legitimate complaint against the property. Failure to post proof of registration with accurate information as outlined in this chapter shall also constitute a legitimate complaint. 
(2)	Other legitimate complaints shall include any substantive violation of this Code in regard to noise, nuisances, animals, and/or junked motor vehicles. Further, any criminal charges successfully prosecuted against the tenants of the short-term rental unit may be considered legitimate complaints by the town. 
(d)	Revocation of registration.
(1)	In the event that three or more legitimate complaints accrue against a property within the calendar year following issuance of its registration, then the registration will be withdrawn for a period of one calendar year. From the point wherein the registration is withdrawn by the town, any use of the property for short-term rental will be punishable by fines of up to $500.00 per day per offense. It will be possible for the property owner to re-apply for a registration upon the expiration of this one-year period. Should a property owner have their registration revoked, then such revocation shall apply to the property. Transfer of the property to another owner during the revocation period will not impact the length of revocation on the property. 
(2)	In the event that the property is subsequently re-zoned to a zoning district which does not allow for the establishment of short-term rentals, then the registration will be considered revoked. 
(e)	Determination of revocation. The town administrator and/or his agent will determine what complaints constitute legitimate complaints for the purpose of this chapter. In the event that the town administrator determines that three legitimate complaints have accrued against a property, then the property owner will be notified in writing and given the opportunity to appeal this finding. In the event that the town administrator shall determine after said appeal that the complaints are in fact legitimate, he shall move to revoke the registration of the property for short-term rentals. 
(f)	Appeal. Should the property owner or adjacent property owner wish to appeal the findings of the town administrator in regard to the revocation of registration, they may do so to the planning and zoning board of adjustment of the town whose decision in the matter will be final. 
(Code 1995, §§ 154.005—154.010; Ord. of 11-17-2015; Ord. of 7-1-2016, § 150.179)
 
Chapter 34 SIGNS
 
 
 
Sec. 34-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Woodfin Sign Ordinance." 
(Code 1995, § 150.100)
 
Sec. 34-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertising means calling public attention to products/services especially by paid announcements with the intent of gaining more customers or sales. 
All other streets means those serving one or more residences located within the town, whether or not these streets are publicly- or privately-owned or maintained, excepting any street otherwise exempted by the board of aldermen. 
Alter means to change the size, shape or outline, or type of sign or to change the electrical lighting, except for the replacement of lamps not brighter than the original or the replacement of a surface panel. 
Amortization means the process for liquidating or gradually writing off the cost of a sign or the process and time allowance for physically eliminating such signs. 
Architectural detail means any projection, articulation, relief, cornice, column, change of building material, window, or door opening on any building. 
Attached means affixed to an object, building or structure. 
Awning means a cloth, plastic, or other nonstructural covering that either is permanently attached to a building or can be raised or retracted to a position against the building when not in use. 
Banner means a temporary onsite sign made of cloth, flexible plastic, canvas, or similar material that is not supported or surrounded by permanent framing. 
Billboard means a sign that is offsite from the commercial enterprise, product or service it promotes, is typically non-directional in nature, and greater than 24 square feet in sign face area. 
Blade sign means an attached sign oriented perpendicular to the face of the building which projects more than 12 inches beyond the surface of the building to which it is affixed or supported. 
Building means a structure which has a roof supported by walls for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or other moveable objects of personal property. 
Building for sale/leasing sign (existing building) means an onsite sign intended to advertise a building or buildings for sale or lease after the buildings have been occupied for a year or more. 
Bulletin board means a permanent ground sign or monument sign displaying news and information. 
Business means entities regulated by this chapter including individuals, partnerships, organizations or corporations engaged in commerce, manufacturing, or service either for profit or otherwise. As used in this chapter, the term "business" means and includes any and all such entities involved in public activities whether or not for profit and including their representations on the signs regulated herein. 
Certificate of occupancy (CO) means an official certificate issued by the county and/or the town which indicates conformance with building, zoning, and health and safety regulations and authorizes legal use and occupancy of the premises for which it is issued. 
Changeable copy means sign content where the message can be changed either manually or digitally/electronically. 
Commercial (or commercial message) means information displayed to promote businesses or the buying, selling, or distribution of goods/services. 
Decoration means temporary, seasonal, or holiday-driven display pieces that contain no commercial message. Decorations are not considered signs. 
Development/construction sign means a temporary onsite ground sign that pertains to a new development that is approved or under construction. 
Directional offsite sign means a permanent offsite ground sign intended to aid in vehicular movement to the site. 
Directional onsite sign means a permanent onsite attached or permanent ground sign intended to aid in vehicular movement on the site. 
Directory sign means a permanent onsite attached or monument sign providing direction to or identifying the businesses in the building. 
Distance from middle of the road means the shortest straight line horizontal distance from a vertical line in the middle of the road to the nearest element of the sign. 
Distance from property line means the shortest straight line horizontal distance from a vertical line at the property line to the nearest element of the sign. 
Distance from right-of-way means the shortest straight line horizontal distance from a vertical line at the right-of-way boundary to the nearest element of the sign. 
Donation bin means a bin or similar structure used for the collection of clothes, non-perishable food items or similar items approved by the town. 
Drive-through sign (food service) means a permanent onsite attached or permanent ground sign located immediately adjacent to, within, or over a drive through lane that is associated with food service sales or business conducted from an automobile. (See Menuboard.) 
Drive-through sign (non-food service) means a permanent onsite attached or ground sign associated with sales or business from an automobile that are not related to food service sales. 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. This shall also include the painting of signs on the exterior surface of a building or structure. 
Event means a limited duration occurrence for a specific cause as defined by the business. 
Event banner means a temporary sign attached to a building that requires a permit and is allowed limited duration and frequency. 
Facade means any separate face of a building, including parapet walls and omitted wall lines, or any part of a building which encloses or covers usable space. Where separate faces are oriented in the same direction, or in the directions within 45 degrees of one another, they are to be considered as part of a single facade. 
Flashing means any changeable copy text, image or other lighted sign component that changes more frequently than every four seconds. 
Fundraiser means any activity that takes place for the sole purpose of raising funds to support community service organizations, public charities, or nonprofit organizations. 
Garage/yard sale sign means a temporary sign intended to advertise garage sales or yard sales. 
Grand opening banner means a banner permitted within one year of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy (CO) for a business. 
Ground sign (permanent) means any sign permanently connected to the ground by legs, poles, or other supports, and which is not an attached, portable, monument, or vehicular sign. 
Height. As applied to a sign, height shall be measured as the vertical distance between the highest part of any component of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and finished grade at the center of the base of the sign. 
Height of letter/logo means the height of each individual letter, logo, symbol, and/or icon in a sign. 
Holiday sign means any sign or light display that is associated with the celebration of a recognized holiday or celebration. 
Home occupation means a sign used in association with a legitimate home occupation conducted in the dwelling unit occupied by the operator of the business. 
Home owners' association means a group of elected or selected home owners who may have commercial responsibilities for a housing subdivision or complex. 
Illumination means the enhancement of a sign utilizing electric lights, luminous tubes or other similar means. 
Information board means a display case type of sign where information pertinent to the occupant space is shown often behind glass, such as menus in front of a restaurant. The sign can be attached to a building or as part of a permanent ground sign. 
Internal driveways or parking areas means an internal network of streets and/or parking areas located wholly within a private commercial or residential development in which said streets and parking areas are privately owned and maintained and not designated primary/secondary arterial or all other streets. 
Land for sale sign means a temporary onsite ground sign on vacant land intended to advertise land for sale including unplatted tracts of land. 
Leased space means an area of a building separated internally and intended for use by an individual tenant (occupant). 
Legal nonconforming sign means a sign that was lawfully constructed or installed prior to the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, was in compliance with the provisions of the town ordinance then in effect, and which does not presently comply with this chapter. 
Logo means any registered or recognized symbol, letter, or combination of symbols and letters used by an organization, individual, company, or product for advertising to identify that organization, individual, company, or product. 
Masonry materials means masonry materials including brick, stucco, cement, concrete tilt wall, stone, or other masonry or materials of equal characteristics. 
Menuboard sign means a sign associated with menu and pricing for food services and may include an audible speaker and microphone integral to the sign. (See Drive-through sign (food service).) 
Model home sign means a temporary onsite real estate sign identifying a homebuilder's model home is open for inspection. 
Monument sign means any sign which is connected to the ground and which has no clear space for the full width of the sign between the bottom of the sign and the surface of the ground. A monument sign includes a sign face, sign structure, and sign base. 
Mural means an artistic expression applied directly to an external wall of a building or other permanent structure. For murals to be exempt from sign permit requirements, they may not be primarily commercial in nature. 
New construction for sale/leasing means a temporary onsite sign intended to advertise a newly constructed existing building for sale or lease. 
Noncommercial (or noncommercial message) means information or notifications displayed for purposes other than to promote businesses or the buying, selling, or distribution of goods/services. 
Nonconforming sign means a sign that is not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
Obsolete means any sign which for at least 45 consecutive days, does not identify or advertise a bona fide business, service, owner, product or activity on the premises on which the sign is located or a sign for which no legal owner can be found and relates to a use or purpose that is no longer in existence. 
Occupant means individual tenant of either leased or owned space. 
Occupant space means an area of a building separated internally and intended for use by a single tenant. 
Offsite sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, good, product, entertainment, or similar enterprise not related to the site upon which such sign is located or to which it is affixed. 
Onsite sign means any sign, the content of which relates to the site on which it is located, referring exclusively to businesses, commodities, services, products, goods, entertainment, or similar enterprise on the site, or the sale, lease, or construction of those sites. 
Panel replacement means the replacement of a panel on an existing sign that does not alter the sign. 
Panel sign means any separate, single panel or piece of material containing a word or symbol legend or individual message that is affixed to the face of a sign. 
Permanent ground sign means any sign permanently connected to the ground by legs, poles, posts, or other supports, which is not an attached, portable, monument, or vehicular sign. The term "permanent ground sign" includes a sign face, sign structure, and sign base. 
Permit means the official authorization by the town to alter, erect, or display any sign not exempted by this chapter. 
Political sign means a type of offsite sign which refers only to the candidates or issues involved in a political election. 
Portable sign means any sign which is not attached or affixed to the ground, a building, vehicle, or other fixed structure or object. Portable signs include those signs installed on wheels, trailers, skids, and similar mobile structures. 
Primary arterial streets means a federally designated U.S. Highway or any primary or secondary NCDOT highway as designated by the state department of transportation, unless specifically exempted from this classification by the board of aldermen of the town from time to time as circumstances dictate. These streets are characterized by two or more lanes, 35 or 45 mile per hour speed limit, zoned primarily commercial or industrial. 
Public property means any property which is owned by a governmental entity. The term "public property" shall also include property for which the primary use is for the operations of a governmental entity. 
Residential builder sign means a temporary onsite sign identifying the builder or contractor of a residential construction site. 
Residential real estate sign means a temporary onsite sign identifying existing residential buildings and/or lots for sale/lease on residentially zoned and platted lots. 
Residential streets are characterized by speed limits less than 35 miles per hour and primarily zoned residential. 
Residentially-zoned property means any platted lots within the town boundaries that are zoned with a residential zoning classification. 
Roof sign means any sign that is: 
(1)	Erected on a vertical framework supported by and located immediately and entirely over the roof of a building; 
(2)	Attached to a fascia extending above or below the projection of the fascia; 
(3)	Painted or otherwise affixed on a roof; or 
(4)	Displayed above the eave line of a sloped roof or parapet of a flat roof. 
Sandwich board sign means a portable sign consisting of two panels, hinged at the top and placed on the ground or pavement so as to be self-supporting. 
Secondary arterial streets means a municipally-maintained road or street serving as a conduit between primary arterial streets or any municipally-maintained roads that serve an area that is primarily commercial in character. A list of these specific streets shall be adopted by the board of aldermen of the town and amended from time to time as circumstances dictate. Such streets shall typically be characterized by two lanes, 35 or 45 mile per hour speed limits, and primarily zoned for commercial or industrial purposes. 
Sidewalk means a pedestrian walkway that is grade-separated from the adjacent street or drive when located adjacent to a street or drive. 
Sign means every sign, name, number, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, device, display, flag, banner, pennant, illustration, logo, balloon, streamer, valance, advertising display, poster, beacon, light or insignia, and structure supporting any of the same, affixed directly or indirectly to or upon any building or outdoor structure, or erected or maintained upon a piece of land, which directs attention to any object, project, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or business. 
Sign base means the above-ground foundation of the sign, which includes the exposed footing for the sign. 
Sign face means the total of all solid surfaces of the sign that contains the text and/or graphic, its associated background, and any frame or border around it. As used in this chapter, the term "sign face" applies to each side (e.g., front back and sides) where the sign's message is displayed and excludes sign structure. 
Sign height means the sign height is measured from the finished grade at the center of the sign. If the finished grade at the center of the sign has been raised, the average ground level in the vicinity of the sign will be considered finished grade. 
Sign panel replacement means the removal and substitution of a single panel within a sign designed to have a removal panel. 
Sign structure means the supporting and structural component parts of a sign including architectural elements which do not include text, graphics or design components normally considered to be part of the sign message. 
Single plane facade means the front or side surface of a building that is unbroken by recesses or extension of the wall; a smooth vertical portion of the wall structure. A building may have multiple single plane facades and sign limitations apply to the single plane facade that is chosen for the sign. 
Site means a lot, tract, parcel or building pad that includes all contiguous pieces of property under same, familial or corporately related ownership. 
Special purpose sign means a temporary sign that is either onsite or offsite that provides identification or information pertaining to a special event or occurrence sponsored by a nonprofit or civic organization. 
Street type means designation of all streets in the town as primary arterial, secondary arterial, or all other streets: 
(1)	Primary arterial. Any federally designated U.S. Highway or any primary or secondary NCDOT highway as designated by the state department of transportation, unless specifically exempted from this classification by the board of aldermen of the town from time to time as circumstances dictate. 
(2)	Secondary arterial. Any municipally-maintained road or street that acts as a conduit between primary arterial streets or any municipally-maintained roads that serve an area that is primarily commercial in character. A list of these specific streets shall be adopted by the board of aldermen of the town and amended from time to time as circumstances dictate. 
(3)	All other streets. Those serving one or more residences located within the town whether or not these streets are publicly or privately owned or maintained, excepting any street otherwise exempted by the board of aldermen. 
(4)	Internal driveway or parking areas. An internal network of streets and/or parking areas located wholly within a private commercial or residential development in which said streets and parking areas are privately owned and maintained. 
(5)	Community-shopping Type 3 Zone. A property designation that does not fall within the street type classification system defined herein. For specific parameters see chapter 54. 
Subdivision entry sign means any permanent onsite sign identifying a residential subdivision. 
Subdivision marketing/open house sign means a temporary sign used to market or advertise residential subdivisions/open houses within the town and to direct interested persons to the subdivision/open house location. 
Temporary sign means any sign intended to be displayed for a short period of time only and that is constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, or other like materials, with or without frames, and any type sign not permanently attached to the ground, wall, or building. 
Temporary structure means a structure without any foundation or footings. 
Tenant structure means a single structure with a common roof or a collection of structures in close proximity; for example, shares a parking lot, under single ownership and where the floor area is divided to provide individual commercial space for nonrelated business entities. One of three designations (7 or more; 4, 5, or 6; and 1, 2, or 3) describes the number of individual businesses operating on a shared site and directly impacts sign face area size allowance. 
Town administrator means the individual appointed by the board of aldermen to the office of town administrator. For the purpose of this chapter, when the term "town administrator" is used, it can also include his designee when appropriate. 
Utility pole banner means a temporary sign attached to a utility pole along a public street or within a public park requiring approval by the town planning and zoning board of adjustment and the appropriate utility company. 
Vehicular sign means any sign which is attached to or supported by a vehicle or trailer, or is located within a vehicle and is yet visible. 
Window sign means any sign affixed to any internal and/or external surface of a window. 
Wind sign means a suspended sign made of flexible material such as canvas, sailcloth, plastic or waterproof paper, including, but not limited to, pennants, spinners, streamers, balloons, and flags that are not governmental (local, state, federal). Air powered or mechanical signs are not considered wind signs and are prohibited when larger than 12 feet high. 
(Code 1995, § 150.116)
 
Sec. 34-3. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to create the legal framework for a comprehensive and balanced system of signs in the town. These regulations are intended to provide an easy and pleasant communication between people and their environment and avoid visual interference that is potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance. In addition to protecting the health, welfare, and safety of the community, these standards are adopted in order to: 
(1)	Enhance automobile and pedestrian safety; 
(2)	Protect and enhance economic viability of the town's commerce; 
(3)	Require safe signs and encourage effective signs; 
(4)	Maintain and enhance the aesthetics of our community. 
(Code 1995, § 150.101)
 
Sec. 34-4. Common standards.
(a)	Sign regulations in this chapter are based on street type. 
(b)	All signs must meet applicable state and county building codes and be so stipulated by the sign owner. 
(c)	All signs shall conform to the town lighting ordinance, as amended. Internal lighting is encouraged for illuminated signs. Exposed lighting is discouraged. 
(d)	Maximum total sign height is measured from the finished grade at the center of the sign. If the finished grade at the center of the sign has been raised by any means, the average ground level in the vicinity of the sign will be considered finished grade. 
(e)	Letters less than three inches in height do not count toward sign allowances. 
(f)	Unless otherwise noted, the stipulations of this chapter apply to signs on the building where business is located or on the property where business is located that is owned, leased, or rented by the business. 
(g)	Any sign that can be displayed under the provisions of this chapter may contain otherwise lawful noncommercial messages. 
(h)	Temporary ground signs must be displayed at or behind the property line. Temporary ground signs may not be displayed on a public right-of-way, including medians. 
(i)	A business is allowed a maximum of three business identification signs, only one of which can be a permanent ground sign. Any presence on a permanent ground sign counts as one allowance. 
(j)	Time/date sign or sign components, when used, must conform to all aspects of this chapter and shall count as part of the sign number and area allowance. 
(k)	When fees are charged, they shall be according to the current fee scheduled adopted by the town board of aldermen. 
(l)	The term "business," as defined herein, means an inclusive term meaning not only commercial enterprises but also organizations, churches, schools, or any other public or private entity. 
(m)	The town subjects itself and all its applicable functions to the provisions of this chapter. 
(n)	Penalties are applied according to the penalties provision contained within the town's schedule of fines. 
(o)	All signs placed in the proximity of an intersection shall ensure public safety by observing visibility guidelines as specified by the governmental jurisdictional transportation authority or authorities for the given intersection. In the event that such authority does not exist for the given intersection, the sign installation shall be per the town's standards. 
(Code 1995, § 150.102)
 
Sec. 34-5. Sign permit requirement.
No signs, unless specifically exempted, shall be erected, displayed, or altered within the town without a duly approved sign permit from the town. The town administrator or designee shall ensure that all sign permits are granted only in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Further, no sign permit shall be issued unless a certificate of occupancy (for new development) or privilege license (for new business) has been issued. Failure to obtain a permit to construct a sign constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 150.103)
 
Sec. 34-6. Exemptions.
(a)	The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)	Warning and security signs, including signs placed for the safety, welfare, or convenience of the public, and onsite informational signs. These include, but are not limited to, signs identifying utilities (high voltage, pole-mounted telecommunications, underground cables, etc.) and signs informing the public of business regulations and stipulations for access to the property, such as hours of operation or prohibitions against smoking or alcohol on the premises. Signs qualifying for this exemption shall not exceed eight square feet and the business name and/or logo cannot exceed 25 percent of the sign face area. 
(2)	Government signs, public notices, or warnings required by valid federal, state, or local laws and regulations. This includes flags, insignia, legal notices, informational, directional, and traffic signs which are legally required or necessary to the essential functions of government agencies. 
(3)	"No Dumping" and "No Trespassing" signs, less than two square feet in area per sign face. 
(4)	Signs inside ball fields or other recreational space fencing which are intended for advertising to raise funds for recreation programs or raise awareness for sponsors of the same and which have copy on only one face with the copy facing toward the interior of the field. 
(5)	Non-illuminated names of buildings, dates of erection, monument statues, commemorative tablets and the like that are a permanent type of construction and an integral part of an allowed structure or made flush to the ground. 
(6)	Sculpture or graphic art in any permanent medium whose theme, symbols or historical content is not primarily commercial and is permanently attached to and incorporated into the overall design of a permitted structure. 
(7)	Federal, state or local governmental flags. 
(8)	Traffic control and way-finding signs which are on the business property and contain no commercial message. Examples of traffic control signs include, but are not limited to, stop, yield, pedestrian crossing, and similar signs. Examples of way-finding signs include, but are not limited to, delivery entrances, building location, parking directions, and similar signs which are intended to allow individuals to orient themselves within a facility and locate their desired destination. Signs qualifying for this exemption shall not exceed eight square feet and the business name and/or logo cannot exceed 25 percent of the sign face area. 
(9)	Address signs no greater than five square feet. Address sign area in excess of five square feet shall be counted toward the sign face area permitted on a building facade or monument sign. 
(10)	Internal retail store window displays of merchandise, freestanding three-dimensional promotional items (with or without proprietary words or symbols solely describing the merchandise that is sold in the store), and/or display fixtures not affixed to windowpanes. 
(11)	Holiday lights and decorations without commercial messages. Air-driven holiday decorations may not exceed 12 feet tall above ground level or eight feet wide/deep and there can be no more than one per 10,000 square feet of lot space. 
(12)	Vehicle signs. Unless such signs are used in the manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter, signs displayed on vehicles or trailers which are operable, currently licensed, and being used in the normal course of a business are exempt from regulation as long as they are permanently affixed, magnetically attached, or painted onto vehicles or equipment. 
(13)	Vehicle for sale. Signs affixed to windows of vehicles displaying the terms of sale for said vehicles. 
(14)	Home occupation. Signs less than two square feet per sign face, on the residence property, in close proximity to the dwelling where the business is conducted. 
(b)	Limited exemptions. The following signs are allowed and exempt from the requirement for a sign permit as long as they meet the corresponding standards listed in the Table 1: Signs Exempt from Permit Requirement. 
Table 1: Signs Exempt from Permit Requirement 
Type of sign	Temporary or Permanent	Sign Structure Type	Number of Signs	Maximum Sign Height	Maximum Sign Face Area	Duration and/or Time Limitation	Other Standards
Banners (events) on school-owned or church-owned property 	Temporary 	Attached, ground or fence 	3 	6 ft. 	30 sq. ft. 	May be installed no more than 15 days prior to the event and must be removed within 5 business days after close of event 	May be offsite if in private easement; not on public right-of-way 
Building for sale or lease—existing building 	Temporary 	Ground or attached 	1 per site per street frontage and 1 window sign per occupant space 	6 ft. 	32 sq. ft. per sign face 	Permitted only when space is available for lease or sale on the same site 	
Development / Construction 	Temporary 	Ground 	1 per street frontage 	6 ft. 	32 sq. ft. per sign face 	Signs may be installed after approval of a site plan or concept plan. Sign must be removed within 1 year of erection or on CO issuance for all buildings on the site 	
Garage/yard sale 	Temporary 	Any 	1 onsite, not to exceed 12 offsite 	4 ft. 	4 sq. ft. per sign face 	Display limited to 3 days before and after event 	
Information board 	Temporary or permanent 	Attached 	1 sign per street entrance 	6 ft. 	5 sq. ft. 		Letters can be no larger than 1 inch 
Land for sale 	Temporary 	Ground 	1 sign per street frontage 	6 ft. 	32 sq. ft. per sign face 	Shall be removed when a building permit is obtained for development on the subject property 	
Model home sign 	Temporary 	Ground 	1 per site 	6 ft. 	32 sq. ft. per sign face 	Must be removed upon sale of the house 	
Political 	Temporary 	No limitation 	No limit 	6 ft. 	32 sq. ft. per sign face 	Conform to state regulations 	Signs shall not be displayed on town property except on Election Day 
Residential builder sign 	Temporary 	Ground 	1 per site 	4 ft. 	4 sq. ft. per sign face 	After issuance of building permit; must be removed on CO issuance 	
Residential real estate 	Temporary 	Ground 	1 per site 	4 ft. 	4 sq. ft. per sign face 	No limitation 	
Subdivision marketing or open house 	Temporary 	Ground 	1 onsite, not to exceed 12 offsite signs 	4 ft. 	4 sq. ft. per sign face 	No more than 5 consecutive days 	Must display the telephone number of the real estate broker, sales agent, homeowner, or builder 
Wind and flags 	Temporary or portable 	All 	3 	10 ft. 	15 sq. ft. 	Shall be displayed only when business is open 	Strings of pennants shall not be used 

(Code 1995, § 150.104; Ord. of 5-20-2014)
 
Sec. 34-7. Temporary signs requiring a permit.
The following temporary signs are allowed. They must meet the requirements for a sign permit and comply with the corresponding standards listed in Table 2: Temporary Signs Requiring a Permit. All temporary signs requiring a permit are required to have the permit number and expiration date permanently printed on the sign. 
Table 2: Temporary Signs Requiring a Permit 
Sign Type	Sign Structure	Number of Signs	Maximum Sign Height	Maximum Sign Face Area	Location	Duration	Additional Regulations
Event banner 	Any 	1 per occupant space 	N/A 	0.75 sq. ft. for every 1 ft. of width of occupant space, but not to exceed 40 sq. ft. 	Attached to the building 	30 days, maximum 4 permits per year 	The width of the sign shall not exceed the occupant space width 
Grand opening banner 	Attached 	1 per street frontage 	N/A 	0.75 sq. ft. for every 1 ft. of width of occupant space, but not to exceed 40 sq. ft. 	Attached to the building 	30 days. May be displayed 1 time within 1 year of issuance of CO 	Permitted in addition to the 4 banner permits allowed in a calendar year. The width of the sign shall not exceed the occupant space width 
Sandwich board sign 	Portable 	1 per occupant space 	4 ft. 	8 sq. ft. per sign face 	N/A 	Only allowed during business hours 	Signs may not exceed 2 ft. in width. A minimum of 4 ft. of sidewalk shall remain clear. Chalkboards may be used for daily changing of messages 
Special purpose sign 	Attached or ground 	1 onsite, not to exceed 12 offsite signs 	10 ft. for ground sign 	32 sq. ft. per sign face 	At or behind property lines 	15 business days, must be removed within 3 days after termination of event. Not to exceed 4 times per year 	For events sponsored by nonprofit civic organizations 
Utility pole banner 	Attached 	1 per utility pole 	N/A 	10 sq. ft. per sign face 	N/A 	As approved by the town administrator 	All utility pole banners shall be approved by the appropriate utility company prior to consideration 

(Code 1995, § 150.105; Ord. of 5-20-2014)
 
Sec. 34-8. Permanent sign requirements.
(a)	Construction requirements. All permanent signs shall be designed and constructed according to the currently adopted North Carolina Building Code. By submitting a permit application, the applicant is stating the proposed sign complies with this requirement and recognizes civil and/or criminal liability if sign is found not to comply. 
(b)	Regulation details. The sign regulations for permanent signs requiring a permit are outlined in Table 3: Regulations Per Street Type for Attached Signs Requiring a Permit; Table 4: Further Regulations per Sign Type for Attached Signs Requiring a Permit; Table 5: Regulations per Street Type for Permanent Ground or Monument Signs, and Table 6: Further Regulations per Sign Type for Permanent Ground or Monument Signs. 
(1)	Sign standards for permanent signs with changeable copy.
a.	Minimum letter size is five inches. 
b.	Further restrictions for signs with digital/electronic changeable copy: 
1.	Scrolling copy and/or images are not permitted. 
2.	Frequency of change may not be faster than every three seconds. 
(2)	Sign regulations for attached signs requiring a permit.
a.	This section specifically addresses signs attached to buildings. 
b.	Each occupant space shall be permitted only one attached building sign per street front. 
c.	The dimensions of each sign shall be based upon the street type that the respective building facade fronts on. 
d.	The distance from the edge of the middle of the road shall be measured from the closest street with the highest street type which has clear visibility of the entire facade/occupant space in question. 
e.	Each sign is limited in width to 75 percent of the single-plane facade. 
f.	Attached signs must meet all requirements of Table 3: Regulations per Street type for Attached Signs Requiring a Permit and Table 4: Further Regulations per Sign Type for Attached Signs Requiring a Permit, when applicable. 
Table 3: Regulations per Street Type for Attached Signs Requiring a Permit 
Street Type	Distance from Middle of the Closest Road with the Highest Street Type	No Maximum	Maximum Sign Face Area	Maximum Sign Face Area Relative to Distance from Middle of the Closest Road with the Highest Street Type
			Occupant Space Width	Sign Face Area not to Exceed	
Primary arterial 	<100 ft. 		<30 ft. 
31—50 ft. 
>50 	40 sq. ft. 
60 sq. ft. 
100 sq. ft. 	<100 ft. = 50 sq. ft. 
	>100 ft. 				>100 ft. = 100 sq. ft. 
Secondary arterial 	Any distance 		Any size 		50 sq. ft. 
All other streets 	Any distance 		Any size 		50 sq. ft. 
Internal driveway or parking areas 	<100 ft. 		<30 ft. 
31—50 ft. 
>50 	40 sq. ft. 
60 sq. ft. 
100 sq. ft. 	<100 ft. = 50 sq. ft. 
	>100 ft 				>100 ft. = 100 sq. ft. 
Community-shopping Type 3 Zone 	<100 ft. 		N/A 	100 sq. ft. 	N/A 
	>100 ft. 		N/A 	130 sq. ft. 	N/A 
Heavy Industrial Zone 	<100 ft. 		N/A 	145 sq. ft. 	145 sq. ft. 
	>100 ft. 		NA 	200 sq. ft. 	200 sq. ft. 

Table 4: Further Regulations per Sign Type for Attached Signs Requiring a Permit 
Sign Type	Street Type Where Permitted	Number of Signs	Maximum Sign Face Area	Other Standards
Awning 	All streets 	1 per awning structure 	8 sq. ft. per sign face 	
Blade 	Primary or secondary arterial streets 	1 per occupant space, permitted in addition to the attached signs allowed per occupant space 	8 sq. ft. per sign face 	Shall not be higher than the eave line or parapet wall of the top of the principal building; shall be a minimum of 7 feet above grade when located adjacent to or projecting over a pedestrian way 
	Internal driveway or parking areas 	1 per occupant space in lieu of 1 attached sign 		Shall not be higher than the eave line or parapet wall of the top of the principal building; shall be a minimum of 7 feet above grade; and shall be adjacent to or projecting over a pedestrian way 
Drive through, non-food service 	Internal driveway or parking areas 	2 per site 	8 sq. ft. per sign face 	Directional signs, height clearance signs and all other signs that are not visible from all adjoining streets shall be exempt from this standard as long as the letter height is less than 6 inches 
Menuboard (i.e., food service) 	Internal driveway or parking areas 	2 per site 	24 sq. ft. per sign face 	Must be located at the side or rear of the principal building 
Murals 	All streets 	1 per site 	Not applicable 	Must be for artistic, noncommercial purposes 
Roof 	All streets 	1 per occupant space 	2 ft. high; maximum of 50 sq. ft. and not to exceed 75% of occupant space width 	Allowed only when there is no available visible facade space below the gutter line that is minimally 7 feet above grade, 2 feet high and 75% of occupant space width and excluding door and window space 
Subdivision entry 	All streets 	Up to 2 attached wall signs per street entrance in lieu of a subdivision entry monument sign 	16 sq. ft. per sign face 	

(3)	Regulations per street type for permanent ground or monument signs requiring a permit. 
a.	This section specifically addresses permanent freestanding ground or monument signs. 
b.	If a monument or permanent ground sign consists of multiple smaller signs, they are collectively considered one sign for sign face area measurement purposes. 
c.	Address numbers are required on permanent ground or monument signs and must be at least six inches high. 
d.	Development name is included in the maximum sign face area allowance. 
e.	All development signs must include the name of the development. 
f.	In multiple tenant situations, individual tenants are not allowed individual monument or permanent ground signs. 
g.	Road front sign permits are given only to the property owner or agent. 
h.	Sign height exemptions may be granted to this type of sign when complying with this chapter's regulations would create a safety issue due to visibility or access in or around the sign. However, no sign may be placed in such a manner as to create the safety issue that would qualify for this exemption should another viable location be available. 
i.	Permanent ground or monument signs must meet all requirements of Table 5: Regulations per Street Type for Permanent Ground or Monument Signs Requiring a Permit and Table 6: Further Regulations per Sign Type for Permanent Ground or Monument Signs Requiring a Permit when applicable. 
Table 5: Regulations per Street Type for Permanent Ground or Monument Signs Requiring a Permit 
	Multi-Tenant Structure—Number of Tenants	Number of Signs	Maximum Total Height (ft.)	Maximum Sign Face Area per Side (sq. ft.) Including Development Name
Primary arterial 	7 or more 	1 per 200 ft. increment of street frontage and no closer than 100 ft. 	16 	10 sq. ft. per tenant; not to exceed 130 sq. ft. for all 
	4, 5, or 6 	1 	12 	60 
	1, 2, or 3 	1 	12 	30 
Secondary arterial 	7 or more 	1 per 200 ft. increment of street frontage and no closer than 100 ft. 	12 	6 sq. ft. per tenant; not to exceed 100 sq. ft. for all 
	4, 5, or 6 	1 	10 	40 
	1, 2, or 3 	1 	8 	20 
All other streets 	7 or more 	1 per 200 ft. increment of street frontage and no closer than 100 ft. 	10 	5 sq. ft. per tenant; not to exceed 70 sq. ft. for all 
	4, 5, or 6 	1 	8 	30 
	1, 2, or 3 	1 	8 	20 
Internal driveway or parking areas 	7 or more 	1 per 32 parking spaces. Noncommercial messages exempt 	10 	3 sq. ft. per tenant; not to exceed 50 sq. ft. for all 
	4, 5, or 6 	1 	8 	20 
	1, 2, or 3 	1 	8 	10 
Community-shopping Type 3 Zone 	N/A 	1 	16 for property immediate adjacent to U.S. 19-23/future I-26 	130 sq. ft. 
			32 for property separated from U.S. 19-23/future I-26 by any street (primary, secondary, or other) 	

Table 6: Further Regulations per Sign Type for Permanent Ground or Monument Signs Requiring a Permit 
Sign Type	Number of Signs	Maximum Sign Height (ft.)	Maximum Sign Face Area Per Side (sq. ft.)	Maximum Total Sign Face Area (sq. ft.)	Additional Regulation
Bulletin board 	1 per site 	7 	9 	18 	Bulletin board must be weather resistant with a framed cover 
Directional on site 	2 per site 	7 	24 	48 	Maximum letter height of 5 inches. If there are multiple sign panels on a single sign structure, they all count toward the total maximum sign face area 
Drive-through, non-food service 	3 per site 	7 	9 	18 	Directional signs, height clearance signs and signs that are not visible from adjoining streets shall be exempt from this standard as long as the letter height is less than 5 inches 
Gasoline pricing 	1 per site 	12 	24 	48 	Sign must be integral to the permitted sign for the site. Price per gallon display may not scroll or flash 
Menuboard (i.e., food service) 	2 per site 	7 	24 	48 	Must be located at the side or rear of the principal building. Directional signs, height clearance signs and signs that are not visible from adjoining streets shall be exempt from this standard as long as the letter height is less than 5 inches 
Subdivision entry 	1 per street entrance 	7 	32 	64 	

;adv=7q>(Code 1995, § 150.106; Ord. of 5-20-2014)
 
Sec. 34-9. Offsite directional signs.
Offsite directional are a special class of signs. In order to reduce unnecessary sign proliferation while providing directional information for businesses that are not located on main streets, the town is providing this option for businesses. These signs will only be installed on primary or secondary arterial streets. 
(1)	Offsite directional sign regulations.
a.	The town designs, installs, and maintains offsite directional signs in a uniform style and height allowing space for a maximum of six businesses per sign face. 
b.	Sign space is available only to businesses that do not have street frontage on primary arterial streets unless authorization is otherwise granted by the board of aldermen. 
c.	Businesses located on secondary arterial streets may be allowed offsite directional signs. The sign must be at an intersection with a primary arterial street. The business may also be allowed a second sign if its street intersects two primary arterial streets. 
d.	Businesses not located on either a primary or secondary arterial street may be allowed offsite directional signs. The sign must be at an intersection on the nearest primary or secondary arterial street. If the business' sign is located on a secondary arterial street, a second sign may be allowed at the intersection of that secondary arterial street and one of the primary arterial streets that it intersects. A second offsite directional sign, if desired, will only be allowed on a space available basis. 
e.	Business presence on these signs is available on a first come, first served basis. When sign requests exceed space available, priority will be given to businesses that have no other offsite directional sign presence. Additional requests lead to a lottery system whereby requests are granted by random drawing. The design and execution of any such lotteries shall be at the discretion of the town administrator. Appeals to the results of any said lottery will only be heard by the board of aldermen of the town whose decision in such matters shall be final. 
f.	The applicant business shall be charged licensing fees, privilege fees or other fees by the town. 
g.	Offsite directional signs are not permitted within restricted distances of interstate and other federal highways and shall not be placed at interstate exchanges. 
h.	Any offsite directional sign not meeting the above criteria is unlawful and shall be prohibited. 
(2)	Responsibility of the business represented on offsite directional signs. Businesses wanting sign presence on a town owned offsite direction sign must: 
a.	Petition the town for initial construction when no sign exists and/or their inclusion on such signs once they do exist; 
b.	Apply for space and continued/renewed presence on the sign by July 1 of every other year for a two-year term; 
c.	Pay appropriate fees from the town's fee schedule; and 
d.	Limit the content on the sign for each business to business name, its logo, direction indicator, and distance. 
(3)	Duration and limitations for offsite directional signs.
a.	The businesses' presence on offsite directional signs is retained as long as all appropriate fees are paid within designated time frames. Nonpayment of fees will be cause for removal of the sign and/or late fees. 
b.	A change of business name or ownership shall not affect the sign agreement. The business shall pay the full cost of replacing or modifying the sign with any changed identification. 
c.	The sign agreement is terminated when a business closes and the business shall not be entitled to a refund of any fees charged by the town. 
(Code 1995, § 150.107)
 
Sec. 34-10. Master sign plans.
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of a master sign plan is to allow an applicant the option of designating an area that will define unique characteristics in all sign elements including type, design, and location based upon specific performance criteria. The goal of a master sign plan for a development is to promote site consistency and architectural compatibility among signs, building, and other components of the property and to enhance the ability of the public to easily identify and locate commercial enterprises and other services as applicable. 
(b)	Application process.
(1)	The applicant shall develop a master sign plan for all sign elements in the development based on this chapter, sound sign design guidelines and standards and in compliance with the current North Carolina Building Code. 
(2)	The master sign plan should be submitted to the town administrator, who will review the application for completeness. The applicant will be notified within ten business days of the acceptability of the application. The application will then be forwarded to the planning and zoning board of adjustment, which will render a decision within 45 days. 
(3)	After approval of a master sign plan for a particular development, all signs in that development shall meet the standards approved in that specific master sign plan. 
(c)	Application requirements. A master sign plan application shall be a written and illustrated document to depict the proposed signs which shall include: 
(1)	Proposed sign palette which may include: 
a.	Attached building signs. 
b.	Monument signs. 
c.	Window signs. 
d.	Directional signs. 
e.	Directory signs. 
f.	Pedestrian-oriented signs. 
(2)	Location of all proposed signs included in the sign palette including context of where signs are to be placed on any given facade. 
(3)	Size and number of all proposed signs including maximum area, letter height, number, height, etc. 
(4)	Materials proposed for all signs and sign structures. 
(5)	Color and style palette for all signs (letter colors, background colors, text fonts, etc.). 
(6)	Type of illumination proposed (external, internal, etc.). 
(7)	Landscaping and/or ornamental structures including fences, fountains, public art, groundcover, and other landscaping elements that are intended to complement the proposed sign palette. 
(8)	Any other information as required by the decision-making bodies. 
(Code 1995, § 150.108)
 
Sec. 34-11. Amortization of nonconforming signs.
(a)	Amortization. Any sign in existence on the effective date of the enactment of this sign ordinance which does not comply with this chapter's regulations is deemed a legal nonconforming sign and shall be handled according to the following provisions: 
(1)	Signs deemed legal nonconforming signs and yet not subject to the amortization provisions of this chapter are listed below. This amortization exemption applies only to the sign aspects listed below and does not exempt the sign from other ordinance regulations. These exemptions remain in effect only as long as the signs are maintained in good condition, identify currently-operating businesses, and do not experience changes that would otherwise require the issuance of a new sign permit. 
a.	Signs built after December 31, 2000 that exceed this chapter's height and/or sign face area restrictions. 
b.	Signs that predate 1975. To qualify for this exemption, the sign owner must present signed, notarized affidavits from two individuals with personal knowledge that the sign qualifies as to age. 
c.	Signs with changeable copy greater than 50 percent for manually changed content and 25 percent for digital/electronic. 
(2)	Legal nonconforming signs shall be allowed to remain in existence for a length of time commensurate with initial costs as indicated in the amortization schedule shown below in Table 7: Amortization Schedule for Nonconforming Signs. 
(3)	The owner or operator of any nonconforming sign must furnish the code enforcement officer with acceptable proof of replacement costs in the form of one of the following: 
a.	An original bill of sale. 
b.	A written estimate by a sign manufacturer. 
(4)	A legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its designation and must be brought into compliance or removed if the: 
a.	Sign is found to be in an unsafe condition, as determined by town officials. 
b.	Sign is not kept in good repair and if said condition continues for 45 days from date of official notification. 
c.	Sign is relocated. 
d.	Complete sign is replaced. 
e.	Permit, variance, or condition under which the sign was allowed expires. 
(5)	No nonconforming sign shall be changed, expanded or altered in any manner which will increase the degree of its nonconformity, or be structurally altered to prolong its useful life, or be moved in whole or in part to any other location where it would remain nonconforming. Additions to the content of the sign may only be made if requested or required by a governmental authority. However, nonconforming signs are required to be maintained in good condition. Normal repair and maintenance of a sign shall not be considered structural alteration for the purpose of this provision. The property owner is responsible for removing signs in the event that becomes necessary. 
Table 7: Amortization Schedule for Nonconforming Signs 
Initial Cost	Amortization Period if Permitted Before 12/31/2007	Amortization Period if Permitted on or after 1/1/2008
Less than $500.00 	6 months 	6 months 
$500.00 to $1,500.00 	1 year 	1 year 
$1,501.00 to $10,000.00 	3 years 	5.5 years 
Over $10,000.00 	5.5 years 	12 years 

(b)	Nonconforming signs. In addition to the amortization schedule above, nonconforming signs must be brought into conformance or removed when any of the following conditions are met. 
(1)	Nonconforming signs in use by an individual business must be brought into conformance at such time as improvements are made to the exterior of the property that require a permit and/or exceed 50 percent of the building's tax value. 
(2)	In multi-tenant business complexes where individual businesses are represented on a consolidated sign serving the entire complex, that sign shall be brought into conformance when a building permit is obtained on behalf of the owner of the complex and the estimated value of the improvements exceed $30,000.00. 
(3)	Signs become damaged beyond 50 percent of their value. 
(4)	Signs become obsolete. 
Any nonconforming sign which violates any provision of this section shall be considered a nuisance. Failure to remove within 30 days of the town's official notification shall subject the sign to abatement by the town. The owner of the nonconforming sign shall be responsible for reimbursement to the town for all costs relating to the abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 1995, § 150.109)
 
Sec. 34-12. Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited: 
(1)	Billboards. 
(2)	Signs attached to curbs, sidewalks, gutters, streets, fences, railings, and trees. Utility pole signs are prohibited except as otherwise governed by this chapter wherein approval is required by the planning and zoning board of adjustment and appropriate utility companies. 
(3)	Signs which prevent free ingress to or egress from any legal entrance/exit or fire escape. 
(4)	Signs erected or displayed in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of pedestrian or vehicular traffic at any location, street, intersection, or driveway. All signs at intersections must conform to guidelines set forth by the governmental transportation authority with jurisdiction for that intersection. 
(5)	Signs which interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic as a result of the position, size, shape, movement, color, fashion, manner, or intensity of illumination or any other characteristics causing such interference. 
(6)	Signs which may be confused with any authorized traffic or pedestrian sign, signal, or device. 
(7)	Signs erected or displayed on or over public right-of-way or other public property, excluding signs erected by the town, county, state or other authorized governmental agency, or with the permission of the town, for public purposes. 
(8)	Banners when used as permanent signs. 
(9)	Signs that contain offensive themes or content, and are without redeeming social value. 
(10)	Signs illuminated to such intensity or in such a manner as to cause a glare or brightness to a degree that it constitutes a hazard or nuisance to traffic. If questioned, the final determination will be made by the town chief of police. 
(11)	Signs that move or flash or have moving or flashing components; signs that are intermittently lighted (flashing) or have changing colors; signs that revolve. This prohibition does not apply to signs with changeable copy which are addressed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(12)	Signs that are air-powered or mechanical and with moving or articulated components that are in excess of 12 feet tall measured from ground level. 
(13)	Illuminated signs erected or displayed within 150 feet of a single-family, residentially-zoned property unless the lighting is shielded from view of the residentially-zoned property and indirect light does not exceed the intensity as specified in the town lighting ordinance, as amended. 
(14)	Any sign attached to a trailer, skid, or similar mobile structure, where the primary use of such structure is to provide a base for such sign or to constitute the sign itself. This provision shall not be interpreted to prohibit identification signs on vehicles used for business purposes, nor shall it be interpreted to prohibit bumper stickers. 
(15)	Vehicular signs. Signs placed on vehicles or trailers which are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying said sign. This does not apply to signs or lettering on vehicles in operation during the normal course of business, nor does it apply to temporary construction site vehicles on active construction sites. 
(16)	Structural or non-structural additions or attachments to monument signs, excluding structural modifications for which a valid permit has been issued. 
(17)	Roof signs except as permitted in section 34-8, Table 4. 
(18)	Window signs except as permitted in section 34-6, Table 1. 
(19)	Air driven holiday decorations that are greater than 12 feet tall above ground level or eight feet wide/deep. 
(20)	Any external sign, visible from the road, and designed to advertise a particular brand or product and where the business is not mentioned. 
(21)	Any sign not specifically permitted by this chapter. 
(Code 1995, § 150.110; Ord. of 5-20-2014)
 
Sec. 34-13. Administration.
(a)	Role of the town administrator. The town administrator may designate a town employee (designee) who shall administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(b)	Application for a permit. Application for a permit shall be made as required by this chapter and the following information shall be submitted on town-approved documents: 
(1)	Application form shall be completed. 
(2)	General plan that illustrates: 
a.	Location of the building, structure, or tract to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected. 
b.	Position of the sign in relation to rights-of-way, easements, buildings, structures, and existing signs. 
c.	Sign drawing that illustrates height, length, width, and all other dimensions associated with the sign. 
(3)	Signature of the owner of the property or the owner's agent stating that the applicant has permission to erect such signs. 
(4)	Identification and appropriate license if sign is to be installed by a sign contractor. 
(5)	The town administrator shall review the permit application and make a decision on whether to grant or deny the requested permit within ten business days of submittal of a fully completed application. If additional information is required of an applicant in order to complete an application, the applicant shall be notified of that fact within five business days. Thereafter, the town administrator shall make a decision on whether to grant or deny the requested permit within ten business days of receiving the additional information or a written certification from the applicant that the application is complete. 
(c)	Fees. All fees for sign permits shall be in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the board of aldermen. Fees not paid by the appropriate payment dates shall incur a late payment fee. No fee is charged for a permit to replace a nonconforming sign with a conforming sign. 
(d)	Consistent interpretation over time. The granting of a sign permit implies an interpretation of the sign's compliance to this chapter that cannot be re-interpreted at a later date. Also, applicants for sign permits may request a conformance letter-of-opinion from the town that is not subject to revocation by future town administration. 
(e)	Permit expiration. If the work authorized by a permit issued under this chapter has not been commenced within 90 days after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void, thereby requiring a new application with appropriate fees. 
(f)	Appeals and variances.
(1)	Appeals. Any decision rendered by the town administrator under this chapter may be appealed to the planning and zoning board of adjustment by the applicant or their agent. Such appeal shall be filed in writing within 30 days of the date of the town administrator's decision. The appeal shall be filed with the planning and zoning board of adjustment by submitting necessary and pertinent documents specifying the grounds on which the appeal is based and payment of any and all applicable fees. The planning and zoning board of adjustment shall hear the appeal at their next regular meeting or within 45 days. The decision of the planning and zoning board of adjustment may be appealed to the board of aldermen whose decision will be final. 
(2)	Variances. The planning and zoning board of adjustment may authorize variances to any restriction set forth in this chapter, including, but not limited to, the number, type, area, height, or any other aspect involved in the sign permitting process. Any decision of the planning and zoning board of adjustment may be appealed to the superior court of the state. 
a.	Application process. Any request for a variance shall be made to the town administrator and be accompanied by a completed application and a non-refundable filing fee in the amount specified in the current fee schedule adopted by the board of aldermen. The town administrator shall forward the variance application to the planning and zoning board of adjustment and take appropriate legal measures to inform the public as required by state law. 
b.	Approval standards. In granting any variance, the planning and zoning board of adjustment shall consider and find true all of the following: 
1.	If the applicant follows this chapter as written, the proposed sign will have no practical use; 
2.	The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant, and are a function of the property itself; 
3.	Such conditions and circumstances do not merely constitute monetary hardship or inconveniences; 
4.	Granting the variance will meet the objectives of this chapter, and will not be detrimental to the development of adjoining property, the public welfare, or infringe upon the current legal uses of surrounding properties; 
5.	The request must be the minimum variance necessary to alleviate the special hardship or practical difficulties faced by the applicant in meeting the requirements of this chapter; 
6.	No variance will result in the extension of a nonconforming use or authorize initiation of a nonconforming use; and 
7.	Granting of the variance will be in harmony with the spirit and purpose of this chapter and secure the public safety and welfare and due substantial justice. 
c.	Decision rendered. The decision, including any stipulations, will be rendered in writing within ten business days. Violation of any of the stipulations or conditions enumerated by the planning and zoning board of adjustment will allow for the immediate revocation of the variance. 
(g)	Responsibility for enforcement. It is the responsibility of the town administrator to interpret and administer the requirements of this chapter. 
(1)	The town administrator may suspend or revoke any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter whenever it is determined that the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or false information supplied, or whenever such permit is issued in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance of the town or laws of the state or the federal government. Such suspension or revocation shall be effective when communicated to the person to whom the permit is issued, the owner of the sign, or the owner of the site upon which the sign is located. Upon such revocation, all construction related to the revoked permit shall cease. 
(2)	A person may appeal the revocation of the sign permit to the planning and zoning board of adjustment by filing an appeal in accordance with this chapter. Upon final determination that the permit is properly revoked, any portion of the sign in place as a result of the permit shall be removed within ten days by the owner of the sign or the owner of the site on which the sign is located. Failure to remove the sign shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(3)	The town may use any means deemed appropriate by the town for ensuring sign conformance. The town administrator may periodically inspect each sign regulated by this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining whether the sign remains in conformance, has become obsolete, or is in need of removal or repair. The town administrator may establish a street-by-street survey schedule that causes every sign to be inspected at least annually. These inspections include all permitted, temporary, and permit-exempt signs. Inspections also identify prohibited signs should they appear within the town's corporate limits. 
(4)	Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this chapter has been commenced or completed without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may be issued for such work. An investigation fee, in addition to the permit fee, may be collected whether or not a permit is then subsequently issued. The investigation fee shall equal 150 percent of the permit fee required by this chapter. 
(5)	The following signs shall be removed based on the determination of the town administrator: 
a.	Obsolete signs. Any sign which the town administrator determines to be obsolete shall be removed by the permit holder, owner of the sign or owner of the site on which the sign is located. For temporary signs, the sign must be removed as noted on the sign permit application or within ten business days after receiving written notification to do so from the town administrator. For permanent signs, the sign must be removed by the permit holder, owner of the sign, or owner of the site on which the sign is located within 30 days or such other time limit as determined by the town administrator. Upon failure to comply with such notice or to file an appeal of the decision in accordance with this chapter, the town administrator is authorized to cause the removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the permit holder, owner of the sign or owner of the site on which the sign is located. 
b.	Unsafe, dilapidated, or deteriorated sign. If the town administrator determines that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is dilapidated or deteriorated, written notice shall be given to remove or replace (in accordance with this chapter) said sign to the person responsible for such sign. If the permit holder, owner of the sign or owner of the site on which the sign is located fails to remove or repair the sign within ten business days after such notice or to file an appeal of the decision in accordance with this chapter, the town administrator is hereby authorized to cause the removal of such sign. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the immediate removal, without notice, of any sign or portion of a sign which is determined by the town administrator to be an immediate threat or danger to the public health, safety, or welfare of the people of the town. Any expense incident to the removal of a sign pursuant to this subsection shall be paid by the permit holder, owner of the sign or owner of the site on which the sign is located. The removal of the sign or portion of the sign shall be limited to the extent necessary to eliminate the threat to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
c.	Signs on utility poles. Signs on utility poles are prohibited except for specific utility pole banners as approved by the planning and zoning board of adjustment and the appropriate utility company. 
d.	Signs to be removed by the town; in right-of-way, on public property, or illegally erected signs. Any sign that is erected, constructed, or otherwise located within or upon public right-of-way, on public property unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, or which the town administrator determines to be in direct violation of this chapter may be removed by the town. The owner or installer of such sign shall be charged a sign recovery fee in accordance with the current fee schedule adopted by the board of aldermen to recover such sign from the town. No such fee shall be charged if the permit holder or owner satisfactorily establishes that such sign was not placed in the right-of-way by the permit holder or owner of such sign or by any authorized agent, representative or employee of said owner. Any such sign removed by town personnel may be held for a period of three business days and, upon expiration of such time, may be destroyed. The town is not required to notify the permit holder or owner of the sign that it has been picked up or that disposal of the sign is imminent. 
e.	Signs to be removed by the owner. The permit holder, owner of the sign, or owner of the site on which permanent signs determined to be removed are located is responsible for their removal within a reasonable time period as specified by the town administrator. Upon failure to comply with such removal notice or to file an appeal of the decision in accordance with this chapter, the town administrator is authorized to cause the removal of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the permit holder, owner of the sign or owner of the site on which the sign is located. 
f.	Extent of the sign removal. The town administrator shall determine to what extent the elements of the sign must be removed to comply with this section. This may include, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
1.	Removal of the text or copy portion of the sign. 
2.	Removal of the portion of the sign excluding the structural support. 
3.	Removal of all structural elements of the sign. 
(h)	Penalty for violation. Any person who erects a sign that is not in compliance with any provision in this chapter, may be assessed a penalty by the administrator equal to 300 percent of the sign permit fee per incident. Each day the violation exists shall be considered a separate incident. A violation, penalty, or requirement of this chapter that is not rectified within 90 days shall become subject to additional penalty. 
(Code 1995, § 150.111)
 
Chapter 38 SOLID WASTE
 
Sec. 38-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building material scraps means scrap building material from the construction, reconstruction, remodeling or repair of a building, walkway, driveway, sign and other structure, including, but not limited to, excavated earth, tree stumps, rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete, lumber or any other similar material used in construction or the containers or wrappings thereof. 
Bulky waste means large items of solid waste such as furniture, white goods (see definition below), large auto parts, stumps, and other oversized wastes whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by normal solid waste collection, processing, and disposal methods. 
Garbage means all putrescible wastes, including animal and vegetable matter, animal offal and carcasses, and recognizable industrial byproducts but excluding sewage and human wastes. 
Refuse means all nonputrescible wastes. 
Solid waste means garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, and other discarded solid materials, including solid waste materials resulting from homes, businesses, industrial, commercial, and agriculture operations, and from community activities, but does not include solids or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water sources, such as silt, dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluent, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or other common water pollutants. 
Tree trimmings mean tree limbs, leaves, shrubbery, weeds, plants or grass. 
White goods means inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, water heaters, freezers, and other similar domestic and commercial large appliances. 
(Code 1995, § 50.01; Ord. of 3-23-1993)
 
Sec. 38-2. Maintenance of premises.
All refuse, trash, white goods, or garbage which originates upon any premises shall not be permitted by the owner or occupant of such premises to accumulate in such manner or in such quantity as to constitute a fire hazard or a danger to health or as to become offensive or otherwise become a public nuisance. Garbage, trash, and refuse shall be disposed of regularly as provided in this chapter and shall be done in a sanitary and lawful manner. 
(Code 1995, § 50.03; Ord. of 3-23-1993)
 
Sec. 38-3. Collection by town; containers.
(a)	Every owner and every occupant or other person in control of any home, building, or land in the town, including vacant property, shall keep the same in a clean and orderly condition and shall deposit trash, garbage, and refuse in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with regulations promulgated by the board of aldermen, the town administrator, or the authorized agent of either. 
(b)	Every owner and every occupant or other person in control of any house, building, or land in the town shall provide and maintain containers in which shall be deposited all garbage, trash, refuse, or other solid wastes existing at such building. The occupant of every building where garbage, trash, and refuse does or may exist shall provide containers made of substantial galvanized iron, plastic, rubber, or other non-rusting material in which shall be deposited all garbage, trash, and refuse existing at such building or premises. Each container shall be provided with handles or bails and with a tightfitting cover made of the same material as the container. All containers shall be watertight and they shall be of a size that can be conveniently handled by the collectors, and no container shall be more than 30 gallons in capacity and measure not over 22 inches in diameter nor 30 inches in height. All containers shall be kept in a reasonably clean condition. No corrugated cardboard shall be deposited in collection containers. Cardboard shall be collected on designated days as determined by the board of aldermen, the town administrator, or authorized agent of either. The number of collection containers shall be limited to eight containers per residence and 16 containers per business (including commercial, industrial, and service) collected per week. Collection of garbage, refuse, or trash exceeding the limits will be subject to the schedule of rates in section 38-8. 
(Code 1995, § 50.05; Ord. of 3-23-1993)
 
Sec. 38-4. Location of containers.
(a)	Containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street or sidewalk except on the days when garbage is to be collected. A schedule of collection shall be kept on file at the administrator's office. When collection schedules are altered from time to time, notice of such change shall be given by publishing the new schedule in a newspaper having general circulation in the town. Garbage containers and recycling containers shall be removed from their positions adjacent to the street or sidewalk after the contents have been emptied on the same day. 
(b)	It is declared unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation operating a business in the town to place garbage or any kind of waste material into the area at the rear of such business establishment, except that the owner or proprietor of each business shall place or cause to be placed a suitable container at the rear of the business establishment. The waste or garbage shall be placed therein for the purpose of being removed by the town garbage collector, and the containers shall be approved by the officer or employee of the town charged with supervision over garbage and refuse collection. 
(Code 1995, § 50.06; Ord. of 3-23-1993; Ord. of 7-20-2010)
 
Sec. 38-5. Unlawful to displace containers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, displace or otherwise interfere with garbage containers or their contents except the owner or upon permission or at the request of the owner. 
(Code 1995, § 50.07; Ord. of 3-23-1993)
 
Sec. 38-6. Tree trimmings; bulk collections; yard waste.
(a)	Tree trimmings. No tree trimmings will be collected in excess of six feet in length and three inches in diameter without a special charge as set forth in the schedule in section 38-8. 
(b)	Bulk collections. Any property owner desiring special bulk collections of loose matter not in closed containers or tied in bundles may request a special collection for which a special charge will be made. If sufficient manpower and equipment are available, town personnel are authorized to make such special collections, provided the person making the request agrees to pay for the labor and equipment used at the rate specified by the mayor or the town administrator. 
(c)	Prohibited items. No collection shall be made from vacant lots nor shall any large rocks, tree trunks, or tree stumps, or other heavy objects be collected by the town. No waste building materials or lot clearings shall be collected from houses or other structures under construction or recently remodeled. No collections will be made of used tires. Presence of used tires in waste material will result in the town declining to haul trash. 
(d)	Yard waste; leaves.
(1)	Yard waste to be collected by special collections shall be placed in piles and so located that such refuse can be easily loaded on trucks for disposal. No collections will be made of grass clippings. 
(2)	Leaves shall be collected beginning October 15 through January 15 of each year. 
(Code 1995, § 50.08; Ord. of 3-23-1993)
 
Sec. 38-7. Removal of dead animals.
Dead animals will be removed from any premises by the town upon notice to the mayor or town administrator of the existence of such dead animal. 
(Code 1995, § 50.09; Ord. of 3-23-1993)
 
Sec. 38-8. Fee schedule.
(a)	Pickup service.
(1)	Pickup of approved trash cans. The town will pick up approved trash cans twice per week. 
(2)	Business pickup. If a business requires more frequent service, then the business will be charged a service fee as established annually by the board of aldermen. 
(3)	Landfill fees. In addition to the fees above, current landfill tipping fees will also be charged on a ton basis as established annually by the board of aldermen. 
(b)	Normal bulk pickups. Normal bulk pickups, which includes collection of any trash that is not in approved containers, will be on a fee basis as established annually by the board of aldermen. 
(1)	Yardage will be billed on a monthly basis. 
(2)	Business pickups. If a business utilizing bulk service requires more than twice per week service, then in addition to normal fees, an additional trip fee will be incurred. 
(c)	Special bulk pickups.
(1)	Special bulk pickups are those pickups not normally scheduled on a weekly basis. 
(2)	Business pickups. The town will make a special bulk pickup on the request of the business and charge a fee which includes the trip and yardage fee. The trip fee and the yardage fee will be as established annually by the board of aldermen. 
(Code 1995, § 50.10; Ord. of 3-23-1993)
 
Sec. 38-9. Commercial dumpsters required for trailer parks and apartment buildings or complexes.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Major trailer parks andapartment buildings and complexes mean commercial housing developments that contain five or more units of housing. The town shall be the sole determiner of what qualifies as a unit of housing. 
(b)	Requirement for commercial dumpster. Within 90 days of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, all trailer parks and apartment buildings and complexes with five or more housing units for rent shall be required to arrange for the placement and perpetual maintenance of a commercial dumpster for the collection of garbage and household refuse for the tenants thereof. At a point 90 days after final passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the town will inspect each such premises within the municipality and determine if said premises are in compliance. 
(Code 1995, § 50.11; Ord. of 4-20-2004)
 
Sec. 38-10. Depositing of household garbage in public municipal garbage containers.
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garbage container means any container whatsoever that has been designated or would reasonably be believed to have been designated by the town for the collection of refuse, trash, garbage, recycling or other such matter. 
Household garbage means any garbage, trash, refuse, recycling, waste, offal, or other undesirable matter, as defined specifically or generally in this chapter, and not limited solely to residential garbage but to anything defined as garbage by the town that was not generated at or used primarily at or with the parks and other public facilities of the town. 
(b)	Depositing of household garbage in public municipal garbage containers.
(1)	It shall constitute the offense of littering for any individual, group, business, organization or any other such entity to cause or place garbage and waste generated at another location into the public municipal garbage containers of the town. 
(2)	It shall constitute a separate offense to place household garbage on top of, adjacent to, near, or against public municipal garbage containers. 
(Code 1995, § 50.12; Ord. of 7-20-2010)
 
Sec. 38-11. Animal or human waste.
It shall be unlawful to dispose of animal or human waste in a garbage container unless such waste is disposed of in tightly sealed garbage bags free from holes or tears. Failure to comply with this chapter will result in fines to be accrued as follows: 
First offense 	Warning 
Second offense 	$25.00 fine 
Third offense 	$100.00 fine 
Fourth and subsequent offenses 	$500.00 fine 

(Code 1995, § 50.13; Ord. of 3-17-2015)
 
Sec. 38-12. Penalty.
Any willful and knowing refusal to pay fees assessed in this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in accordance with section 1-13. 
(Code 1995, § 50.99; Ord. of 3-23-1993)
 
Chapter 42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 42-1. Board approval of new streets.
Before any new street offered for dedication to the town is accepted as such, and officially recognized as a town-maintained street, the board must give its approval, finding that the street complies with engineering standards set by the board, and that the best interests of the town would be served by accepting the street as a town street. 
(Code 1995, § 51.01)
 
Secs. 42-2—42-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. EXCAVATION AND REPAIR
 
Sec. 42-21. Excavation; permit required.
No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig a ditch, trench, tunnel, or hole in, along, across, or under any street, sidewalk, or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, or poles or for any other purposes unless a written permit therefor has been issued by some officer of the town vested with proper authority, provided that a permit shall not be required where the work is performed under contract with the town, but in the event the work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the party performing the work shall notify the town at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1995, § 51.15)
 
Sec. 42-22. Application; fees.
All persons desiring a permit to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 42-21, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. A fee may be required by the board for such permit. 
(Code 1995, § 51.16)
 
Sec. 42-23. Street repair; after excavation.
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public place of the town shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making the excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening, and the refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and specifications of the town. 
(Code 1995, § 51.17)
 
Sec. 42-24. Excavations; leaving unprotected.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation who obtains a permit under the sections of this article to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk, or public space of the town without placing and maintaining proper guard rails three feet from the ground and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of the excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of the excavation or work. 
(Code 1995, § 51.18)
 
Sec. 42-25. Streets not to be damaged by tractors or harrows.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag, or run or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine, machine, or tool on any asphalt or other type of permanently paved street of the town which shall be likely in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof. 
(b)	Any person violating subsection (a) of this section shall be liable to the town for the cost of repairing any and all damage caused. 
(Code 1995, § 51.19)
 
Sec. 42-26. Sidewalk construction.
No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm, or corporation of any brick, wood, or other material without a written permit from the town. 
(Code 1995, § 51.20)
 
Sec. 42-27. House moving.
No person shall move any house or building on or across the public streets or sidewalks without the written consent of the board and the deposit of a good and sufficient bond to cover damage done to any street or sidewalk or to any property of any person. 
(Code 1995, § 51.21)
 
Sec. 42-28. Damage to town property.
No person shall injure, tamper with, remove, paint on, or deface any bridge, culvert, ditch and drain, sign, sign post, street light, traffic signal, bulletin board, or other town property on the streets and sidewalks or elsewhere except employees of the town in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1995, § 51.22)
 
Sec. 42-29. Driveways; permit required.
No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter, or grade any driveway on the public streets, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the town. 
(Code 1995, § 51.23)
 
Secs. 42-30—42-46. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PUBLIC SIDEWALK ADMINISTRATION
 
Sec. 42-47. Public sidewalks.
(a)	This article shall be applicable to all public sidewalks within the town. All sidewalks within the right-of-way expressed or implied of public roadways shall presumptively be considered public sidewalks. All sidewalks previously constructed by, or dedicated for public use to the town shall presumptively be considered public sidewalks and the area upon which they are constructed shall be subject to such easement and right-of-way as shall be sufficient for the town to repair, construct, and replace such sidewalk. 
(b)	Any area lying between public roadways and public sidewalks lie within the sidewalk easement and right-of-way and are subject to the regulation of public sidewalks. Any vegetation or other covering such as decorative pavers on such area shall not exceed six inches in height. 
(c)	As the context requires, the definition of the term "public sidewalks" includes all public parks and walkways. 
(Code 1995, § 51.24; Ord. of 11-20-2012)
 
Sec. 42-48. Structures, merchandise, equipment or other objects on sidewalks.
(a)	Except as may be specifically otherwise provided in this article, no structures, merchandise, equipment, or other objects of any kind may be placed on or upon public sidewalks except as specifically permitted by the town as set forth in a duly executed encroachment agreement. 
(b)	This prohibition shall not apply to loading, unloading, moving, or transportation of such merchandise, equipment, or other objects, provided that such activity does not unduly inconvenience the citizens of the town in the estimation of the town administrator or his agents. 
(c)	This prohibition shall not apply to solid waste garbage cans and recycling containers approved or issued by the town when placed on the public sidewalks at times and in specific areas designated by the director of public works. This prohibition shall also not apply to tree trimmings, grass, leaves, and similar materials when placed on or near public sidewalks in accordance with this Code and policies adopted by the town. 
(Code 1995, § 51.25; Ord. of 11-20-2012)
 
Sec. 42-49. Community events and festivals.
(a)	Notwithstanding the provisions of this article to the contrary, the town administrator is hereby authorized to permit certain types of community events or festivals to take place upon the public streets and sidewalks of the town. 
(b)	The sponsor of the event or festival shall submit to the town administrator a written application for a permit prior to the opening of the community event or festival for which a permit is desired. Such application shall be submitted no less than seven days prior to the opening of any festival and no less than 30 days prior to the opening of any festival for which the closing of roadways is requested. 
(c)	In deciding whether to issue a permit, the town administrator or designee shall consider: 
(1)	The number of persons to participate; 
(2)	The anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the activity; 
(3)	The schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have been issued; 
(4)	The adequacy of adult supervision for any minor scheduled to participate; 
(5)	The availability of town personnel whose presence on duty may be required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public; and 
(6)	The adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of public facilities in the proposed location. 
(d)	The terms of the permit shall take into consideration the costs of the town in connection therewith, including the costs of cleaning services necessary to rid the festival area of all debris and litter created as a result of the event or festival. The permit may provide that the sponsor be responsible for payment to the town, of the costs incurred or to be incurred by the town, in connection with the event and may also provide for the assumption of certain responsibilities by the event sponsor, such as cleaning, as determined by the town administrator. Such payment of costs shall not apply to town-sponsored events. 
(e)	The issuance of a permit to a sponsor shall authorize only that sponsor and participants specifically authorized by the sponsor to participate in that community event or festival. 
(Code 1995, § 51.27; Ord. of 11-20-2012)
 
Sec. 42-50. Awnings, overhangs, signage.
(a)	No awning, overhang, or signage, including supporting structures thereof, may be located in or over the traveled portion of any public right-of-way, including sidewalks, unless attached to a structural element of the building and an encroachment agreement has been obtained. 
(b)	In addition to all other requirements as may be necessary for consideration of an encroachment permit, no portion of any awning, overhang, or signage shall be less than seven feet above the surface of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1995, § 51.28; Ord. of 11-20-2012)
 
Sec. 42-51. Bicycles, skateboards and similar apparatus on sidewalks.
No person shall ride or operate a bicycle, skateboard, scooter, skates, or similar apparatus upon the sidewalks. 
(Code 1995, § 51.29; Ord. of 11-20-2012)
 
Sec. 42-52. Central business district.
(a)	The central business district, as used herein, shall be defined as set forth by the board of aldermen as amended from time to time. 
(b)	It is acknowledged that use of public spaces within the central business district significantly affects the image of the town and determines whether the central business district is conducive for the conduct of businesses therein and the use and enjoyment of the public. To this end, this article specifically regulates the conditions under which encroachment agreements may be granted for such central business district. 
(c)	It is the policy of the town to strictly limit encroachments on the public sidewalks in the central business district. Encroachment permits must be obtained for any type of vending machine, newspaper rack, or similar device, whether dispensed at a charge or for free, within the central business district. 
(d)	The town reserves the right and privilege to place planters, seating areas, and decorative objects upon the public sidewalks in the central business district. Encroachment agreements with property owners will be considered for planters, seating, and other objects consistent with the planters and seating areas maintained upon such public sidewalks by the town. 
(e)	Merchandise and structures or devices holding or displaying the same may be allowed on the sidewalks in the central business district only upon the execution of an encroachment agreement. In the event such an encroachment agreement is issued, the following restrictions shall apply: 
(1)	Merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which they are displayed shall be located so that a minimum of three feet of passage for pedestrian traffic shall be provided at all times. 
(2)	No fixtures or devices on which outdoor merchandise is displayed shall be attached to the sidewalk without the specific permission of the town in the encroachment agreement. 
(3)	Outdoor merchandise display areas will be permitted only adjacent to the building or structure in which the retail business is located. Outdoor merchandise areas shall not be permitted next to the curb of the street or in the middle of such sidewalks without allowing such minimum clearance for passage of pedestrian traffic as above provided. (Note: this section shall apply to display of merchandise. Sale of merchandise on town sidewalks are governed by other regulations of the town.) 
(4)	Merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed must not block regulatory signs, crosswalks, or intersections. 
(5)	All merchandise located within an outdoor merchandise area shall be placed so that the merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed are stable and not easily tipped and do not include sharp edges, protrusions, or other features which may be hazardous to the public. 
(6)	All displays of merchandise must be of sufficient size, height, and position so that safe pedestrian traffic is not impeded. 
(7)	Generally, encroachment permits shall provide that all merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed shall be moved inside the building or structure wherein the retail business is located during the hours the retail business is not operated. However, encroachment permits may allow the display of merchandise and the use of such fixtures or devices during the hours the retail business is not operating, including overnight, on a seasonal basis. 
(8)	All merchandise and the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed must be secured so that it may not be dislodged during windy or stormy weather prior to being moved inside the building or structure wherein the retail business is located. 
(9)	All such merchandise, fixtures, and devices shall be removed from the sidewalk when directed to do so by a law enforcement officer, fire official, administrative personnel of the town or emergency medical personnel in the event of an emergency or a situation in which exigent circumstances arise. 
(10)	The permit holder for the outdoor merchandise area shall be responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, and security of the fixtures or devices on which the merchandise is displayed and the town shall not have any responsibility for the same. 
(11)	The permit holder shall be responsible for keeping the outdoor merchandise area clean of garbage, trash, paper, cups, cans, or litter associated with the operation of the outdoor merchandise area. 
(Code 1995, § 51.30; Ord. of 11-20-2012)
 
Sec. 42-53. Spaces under sidewalks.
(a)	No person, firm, or corporation shall use or appropriate any space under a sidewalk for a cellar or other underground uses without first obtaining a permit from the town council, which permit shall be revocable at the will of the council with or without notice. In the event that the board of aldermen shall grant such a permit, the permit holder must agree to indemnify and hold harmless the town from any and all liability which may arise out of or in connection with the use of such space under the sidewalk by the permit holder. The permit holder shall also provide such other insurance coverage as shall be required by such permit. 
(b)	In the event such a permit is granted, the permit holder shall be responsible for such modifications as shall be necessary to make the sidewalk over any underground space of such construction so as to permit travel over the same by pedestrians free from danger. 
(Code 1995, § 51.31; Ord. of 11-20-2012)
 
Chapter 46 SUBDIVISIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 46-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina," and may be referred to as the "Subdivision Regulations." 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-2. Purpose.
(a)	The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for the development and subdivision of land within the territorial jurisdiction of the town. 
(b)	It is further designed to provide for: 
(1)	The orderly growth and development of the town; 
(2)	The coordination of streets and highways within proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and highways and with other public facilities; 
(3)	The dedication or reservation of recreation areas serving residents of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision and of rights-of-way or easements for street and utility purposes; and 
(4)	The distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion and overcrowding and will create conditions essential to public health, safety, and the general welfare. 
(c)	This chapter is designed to further facilitate adequate provisions of water, sewerage, parks, schools, and playgrounds, and also to facilitate the further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-3. Authority.
This chapter is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of G.S. ch. 160D, art. 8. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-4. Jurisdiction.
The regulations contained herein, as provided in G.S. 160D-201, shall govern each and every subdivision within the town official boundary map. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-5. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block means a piece of land bounded on one or more sides by streets or roads. 
Buffer strip. If the locality uses the optional section on buffer strips, it should be defined a buffer strip here. 
Building setback line means a line parallel to the front property line in front of which no structure shall be erected. Setbacks shall be figured from the right-of-way line. 
Dedication means a gift, by the owner, or a right to use of land for a specified purpose, because a transfer of property rights is entailed. Dedication must be made by written instrument, and is completed with an acceptance. 
Easement means a grant by the property owner of a strip of land for a specified purpose and use by the public, a corporation, or persons. 
Half street means a street whose centerline coincides with a subdivision plat boundary, with one-half the street right-of-way width being contained within the subdivision plat. Also, any existing street to which the parcel of land to be subdivided abuts on only one side. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit of transfer of ownership or for development or both. Includes the words "plot," "parcel," or "tract." 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county prior to February 15, 1988, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded prior to February 15, 1988. 
Lot types.
(1)	Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot abutting a curved street shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot's lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angel of less than 135 degrees. 
(2)	Double frontage lot means a continuous (through) lot which is accessible from both streets upon which it fronts. 
(3)	Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street. 
(4)	Through lot or double frontage lot means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as double frontage lots. 
(5)	Reversed frontage lot means a lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles (interior angles less than 135 degrees) to the general patter in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot, an interior lot or a through lot. 
(6)	Single-tier lot means a lot which backs upon a limited access highway, a railroad, a physical barrier, or another type of land use and to which access from the rear is usually prohibited. 
Major subdivision means any subdivision not defined as a minor subdivision. 
Minor subdivision means a subdivision of land meeting all of the following criteria: 
(a)	Containing not more than four lots or building sites abutting an existing public street or access easement thereto; 
(b)	Not involving the extension of any new public utilities, other than laterals to individual lots; 
(c)	Not requiring any new street construction or street right-of-way dedication; and 
(d)	Where the use of all of the lots will be for single family residences. 
Official maps of plans means any maps of plans officially adopted by the board of commissioners. 
Open space means an area (land and/or water) generally lacking in manmade structures and reserved for enjoyment in its unaltered state. 
Planned unit development means a definition compatible with chapter 54 should be inserted here. 
Plat means a map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been subdivided. 
Private driveway means a roadway serving two or fewer lots, building sites or other divisions of land and not intended to be public ingress or egress. 
Private street means an undedicated private right-of-way which affords access to abutting properties and requires a subdivision streets disclosure statement in accordance with G.S. 136-102.6. 
Public sewage disposal system. The current definitions should be inserted. 
Recreation area or park means an area of land or combination of land and water resources that is developed for active and/or passive recreation pursuits with carious manmade features that accommodate such activities. 
Reservation. A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of property rights. It simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from development for a stated period of time. 
Rural roads.
(1)	Principal arterial means a rural link in a network of continuous routes serving corridor movements having trip length and travel density characteristics indicative of substantial statewide or interstate travel and existing solely to service traffic. This network would consist of interstate routes and other routes designed as principal arterials. 
(2)	Minor arterial means a rural link in a network joining cities and larger towns and providing interstate and intrastate and intercounty service at relatively high overall travel speeds with minimum interference to through movement. This network would primarily serve traffic. 
(3)	Major collector means a road which serves major intercounty travel corridors and traffic generators and provides access to the arterial system. 
(4)	Minor collector means a road which provides service to small local communities and links locally important traffic generators with their rural hinterland. 
(5)	Local street means any link not part of a higher order urban system which serves primarily to provide direct access to abutting land and access to higher systems. 
Shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Street means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic. The following classifications shall apply: 
(1)	Specific type rural or urban streets.
a.	Freeway, expressway, or parkway means a divided multi-lane roadway designed to carry large volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds. The term "freeway" means a divided highway providing for continuous flow of vehicles with no direct access to abutting property or streets and with access to selected crossroads provided via connecting ramps. The term "expressway" means a divided highway with full or partial control of access and generally with grade separations at major intersections. The term "parkway" means a highway for noncommercial traffic, with full or partial control of access, and usually located within a park or a ribbon of park-like development. 
b.	Residential collector street means a local access street which serves as a connector street between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system. Residential collector streets typically collect traffic from 100 to 400 dwelling units. 
c.	Local residential street means cul-de-sac, loop streets less than 2,500 feet in length or streets less than one mile in length that do not connect thoroughfares, or serve major traffic generators, and do not collect traffic from more than 100 dwelling units. 
d.	Cul-de-sac means a short street having but one end open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated and a vehicular turnaround provided. 
e.	Frontage road means a local street or road that is parallel to a full or partial access to adjacent land. 
f.	Alley means a strip of land, owned publicly or privately, set aside primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(2)	Urban streets.
a.	Major thoroughfares. Major thoroughfares consist of interstate, other freeway and expressway links, and major streets that provide for the expeditious movement of volumes of traffic within and through urban areas. 
b.	Minor thoroughfares. Minor thoroughfares are important streets in the urban system and perform the function of collecting traffic from local access streets and carrying it to the major thoroughfare system by facilitating a minor through traffic movement and may also serve abutting property. 
c.	Local street. A local street is any link not part of a higher-order urban system which serves primarily to provide direct access to abutting land and access to higher systems. 
Structure means and includes the word building. 
Subdivider means any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for a purpose of sale or building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets; but the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject to any regulations enacted pursuant to this chapter: 
(1)	The combination or recombination of portions of previously subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality as shown in this chapter; 
(2)	The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no street right-of-way dedication is involved; 
(3)	The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the widening or opening of streets; and 
(4)	The division of a tract in single ownership into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality as shown by this chapter. 
(5)	The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms of a probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under Chapter 29 of the General Statutes. 
(6)	The division of land pursuant to an order of a court of the general court of justice. 
(7)	The division of land for cemetery lots or burial plots. 
(9)	The division of land for the purpose of changing the boundary line(s) between adjoining property owners and no new road right-of-way dedication is involved, providing said division does not cause either property to be in violation of any town ordinance. 
Used for means and includes the meaning "designed for." 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-6. Prerequisite to plat recordation.
After February 15, 1988, each individual subdivision plat of land within the town's jurisdiction shall be approved by the planning board. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-7. Acceptance of streets.
No street shall be maintained by the town or street dedication accepted for ownership and maintenance in any subdivision for which a plat is required to be approved unless and until such final plat has been approved by the town and the board of commissioners accepts the street dedication by resolution. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-8. Thoroughfare plans.
(a)	Where a proposed subdivision includes any part of a thoroughfare which has been designated as such upon the officially adopted thoroughfare plan of the town, such part of such thoroughfare shall be platted by the subdivider in the location shown on the plan and at the width specified in this chapter. 
(b)	If the board of commissioners and the county board of education have jointly determined the specified location and size of any school sites to be reserved and this information appears in the comprehensive land use plan, the planning board shall immediately notify the board of education whenever a sketch plan for a subdivision is submitted which includes all or part of a school site to be reserved. The board of education shall promptly decide whether it still wishes the site to be reserved. If the board of education does not wish to reserve the site, it shall so notify the planning board. If the board of education does not wish to reserve the site, the subdivision shall not be approved without such reservation. The board of education shall then have 18 months beginning on the date of final approval of the subdivision within which to acquire the site by purchase. If the board of education has not purchased or begun proceedings to condemn the site within 18 months, the subdivider may treat the land as freed of the reservation. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-9. Zoning and other plans.
Similarly, proposed subdivisions must comply in all respects with the requirements of chapter 54 that are in effect in the area to be subdivided, and any other officially adopted plans. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 46-10—46-36. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. LEGAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 46-37. Plat approval.
(a)	After February 15, 1988, no subdivision plat of land within the town's jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded until it has been submitted to and approved by the planning board as set forth in section 46-81, and until this approval is entered in writing on the face of the plat by the board of commissioners and attested by the town clerk. 
(b)	The register of deeds shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision of land located within the territorial jurisdiction of the town that has not been approved in accordance with these provisions, nor shall the clerk of superior court order or direct the recording of a plat if the recording would be in conflict with this section. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-38. Statement by owner.
The owner of land shown on a subdivision plat submitted for recording, or his authorized agent, shall sign a statement on the plat stating whether or not any land shown thereon is within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of the town. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-39. Dedications.
Pursuant to G.S. 160D-806, the approval of a plat shall not be deemed to constitute or effect the acceptance by the town or public of the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line, or other public facility shown on the plat. However, the board of commissioners may, by resolution, accept any dedication made to the public of lands or facilities for streets, parks, public utility lines or other public purposes, when the lands or facilities are located within its subdivision regulations jurisdiction. Acceptance of dedication of lands or facilities located within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction but outside the corporate limits of the municipality shall not place on the town any duty to open, operate, repair, or maintain any street, utility line, or other land or facility, and the municipality shall in no event be held to answer in any civil action or proceeding for failure to open, repair, or maintain any street located outside its corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-40. Variances.
The board of adjustment may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the board of adjustment shall make the findings required below, taking into account the nature of the proposed subdivision, the existing use of land in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted until the board of adjustment holds a public hearing and finds: 
(1)	Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the regulation. It is not necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property. 
(2)	The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance. A variance may be granted when necessary and appropriate to make a reasonable accommodation under the Federal Fair Housing Act for a person with a disability. 
(3)	The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance is not a self-created hardship. 
(4)	The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the regulation, such that public safety is secured and substantial justice is achieved. 
Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance. Any other development regulation that regulates land use or development may provide for variances from the provisions of those ordinances consistent with the provisions of this subsection. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-41. Amendments.
(a)	The board of commissioners may from time-to-time amend the terms of this article, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the planning board for review and recommendation. The planning board shall have 30 days from the time the proposed amendment is submitted to it within which to submit its report. If the planning board fails to submit a report within the specified time, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the amendment. 
(b)	No amendment shall be adopted by the board of commissioners until they have held a public hearing on the amendment. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a paper of record at least once a week for two successive calendar weeks prior to the hearing. The initial notice shall appear not more than 25 nor less than ten days prior to the hearing date. In computing the ten- through 25-day period, the date of publication is not to be counted, but the date of the hearing is. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-42. Abrogation.
It is not intended that this article repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. However, where this article imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this article shall govern. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-43. Administrator.
The holder of the office of zoning administrator is hereby appointed to serve as subdivision administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 46-44—46-74. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SUBDIVISION PLATS
 
Sec. 46-75. Plat required on subdivision.
Pursuant to G.S. 160D-804, a final plat shall be prepared, approved, and recorded pursuant to the provisions of this article whenever any subdivision of land takes place. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-76. Approval prerequisite.
Pursuant to G.S. 160D-803, no final plat of a subdivision within the jurisdiction of the town, as established in section 46-4, shall be recorded by the county register of deeds until it has been approved by the town planning board as provided herein. To secure such approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall follow the procedures established in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-77. Procedures for review of subdivisions.
(a)	All subdivisions shall be considered major subdivisions except those defined as minor subdivisions in section 46-5. Major subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures in sections 46-79 through 46-81. Minor subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions in section 46-78. However, if the subdivider owns, leases, holds an option on, or holds any legal or equitable interest in any property adjacent to or located directly across a street, easement, road, or right-of-way from the property to be subdivided, the subdivision shall not qualify under the abbreviated procedure. Furthermore, the abbreviated procedure may not be used a second time within three years on any property less than 1,500 feet from the original property boundaries by anyone who owned, had an option on, or any legal interest in the original subdivision at the time the subdivision reviewed preliminary or final plat approval. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-78. Minor subdivisions.
(a)	Preliminary plat.
(1)	Prior to submission of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the subdivision administrator three copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed minor subdivision containing the following information: 
a.	A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads, and waterways; 
b.	The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract of the subdivided; 
c.	The total acreage to be subdivided; 
d.	The existing and proposed use of the land within the subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it; 
e.	The existing street layout and right-of-way width, lot layout and size of lots; 
f.	The name, address, and telephone number of the owner; 
g.	The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision; 
h.	Streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties; 
i.	The zoning classification of the tract and of adjacent properties; 
j.	A statement from the county health department that a copy of the sketch plan has been submitted to them if a septic tank or other on-site water or wastewater systems are to be used in the subdivision. 
(2)	An application for a preliminary plat for a minor subdivision shall be deemed complete if it is submitted on the required form, includes all the requested information, and is accompanied by the applicable fee. A determination of application completeness shall be made within five working day of application filing. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the subdivision administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant along with the explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 20 working days, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
(3)	The subdivision administrator shall review the preliminary plat with the applicant for general compliance with requirements, the zoning and eligible uses, and other needs. The public works, fire chief or police chief, local NCDOT district representative or other representative may be invited to review the sketch plan depending on the determination of the staff reviewer. Additional information concerning the proposed subdivision may be required at the request of the administering staff. 
(4)	One copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained and kept on file by the subdivision administrator, and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his authorized agent. 
(5)	The subdivision administrator shall take action regarding the application by either approving or denying the minor subdivision request based on compliance with the information required by subsection section 46-78(a)(1). The action of the subdivision administrator shall be reduced to writing and transmitted to the subdivider. 
(b)	Final plat for minor subdivisions.
(1)	Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the subdivision administrator the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)	The final plat shall include a statement from the Buncombe County Health Department that a copy of the final plat has been submitted to them if septic tanks or other on-site water or wastewater systems are to be used in the subdivision. 
(3)	The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor currently licensed and registered in the state by the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors. 
(4)	Five copies of the final plat shall be submitted, two of these shall be on reproducible material; three shall be black-or blue-line paper prints. Material and drawing medium for the original shall be in accordance with the "Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina" where applicable, and the requirements of the county register of deeds. 
(5)	The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the county register of deeds and shall be at a scale of not less than one-inch equals 200 feet. Maps may be placed on more than one sheet with appropriate match lines. 
(6)	Submission of the final plat shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $35.00. 
(7)	The following signed certificate shall appear on all five copies of the final plat. 
a.	Certification of ownership and dedication.
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of Woodfin and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent and established minimum building setback lines as noted. 
Date: _______        Owner: ___________ 
b.	Certificate of survey and accuracy.
1.	In accordance with G.S. 47-30, there shall appear on each plat a certificate by the person under whose supervision such survey or such plat made, stating the origin of the information shown on the plat, including recorded deed and plat references shown thereon. The ration of precision as calculated by latitudes and departures before any adjustments must be shown. Any lines on the plat that were not actually surveyed must be clearly indicated and a statement included revealing the source of information. The execution of such certificate shall be acknowledged before any officer is authorized to take acknowledgements by the registered land surveyor preparing the plat. All plats to be recorded shall be probated as required by law for the registration of deeds. Where a plat consists of more than one sheet, only the first sheet must contain the certification and all subsequent sheets must be signed and sealed. 
2.	The certificate required shall include the source of information for the survey and data indicating the accuracy of closure of the plat before adjustments and shall be in substantially the following form: 
"I ___________, Certify that this plat was drawn under my supervision from (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book _____, Page _____, etc.) (other); that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book _____, Page _____; that this plat was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended. Witness my original signature, registration number and seat this day of _______, A.D. 20___." 
Surveyor: ___________ 
Seal or Stamp 
Registration Number: _______ 
3.	The certificate of the notary shall read as follows: 
North Carolina, _______ County. 
I, a Notary Public of the County and State aforesaid, certify that _______, a registered land surveyor, personally appeared before me this day and acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument. Witness my hand and official stamp or seal, this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
Notary Public: ___________ 
Seal or Stamp 
My commission expires _______. 
(8)	The subdivision administrator shall review the final plat and shall recommend approval, conditional approval with modification to bring the plat into compliance, or disapproval of the final plat with reasons within 60 days of the first consideration of the plat. 
(9)	If the subdivision administrator approves the final plat, such approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate: 
Certificate of Approval for Recording 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina and that this plat has been approved by the subdivision administrator for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Buncombe County. 
Subdivision Administrator: ___________ 
(10)	The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the county register of deeds within 15 days of the subdivision administrator approval; otherwise such approval shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-79. Major subdivisions.
(a)	Number of copies and contents. Prior to the preliminary plat submission, the subdivider shall submit to the planning board two copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision or three copies if the abbreviated procedure is to be used containing the following information: 
(1)	A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads and waterways; 
(2)	The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be subdivided; 
(3)	The total acreage to be subdivided; 
(4)	The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it; 
(5)	The proposed street layout with approximate pavement and right-of-way width, lot layout and size of lots; 
(6)	The name, address, and telephone number of the owner; 
(7)	The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision; 
(8)	Streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties; 
(9)	The zoning classification of the tract and of adjacent properties; 
(10)	A statement from the county health department that a copy of a sketch plan has been submitted to them if septic tanks or other on-site water or wastewater systems are to be used in the subdivision. 
(b)	Submission and review procedure.
(1)	The concept plan shall be submitted at least 21 days prior to the planning board meeting at which it will be reviewed. Concept plans shall meet the specifications of section 46-82. The planning board shall review the concept plan for general compliance with the requirements of this article and chapter 54; the planning board shall advise the subdivider or his authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and submission of the preliminary and final plats. 
(2)	One copy of the concept plan shall be retained as a part of the minutes of the planning board with the other copy being returned to the subdivider or his authorized agent. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-80. Preliminary plat submission and review.
(a)	Submission procedure.
(1)	Upon approval of the concept plan by the planning board, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the preliminary plat, and with arrangements for making required improvements in accordance with the approved concept plan and the requirements of this chapter. For every major subdivision within the jurisdiction of the town, the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat which shall be reviewed by the planning board and approved by the board of commissioners before any work is begun of any kind which affects the topography on the site. 
(2)	Three copies of the preliminary plat (as well as any additional copies which the subdivision administrator determines are needed to be sent to other agencies) shall be submitted to the administrator of this article at least 21 days prior to the planning board meeting at which the subdivider desires the planning board to review the preliminary plat. 
(3)	Preliminary plats shall meet the specifications in section 46-82. 
(4)	An application for a preliminary plat for a major subdivision shall be deemed complete if it is submitted on the required form, includes all the requested information, and is accompanied by the applicable fee. A determination of application completeness shall be made within five working day of application filing. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the subdivision administrator shall provide written notice to the applicant along with the explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 20 working days, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
(b)	Review by other agencies. After having received the preliminary plat from the subdivider, the subdivision administrator may submit copies of the preliminary plat and any accompanying material to other officials and agencies which may be concerned with the new development. 
(c)	Review procedure.
(1)	The planning board shall review the preliminary plat at or before its next regularly scheduled meeting which follows at least 21 days after the subdivision administrator received the preliminary plat and the comments from the appropriate agencies. 
(2)	The planning board shall, in writing, recommend approval, conditional approval with recommended changes to bring the plat into compliance, or disapproval with reasons within 60 days of its first consideration of the plat. 
(3)	If the planning board recommends approval of the preliminary plat, it shall retain one copy of the plat for its minutes and transmit two copies of the plat to the board of commissioners with its recommendations. 
(4)	If the planning board recommends conditional approval of the preliminary plat, it shall keep one copy of the plat for its minutes, transmit two copies of the plat and its recommendation to the board of commissioners, and return the remaining copy of the plat and its recommendation to the subdivider. 
(5)	If the planning board recommends disapproval of the preliminary plat, it shall retain one copy of the plat for its minutes, transmit one copy of the plat and its recommendation to the board of commissioners, and return the remaining copy of the plat and its recommendations to the subdivider. 
(6)	If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make the recommended changes and submit a revised preliminary plat or appeal the decision to the board of commissioners. 
(7)	If the planning board does not make a written recommendation within 60 days after its first consideration of the plat, the subdivider may apply to the board of commissioners for approval or disapproval. 
(8)	If the planning board approves the preliminary plat, such approval shall be noted on two copies of the plat. One copy of the plat shall be retained by the board of commissioners and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. If the board of commissioners approves the preliminary plat with conditions, approval shall be noted on two copies of the plat along with a reference to the conditions. One copy of the plat along with the conditions shall be retained by the board of commissioners and one copy of the preliminary plat along with the conditions shall be returned to the subdivider. If the board of commissioners disapproves the preliminary plat, the reason for such disapproval shall be specified in writing. One copy of the plat and the reasons shall be retained by the board of commissioners and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-81. Final plat submission and review.
(a)	Preparation of final plat and installation of improvements. Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the board of commissioners, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the installation of or arrangement for required improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this article. Prior to approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the improvements specified in this article or guaranteed their installation as provided herein. No final plat will be accepted for review by the planning board or the board of commissioners unless accompanied by written notice by the subdivision administrator acknowledging compliance with the improvement and guarantee standards of this article. 
(b)	Performance guarantees.
(1)	Agreement and security required. In lieu of requiring the completion, installation, and dedication of all improvements prior to final plat approval, the town may enter into an agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall complete all required improvements. Once the agreement is signed by both parties and the security required herein is provided, the final plat may be approved if all other requirements of this article are met. To secure this agreement, the subdivider shall provide, any, or a combination of the following guarantees to cover the costs of the uncompleted improvements: 
a.	Surety bond. The subdivider shall obtain a surety bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the state. The bond shall be payable to the town and shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the entire cost of completing all required improvements, but not to exceed 125 percent of the entire estimated cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the board of commissioners. The duration of the bond shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the board of commissioners. 
b.	Letter of credit. The subdivider shall deposit cash, an irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the town or in escrow with a financial institution. The use of any instrument other than cash shall be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. The amount of deposit shall be equal sufficient to cover the entire cost of completing all requirement improvements, not to exceed 125 percent of the entire estimated cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the board of commissioners. 
If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a financial institution, as provided above, then the subdivider shall file with the board of commissioners an agreement between the financial institution and himself guaranteeing the following: 
(i)	That the escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the board of commissioners and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider in any other matter during the term of the escrow; and 
(ii)	That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the improvements, the financial institution shall, upon notification by the board of commissioners and submission of by the board of commissioners to the financial institution of an engineer's estimate of the amount needed to complete the improvements, immediately either pay to the town the funds estimated to complete the improvement, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to the town any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full to the town. 
(2)	Default. Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider to complete the required improvements in a timely manner as spelled out in the performance bond or escrow agreement, the surety or the financial institution holding the escrow account shall, if requested by the board of commissioners, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the town up to the amount needed to complete the improvements based on an engineering estimate. Upon payment, the board of commissioners, in its discretion, may expend such portion of the funds as it deems necessary to complete all or any portion of the required improvements. 
(3)	Release of guarantee security. The performance guarantee shall be returned or released, as appropriate, in a timely manner upon the acknowledgement by the board of commissioners that the improvements for which the performance guarantee in being required are complete. If the improvements are not complete and the current performance guarantee is expiring, it shall be extended, or a new performance guarantee issued, for an additional period until such required improvements are complete. A subdivider shall demonstrate, reasonable, good-faith progress toward completion of the required improvements. 
(c)	Submission procedure.
(1)	The subdivider shall submit the final plat, so marked, to the subdivision administrator not less than 21 days prior to the planning board meeting at which it will be reviewed; further, the final plat for the first stage of the subdivision shall be submitted not more than six months after the date on which the preliminary plat was approved; otherwise, such approval shall be null and void, unless a written extension of this limit is granted by the board of commissioners on or before the six month anniversary of the approval. 
(2)	The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor currently licensed and registered in the state by the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors. The final plat shall conform to the provisions for plats, subdivisions, and mapping requirements set forth in G.S. 47-30 and the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina. 
(3)	Five copies of the final plat shall be submitted; two of these shall be on reproducible material; three shall be black- or blue-line paper prints. Material and drawing medium for the original shall be in accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, where applicable, and the requirements of the county register of deeds. 
(4)	The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the county register of deeds and shall be at a scale of not less than one-inch equals 200 feet. Maps may be placed on more than one sheet with appropriate match lines. 
(5)	Submission of the final pat shall be accompanied by a filing fee as established by the board of commissioners. 
(6)	The final plat shall meet the specifications in sections 46-81 and 46-82. 
(7)	The following signed certificates shall appear on all five copies of the final plat: 
a.	Certificate of ownership and dedication.
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent, establish minimum building setback lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites and easements to public or private use as noted. 
Date: _______        Owners: ___________ 
b.	Certificate of survey and accuracy.
1.	In accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina: 
On the face of each map prepared for recordation there shall appear a certificate acknowledged before an officer authorized to take acknowledgements and executed by the person making the survey or map including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map which were not actually surveyed must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the certificate revealing the source on information. 
2.	The certificate shall take the following general form: 
I, ___________, certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision) (deed description recorded in Book _____, Page _____, Book _____, Page _____, etc.) (other); that the ration of precision as calculated by latitudes and departure is 1: _______, (that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book _____, Page _____; that this plat was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended. Witness my original signature, registration number, and seal this _____ day of _______ A.D., 20___. 
Surveyor: ___________ 
Seal or Stamp 
Registration Number: _______ 
3.	The certificate of the notary shall read as follows: 
North Carolina, _______ County. 
I, A Notary Public of the County and State aforesaid, certify that _______, a registered land surveyor, personally appeared before me this day and acknowledged the execution of the foregoing instrument. Witness my hand and official stamp or seal, this _____ day of _______, 20___. 
Notary Public: ___________ 
Seal or Stamp 
My commission expires _______. 
c.	Certificate of approval of the design and installation of streets, utilities, and other required improvements.
I hereby certify that all streets, utilities, and other required improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to town specifications and standards in the _______ Subdivision or that guarantees of the installation of the required improvements in an amount and manner satisfactory to the town has been received, and that the filing fee for this plat, has been paid, as such fee is established by the Board of Commissioners. 
Subdivision Administrator: ___________      Date: _______ 
(8)	The planning board shall review the final plat at or before its next regularly scheduled meeting which follows at least 21 days after the subdivision administrator receives the final plat and shall recommend approval, conditional approval with modifications to bring the plat into compliance or disapproval of the final plat with reasons within 60 days of its first consideration of the plat. 
(9)	During its review of the final plat, the planning board may appoint a registered land surveyor to confirm the accuracy of the final plat if agreed to by the board of commissioners. If errors are found, the plat shall not be recommended for approval until such errors have been corrected. 
(10)	If the planning board recommends approval of the final plat, it shall transmit all copies of the plat and its written recommendations to the board of commissioners through the subdivision administrator. 
(11)	If the planning board recommends disapproval of the final plat, it shall instruct the subdivider concerning resubmission of revised plat and the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the plat into compliance with the provisions of this article and resubmit the same for reconsideration by the planning board, or appeal the decision to the board of commissioners. 
(12)	Failure of the planning board to make a written recommendation within 60 days shall constitute grounds for the subdivider to apply to the board of commissioners for approval. 
(13)	If the planning board recommends approval or conditional approval with modifications to bring the plat into compliance, or the subdivider appeals to the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners shall review and approve or disapprove the final plat within 30 days after the plat and recommendations of the planning board have been received by the subdivision administrator. 
(14)	If the board of commissioners approves the final plat, such approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate: 
Certificate of Approval for Recording 
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina and that this plat has been approved by the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Woodfin for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Buncombe County. 
Town Clerk: ___________      Date: _______ 
_______, North Carolina 
(15)	If the final plat is disapproved by the board of commissioners, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this article with which the final plat does not comply. One copy of such reasons and one print of the plat shall be retained by the board of commissioners as part of its proceedings; one copy of the reasons and three copies of the plat shall be transmitted to the subdivider. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the final plat into compliance and resubmit the same for reconsideration by the planning board and the board of commissioners or by the board of commissioners as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(16)	If the final plat is approved by the board of commissioners, the original tracing and one print of the plat shall be retained by the subdivider. One reproducible tracing and one print shall be filed with the town clerk, and one print shall be returned to the planning board for its records. 
(17)	The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the register of deeds of the county within ten days of the board of commissioners' approval; otherwise, such approval shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-82. Information to be contained or depicted.
The preliminary and final plats shall depict or contain the information indicated in the following table. An "X" indicates that the information is required. 
Information 	Concept Plan 	Preliminary Plat 	Final Plat 
Title block containing: 
Property designation 	X 	X 	X 
Name of owner 	X 	X 	X 
Location (including township, county, and state) 	X 	X 	X 
Date or dates survey was conducted and plat prepared 		X 	X 
A scale of drawing in feet per inch listed in words or figures 	X 	X 	X 
A bar graph 	X 	X 	X 
Name, address, registration number and seal of the registered land surveyor 		X 	X 
Name of the subdivider 	X 	X 	X 
Corporate limits, township boundaries, county lines if on the subdivision tract 	X 	X 	X 
The registration numbers and seals of the professional engineers, registered land surveyors, land planners, architects, landscape architects, and professional engineers responsible for the subdivision 		X 	X 
North arrow and orientation 	X 	X 	X 
The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of existing boundary lines of adjoining lands 	X 	X 	X 
The names of owners of adjoining properties 		X 	X 
The names of any adjoining subdivisions or record or proposed and under review 		X 	X 
Minimum building setback lines 	X 	X 	X 
The zoning classification of the tract to be subdivided and adjoining properties 	X 	X 	
Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers, and approximate dimensions 	X 	X 	X 
The exact location of the flood hazard, floodway and floodway fringe areas from the community's FHBM or other FEMA maps 		X 	X 
Right-of-way location and dimensions, Proposed streets, pavement widths, approximate grades and street names 		X 	X 
Typical cross section of proposed streets and proposed street names and designation as "public" or "private" 		X 	X 
Existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in the proposed subdivision 		X 	X 
Evidence that the subdivider has obtained such approval, location and dimensions of all: 			
Utility and other easements 		X 	X 
School sites 		X 	X 
Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public use 		X 	X 
Areas to be used for purposes other than residential with the purpose of each stated 		X 	X 
The future ownership (dedication or reservation for public use to governmental body, for owners to duly constituted homeowner's association, or for tenants remaining in subdivider's ownership) of recreation and open space lands 			
Sanitary sewers system layout, prepared by a profession engineer 		X 	
Storm sewers system layout, prepared by a professional engineer 		X 	
Other drainage facilities, if any, prepared by a professional engineer, except incidental drainage 		X 	
Water distribution system layout, prepared by a professional engineer illustrating connections to existing systems, showing line sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs, pumps, and gate valves 		X 	
A statement as to whether or not natural gas, telephone and electric and cable television lines are to be installed and whether or not they will be overhead or underground 		X 	X 
Plans for individual water supply and sewage disposal systems, if any 		X 	
Acreage in total tract to be subdivided 	X 	X 	X 
Total number of parcels created 	X 	X 	X 
Acreage in the smallest lot in the subdivision 		X 	
Linear feet in streets 		X 	
Topographic map with contour intervals of no greater than 10' at a scale of no less than 1:2.00 	X 	X 	X 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-83. Recombination of land.
(a)	Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner at any time before the sale of any lot in the subdivision by a written instrument to which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated. 
(b)	Such an instrument shall be approved by the same agencies as approved the final plat. The board of commissioners may reject any such instrument which abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets, or alleys. 
(c)	Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged, or approved and recorded and filed in the same manner as a final plat; and being duly recorded or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys, and public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat. 
(d)	When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner provided in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section by all owners of the lots in such plat joining in the execution of such writing. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-84. Resubdivision procedures.
For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures, rules and regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-85. Zoning vested right.
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of G.S. 160D-108.1 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established upon the approval of a site-specific vesting plan. 
(b)	Approving authority. The town board of commissioners shall be the approving authority for zoning vested rights. 
(c)	Establishment of a zoning vested right.
(1)	A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid approval, or conditional approval, by the town board of commissioners of a site-specific development plan, following notice and public hearing. 
(2)	The town may approve a site-specific development plan upon such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(3)	A site-specific development plan shall be deemed approved upon the effective date of the town board of commissioners' action. 
(4)	Notwithstanding the above information, approval of a site-specific development plan with the condition that a variance be obtained shall not confer a zoning vested right unless and until the necessary variance is obtained. 
(5)	The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude the application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but does not affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or regulations that are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land-use regulation by the town, including, but not limited to, all codes. Otherwise, applicable new or amended regulations shall become effective with respect to property that is subject to a site-specific development plan upon the expiration or termination of the vested right in accordance with this section. 
(6)	A zoning vested right is not a personal right but shall attach to and run with the applicable property. After approval of a site-specific development plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise such right while applicable. 
(7)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Site-specific vesting plan, for the purposes of applying for zoning vested rights approval under this section, means a plan of land development submitted to the town by a landowner or agent. The plan shall be one of the following: 
a.	A preliminary plat for a proposed subdivision that meets all requirements set forth in the town's subdivision regulations; 
b.	A site plan for a group development as described in chapter 54; or 
c.	A preliminary plan for a development that provides information regarding the type (single-family, multifamily, commercial, etc.) and intensity (number of lots, number of units, approximate square feet of commercial space, etc.) of the proposed development such that it describes with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of development proposed for the site. 
The town shall determine whether the plan describes with reasonable certainty the type and intensity of development proposed for the site. 
(d)	Approval procedures and approving authority.
(1)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application for site-specific vesting plan approval shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established by ordinance and shall be considered by the town board of commissioners for the specific type of zoning or land use permit or approval for which application is made. 
(2)	In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon approval of a site-specific development plan, the applicant must indicate at the time of application, on a form to be provided by the town, that a zoning vested right is being sought. 
(3)	Each map, plat, site plan, or other document evidencing a site-specific development plan shall contain the following notation: "Approval of this plan establishes a zoning vested right under G.S. 160A-385.1. Unless terminated at an earlier date, the zoning vested right shall be valid until (date)." 
(5)	Following approval or conditional approval of a site-specific development plan, nothing in this section shall exempt such a plan from subsequent reviews and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals are not inconsistent with the original approval. 
(6)	Nothing in this section shall prohibit the revocation of the original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable terms and conditions of the approval or this article. 
(e)	Duration.
(1)	A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this section shall remain vested for a period of five years. 
(2)	A zoning permit, conditional use permit, or approval of a preliminary plat for a proposed subdivision shall not expire or be revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested right under this section is outstanding. 
(f)	Termination. A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this section shall terminate: 
(1)	At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filed; 
(2)	With the written consent of the affected landowner; 
(3)	Upon findings by the town, by ordinance after notice and a public hearing, that natural or manmade hazards on or in the immediate vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as contemplated in the site-specific vesting plan; 
(4)	Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all costs, expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant's fees incurred after approval by the town, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid. Compensation shall not include any diminution in the value of the property which is caused by such action; 
(5)	Upon findings by the town board of commissioners, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, that the landowner or his representative intentionally supplied inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which made a difference in the approval by the town board of commissioners of the site-specific vesting plan; or 
(6)	Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site-specific vesting plan, in which case the town board of commissioners may, by ordinance after notice and a hearing, modify the affected provisions upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has a fundamental effect on the plan. 
(g)	Voluntary annexation. A petition for annexation filed with the town under G.S. 160A-31 or 160A-58.1 shall contain a signed statement declaring whether or not any zoning vested right with respect to the properties subject to the petition has been established under G.S. 160D-108. A statement that declares that no zoning vested right has been established under G.S. 160D-108, or the failure to sign a statement declaring whether or not a zoning vested right has been established, shall be binding on the landowner and any such zoning vested right shall be terminated. 
(h)	Limitations. Nothing in this section is intended or shall be deemed to create any vested right other than those established pursuant to G.S. 160A-385.1. 
(i)	Repeal. In the event that G.S. 160A-385.1 is repealed, this section shall be deemed repealed and the provisions hereof no longer effective. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 46-86—46-113. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. REQUIREMENTS
 
Sec. 46-114. Minimum standards.
Each subdivision shall contain the improvements specified in this article, which shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this article and paid for by the subdivider, unless other means of financing is specifically stated in this article. Land shall be dedicated and reserved in each subdivision as specified in this article. Each subdivision shall adhere to the minimum standards of design established by this article. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-115. Suitability of land.
(a)	Land which has been determined by the planning board on the basis of engineering or other expert surveys to pose an ascertainable danger to life or property by reason of its unsuitability for the use proposed shall not be platted for that purpose, unless and until the subdivider has taken the necessary measures to correct such conditions and to eliminate the dangers. 
(b)	Areas that have been used for disposal of solid waste shall not be subdivided unless tests by the county health department, a structural engineer and a soils expert determine that the land is suitable for the purpose proposed. 
(c)	Flood prevention. 
(1)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-116. Name duplication.
The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision within the county. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-117. Subdivision design.
(a)	Blocks.
(1)	The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; zoning requirements; needs for vehicular and pedestrian circulation; control and safety of street traffic; limitations and opportunities of topography; and convenient access to water areas. 
(2)	Blocks shall not be less than 400 feet or more than 1,800 feet. 
(3)	Blocks shall have sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth except where single tier lots are required to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or another type of use, in nonresidential subdivisions, or where abutting a water area. 
(4)	Where deemed necessary by the board of commissioners, a pedestrian crosswalk at least 15 feet in width may be required to provide convenient public access to a public area such as a park or school, to a water area, or to areas such as shopping centers, religious or transportation facilities. 
(5)	Block numbers shall conform to the town street numbering system, if applicable. 
(b)	Lots. All lots in new subdivisions shall conform to the zoning requirement, which means, among other things, that the smallest lot in the subdivision must meet all dimensional requirements of chapter 54. It is not sufficient merely for the average lot to meet the zoning requirements. 
(c)	Easements. Easements shall be provided as follows: 
(1)	Utility easements. Easements for underground or above ground utilities shall be provided, where necessary, across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines and shall be at least ten feet wide for water and sanitary sewer lines and as required by the companies involved, for telephone, gas and power lines. The planning board will determine whether one easement is sufficient or whether several easements are necessary to accommodate the various facilities and the subdivider shall provide the required easements. 
(2)	Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream or drainageway, an easement shall be provided conforming with the lines of such stream and of sufficient width as will be adequate for the purpose. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-118. Streets.
(a)	Type of street required. All subdivision lots shall abut on a public street. All public streets shall be dedicated to the town or the public as determined appropriate by board of commissioners. All public streets shall be built to the standards of the town and the state department of transportation as found in "Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards." Public streets not dedicated to the town which are eligible for acceptance into the state highway system shall be constructed to the standards necessary to be put on the state highway system or the standards in this article, whichever is stricter, in regard to each particular item and shall be put on such system. Streets not dedicated to the town which are not eligible to be put on the state highway system because there are too few lots or residences shall, nevertheless, be dedicated to the public and shall be in accordance with the standards in this article or the standards necessary to be put on the state system shall be included with the final plat. If any street is proposed to intersect with a state maintained road, the subdivider shall apply for driveway approval as required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation. 
(b)	Subdivision street disclosure statement. All streets shown on the final plat shall be designated in accordance with G.S. 136-102.6, and designation as public shall be conclusively presumed an offer of dedication to the public. Where streets are dedicated to the public but not accepted into any municipal or the state system, before lots are sold, a statement explaining the status of the street shall be included with the final plat. 
(c)	Half streets. The dedication of half streets of less than 60 feet at the perimeter of a new subdivision shall be prohibited. If circumstances render this impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of the remaining half of the street shall be furnished by the subdivider. Where there exists a half-street in an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided by the proposed subdivision. However, in circumstances where more than 60 feet of right-of-way, not less than 60 feet in width, may be dedicated when adjoining undeveloped property is owned or controlled by the subdivider, provided that the width of the partial dedication is such as to permit the installation of such facilities as may be necessary to serve abutting lots. When the adjoining property is subdivided, the remainder of the full required right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
(d)	Marginal access streets. Where a tract of land to be subdivided adjoins a principal arterial street the subdivider may be required to provide a marginal access street parallel to the arterial street or reverse frontage on a minor street for the lots to be developed adjacent to the arterial. Where reverse frontage is established, private driveways shall be prevented from having direct access to the principal arterial. 
(e)	Access to adjacent properties. Where, in the opinion of the board of commissioners, it is necessary to provide for street access to an adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such property and a temporary turnaround provided. 
(f)	Nonresidential streets. The subdivider of a nonresidential subdivision shall provide streets in accordance with F-4 of the North Carolina Roads, Minimum Construction Standards, July 1, 1979; and the standards in this article, whichever are stricter in regard to each particular item. 
(g)	Design standards. The design of all streets and roads within the jurisdiction of this article shall be in accordance with the accepted policies of the state department of transportation, division of highways, as taken or modified from the American Association of State Highway Officials (AASHO) manuals. The North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards, May 1, 1985 shall apply for any items not included in this article, or where stricter than this article. 
(h)	Other requirements.
(1)	Through traffic discouraged on residential collector and local streets. Residential collector and local streets shall be laid out in such a way that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Streets shall be designed or walkways dedicated to ensure convenient access to parks, playgrounds, schools, or other places of public assembly. 
(2)	Sidewalks. Sidewalks may be required by the planning board on both sides of the street in areas likely to be subject to heavy pedestrian traffic such as near schools and shopping areas. Such sidewalks shall be constructed to a minimum width of four feet, and shall consist of a minimum thickness of four inches of concrete. All sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way, unless the development is platted as a planned unit or group development. Sidewalks shall consist of a minimum of six inches of concrete at driveway crossings. 
(3)	Street names. Proposed streets which are obviously in alignment with existing streets shall be given the same name. In assigning new names, duplication of existing names shall be avoided and in no case shall the proposed name be phonetically similar to existing names in the county irrespective of the use of a suffix such as street, road, drive, place, court and the like. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning board. 
(4)	Street name signs. The subdivider shall be required to provide and erect street name signs to town standards at all intersections within the subdivision. 
(5)	Permits for connection to state roads. An approved permit is required for connection to any existing state system road. This permit is required prior to any construction on the street or road. The application is available at the office of the nearest district engineer of the division of highways. 
(6)	Offset to utility poles. Poles for overhead utilities should be located clear of roadway shoulders, preferably a minimum of at least 30 feet from the edge of pavement on major thoroughfares. On streets with curb and gutter, utility poles should be set back a minimum distance of six feet from the face of the curb. 
(7)	Wheelchair ramps. In accordance with G.S. 136-44.14, all street curbs in the state being constructed or reconstructed of maintenance procedures, traffic operations, repairs, corrections of utilities, or altered for any reason after September 1, 1973, shall provide wheelchair ramps for the physically handicapped at all intersections where both curb and gutter and sidewalks are provided and at other major points of pedestrian flow. 
(8)	Horizontal width on bridge deck.
a.	The clear roadway widths for new and reconstructed bridges serving two-lane, two-way traffic shall be as follows: 
1.	Shoulder section approach.
(i)	Under 800 ADT design year. Minimum 28 feet face-to-face of parapets or rails or pavement width plus ten feet, whichever is greater. 
(ii)	800 through 2,000 ADT design year. Minimum 34 feet width face-to-face of parapets or rails or pavement width plus 12 feet, whichever is greater. 
(iii)	Over 2,000 ADT design year. Minimum 40 feet. Desirable 44 feet width face-to-face of parapets or rails. 
2.	Curbs and gutter approach.
(i)	Under 800 ADT design year. Minimum 24 feet face-to-face of curbs. 
(ii)	Over 800 ADT design year. Width of approach pavement measured face-to-face of curbs. 
b.	Where curb and gutter sections are used on roadway approaches in height, in width of face-to-face of curbs, and in crown drop. The distance from face of curb to face of parapet or rail shall be one foot six inch minimum, or greater if sidewalks are required. 
c.	The clear roadway widths for new and reconstructed bridges having four or more lanes serving undivided two-way shall be as follows: 
1.	Shoulder section approach. Width of approach pavement plus width of usable shoulders on the approach left and right. Minimum eight feet; des. ten feet. 
2.	Curb and gutter approach. Width of approach pavement measured face-to-face of curbs. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-119. Utilities.
(a)	Water and sanitary systems. The town water and sewer district board directs the town systems. Approval of a subdivision plat by the planning board is dependent on a written statement of agreement between the water and sewer district board and the subdivider. No action will be taken by either parties until this section is satisfied. 
(b)	Stormwater drainage system. The subdivider shall provide a surface water drainage system constructed to standards found in the state department of transportation, as reflected in the Handbook for the Design of Highway Surface Drainage Structures, 1973, subject to review by the town engineer. 
(1)	No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a sanitary sewer. 
(2)	Where feasible, the subdivider shall connect to an existing storm drainage system. 
(3)	Where an existing storm drainage system cannot feasibly be extended to the subdivision, a surface drainage system shall be designed to protect the proposed development from water damage. 
(4)	Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of at least three feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical distance, and courses shall be a sufficient size to accommodate the drainage area without flooding, and designed to comply with the standards and specifications for erosion control as required by state law and any locally adopted erosion and sedimentation control ordinances. 
(5)	The minimum grade along the bottom of a surface drainage course shall be a vertical fall of at least one foot in each 200 feet of horizontal distance. 
(6)	Stream banks and channels downstream from any land disturbing activity shall be protected from increased degradation by accelerated erosion caused by increased velocity of runoff from the land disturbing activity in accordance with state law. 
(7)	Anyone constructing a dam or impoundment within the subdivision must comply with the state Dam Safety Law, G.S. 143-215.23 et seq. and 15A NCAC 2K.0103 et seq. 
(8)	In all areas of special flood hazards, all subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(c)	Street lights. All subdivisions in which the size of the smallest lot is less than 40,000 square feet shall have street lights installed at every intersection of roads within the subdivision and at all entrances to the subdivision in accordance with state department of transportation standards. The developer shall be required to pay to the electric company the cost of street lighting installation that exceeds four times the continuing annual revenue. If underground wiring of street lighting is requested by the developer or the town, the developer may be required to install all fixed items such as conduit, pads, handholds and pole foundations; the town will own and maintain the fixed items. 
(d)	Underground wiring. All subdivisions in which the smallest lot is less than 40,000 square feet shall have underground wiring. This requirement may be waived the power lines existed above ground at the time of first approval of a plat by the planning board, or the power lines are located outside the boundaries of the parcel of land that contains the property covered by the subdivision plat. The subdivider shall be required to pay the charges for installation of the underground service, which charges will be made in accordance with the plan as filed with the state utilities commission. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-120. Other requirements.
(a)	Placement of monuments. Unless otherwise specified by this article, the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying, as adopted by the state board of registration for professional engineers and land surveyors under the provisions of 21 NCAC 56.0101 et seq., shall apply when conducting surveys for subdivisions; to determine the accuracy for surveys and placement of monuments, control corners, markers, and other property corner ties; to determine the location, design, and material of monuments, markers, control corners, and property corner ties; and to determine other standards and procedures governing the practice of land surveying for subdivisions. 
(b)	Construction procedures. No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a proposed subdivision until the preliminary plat has been approved, and all plans and specifications have been approved by the appropriate authorities. No building, zoning or other permits shall be issued for erection of a structure on any lot not of record at the time of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived until all the requirements of this article have been met. The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with the administrator of this article to provide for adequate inspection. The approving authorities having jurisdiction or their representatives shall inspect and approve all completed work prior to release of the sureties. 
(c)	Oversized improvements. The town may require installation of certain oversized utilities or the extension of utilities to adjacent property when it is in the interest of future development. If the town requires the installation of improvements in excess of the standards required in this article, including all standards adopted by reference, the town shall pay the cost differential between the improvement required and the standards in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 46-121. Penalty.
(a)	Whenever the subdivision administrator determines that a person is violating any of the provisions of this ordinance or any plan, order, or condition issued pursuant to this ordinance, a written notice of violation may be issued. The notice of violation shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic delivery, or first-class mail to the holder of the development approval or occupant and the landowner of the property involved, if the landowner is not the occupant or holder of the development approval. The notice of violation may be posted on the property. The subdivision administrator shall certify that the notice was provided. 
(b)	The violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $500.00 to be recovered by the town. Violators shall be issued a written citation which must be paid within ten days. 
(c)	Each day's continuing violation of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense. 
(d)	Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, this chapter may be enforced by appropriate equitable remedies issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the use of remedies available to the town. The town may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one, all, or a combination of remedies. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Chapter 50 TRAFFIC
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 50-1—50-18. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PARKING REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 50-19. Unlawful parking.
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the principal purpose of: 
(1)	Displaying it for sale. 
(2)	Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)	Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another or parking for any purpose a vehicle of one-ton capacity or greater for a period longer than two hours. 
(4)	Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when such storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of such automobile or other vehicle. 
(5)	Advertising any goods or merchandise for sale. 
(Code 1995, § 70.01; Ord. of 11-15-1977)
 
Sec. 50-20. Stopping, standing or parking.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device in any of the following places: 
(1)	On the sidewalk. 
(2)	Within 30 feet of an intersection. 
(3)	On a crosswalk. 
(4)	Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a street or roadway. 
(5)	Along or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when such stopping or standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(6)	Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, or within any underpass. 
(7)	Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel, theater, hospital, sanatorium, or other public building. 
(8)	Upon any area designated as a no parking area when said areas are appropriately marked. 
(Code 1995, § 70.02; Ord. of 11-15-1977; Ord. of 3-18-2003)
 
Sec. 50-21. Parallel parking.
Where not otherwise directed by law, and where the street is not marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel to the curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom. 
(Code 1995, § 70.03; Ord. of 11-15-1977)
 
Sec. 50-22. Vehicles backed up to curb.
In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to a curb except when actually loading or unloading. 
(Code 1995, § 70.04; Ord. of 11-15-1977)
 
Sec. 50-23. Left side to curb not permitted.
No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb, and all vehicles shall stop, stand, or park so as to be headed in the direction of traffic. 
(Code 1995, § 70.05; Ord. of 11-15-1977)
 
Sec. 50-24. Parking within lines.
On any street which is marked with lines indicating the parking space for a vehicle, all vehicles shall be parked within said lines as directed. 
(Code 1995, § 70.06; Ord. of 11-15-1977)
 
Sec. 50-25. Removal of vehicles.
The owner of any vehicle parked or left standing in violation of the law shall be deemed to have appointed any investigating law enforcement officer or his agent: 
(1)	For the purpose of removing the vehicle to the shoulder of the street or to some other suitable place; and 
(2)	For the purpose of arranging for the transportation and safe storage of any vehicle which is interfering with the regular flow of traffic or which otherwise constitutes a hazard, in which case the officer shall be deemed a legal possessor of the vehicle within the meaning of G.S. 44A-2(d). 
(Code 1995, § 70.07; Ord. of 11-16-1990)
 
Sec. 50-26. Power to designate no parking zones.
The town administrator or his designee shall have the authority to declare any street frontage within the town a "No Parking" zone, at the request of the property owner, should he determine that on- or off-street parking in that area is a threat to the health or safety of the citizens of the town. 
(Code 1995, § 70.08; Ord. of 3-18-2003)
 
Sec. 50-27. Penalty.
(a)	Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-13. 
(b)	Failure to remove an illegally parked or inoperable vehicle within 24 hours of initial citation may result in towing or immobilization of said vehicle and an additional $25.00 fine. Any vehicle with three or more unpaid parking violations may be towed or immobilized and fined an additional $25.00. If immobilized, the owner must pay all outstanding fines and a fee of $100.00 for the removal of the device. Once towed, a vehicle shall not be released until all outstanding fines are satisfied including the $25.00 impound release fee. 
(Code 1995, § 70.99; Ord. of 11-15-1977; Ord. of 6-16-2015)
 
Sec. 50-28. Public parking division.
The town hereby establishes a public parking division within the parks and recreation department. The purpose of the public parking division is to provide convenient, safe, clean, and accessible public parking for the selected areas. 
(Code 1995, § 70.10; Ord. of 8-21-2018)
 
Sec. 50-29. Payment.
All municipal parking facilities are considered to be metered 24 hours a day unless otherwise posted. During these times, customers may pay for hourly parking through whatever device or manner currently employed by the town. Payment of parking citations may also be made by placing cash, check or money order along with a copy of the citation firmly attached or enclosed within a sealed envelope into specifically posted collection boxes or in person at the town hall during normal business hours. 
(Code 1995, § 70.11; Ord. of 8-21-2018)
 
Sec. 50-30. Parking rules.
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with any of the parking or traffic rules and regulations prescribed by the town in any municipal facility or to park or attempt to park any vehicle in any area or space in a park, except in such places as are designated for parking and plainly marked as a parking space unless otherwise directed to do so by appropriate municipal officials in the official execution of their duties. 
(Code 1995, § 70.12; Ord. of 8-21-2018)
 
Sec. 50-31. Failure to pay parking fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park for any purpose other than in the event of a true and actual emergency in an area designated as fee-based parking, without paying the parking fee provided therefor. 
(Code 1995, § 70.13; Ord. of 8-21-2018)
 
Sec. 50-32. Penalty.
The town may, at its sole discretion, exercise any or all of the following remedies to address illegal parking within posted and designated municipal parking facilities: towing and storage of the unlawfully parked vehicle, immobilization by device of the unlawfully parked vehicle, the issuance of a citation to the owner of the unlawfully parked vehicle. Fees collected in connection with this article will be used to defray operation costs of municipal parking facilities; any funds raised in excess of such costs shall be deposited in the general fund. 
(Code 1995, § 70.14; Ord. of 8-21-2018)
 
Sec. 50-33. Appeal of citation.
(a)	Citations may be appealed within 15 days of the citation issue date, by completing and submitting an appeal form by mail or in person. 
(b)	Additional late fees will not accumulate during the appeals process, but will restart again immediately depending on the final outcome. 
(Code 1995, § 70.15; Ord. of 8-21-2018)
 
Secs. 50-34—50-54. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 50-55. Traffic and parking regulations.
(a)	Town traffic and parking regulations will be established by ordinance and the board. When a new traffic or parking ordinance is adopted, the chief of police shall make certain that the appropriate sign, traffic-control signal, or other markings are made to give proper notice of the regulation. 
(b)	A list of all town traffic and parking regulations shall be maintained in the office of the clerk. The current list of regulations is incorporated by reference into this article. 
(Code 1995, § 71.01)
 
Sec. 50-56. Obedience to signs, markers, or devices.
Any person failing or refusing to comply with the directions indicated on any sign, marker, or device for control of direction of traffic or regulation of parking erected or placed in accordance with the provisions of this article, when so placed or erected, shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor. This section shall not be construed to apply when the driver of a vehicle is otherwise directed by a police officer, or when an exception is granted to the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle under section 50-61. 
(Code 1995, § 71.02)
 
Sec. 50-57. Signs as prerequisite to enforcement.
No provisions of this article for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily observant person. 
(Code 1995, § 71.03)
 
Sec. 50-58. Display of unauthorized signs.
(a)	No person shall place, maintain or display on or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device, sign, or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device, sign, or signal. 
(b)	No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit on any street or highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. 
(Code 1995, § 71.06)
 
Sec. 50-59. Authority of police officials.
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to enforce traffic and vehicle laws. 
(Code 1995, § 71.08)
 
Sec. 50-60. Obedience to police officials.
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer. 
(Code 1995, § 71.09)
 
Sec. 50-61. Authorized emergency vehicles.
The provisions of this article regulating the operation, parking, and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in this article, except as provided under state law. 
(Code 1995, § 71.10)
State law reference(s)—Emergency vehicles, exceptions to right-of-way rules, G.S. 20-156. 
 
Sec. 50-62. Clinging to moving vehicles.
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall attach himself or his vehicle to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1995, § 71.11; Ord. of 9-18-2007)
 
Sec. 50-63. Use of skateboards, roller skates, coasters or toy vehicles on roadways.
No person upon any skateboard, roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets when and as authorized by this article. 
(Code 1995, § 71.12; Ord. of 9-18-2007)
 
Sec. 50-64. Bicyclists to ride in single file.
(a)	All persons operating a bicycle upon any road in the town shall ride in single file only, and as near to the cyclist's right side of the road as is reasonably safe under the existing conditions, and exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle, being passed by a moving vehicle, or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)	Every person operating a bicycle upon a highway or bikeway shall be subject to the provisions of article 3, Motor Vehicle Act of 1937, as found in G.S. 20-38.100 et seq., except those provisions of such sections of the General Statutes which, by their own nature, can have no application. 
(Code 1995, § 71.13; Ord. of 8-18-2009)
 
Sec. 50-65. Penalty.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-13. 
(Code 1995, § 71.99)
 
Chapter 54 ZONING 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 54-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Woodfin, North Carolina," and the map referred to, which is identified by the title "The Official Zoning Map, Town of Woodfin, North Carolina," shall be known as the "zoning map." 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-2. Purpose and authority.
The purpose of the zoning regulations and districts as set forth in this chapter is to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted in G.S. ch. 160D and ch. 160A, art. 8. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-3. Introduction.
As the proper regulation of the use of certain structures, land, waters, and air is neither feasible nor adequate through the use of the zoning districts alone, the following restrictions and regulations, which shall be applied in addition to the district regulations are necessary to accomplish the intent of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all structures, lands, waters, and air within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-4. Interpretation, purpose, and conflict.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, health, morals, and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or premises, upon the height of buildings or premises or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to amend or repeal any other existing ordinance of the town. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-5. Intent.
It is the general intent of this chapter to: 
(1)	Lessen congestion in the streets; 
(2)	Secure safety from fire, panic and other danger; 
(3)	Promote health and the general welfare; 
(4)	Provide adequate light and air; 
(5)	Prevent the overcrowding of land; 
(6)	Avoid undue concentration of population; and 
(7)	Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-6. Zoning affects every building and use.
No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located except hereinafter provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-7. Reduction of lot and yard areas.
No yard or lot existing on September 16, 1973, shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein, except for street widening. Yards or lots created after September 16, 1973 shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this article. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-8. Relationship of building to lot.
Every building hereafter erected, moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and in no case shall there be more than one principal building and its customary accessory building on the lot, except in the case of a specially designed group development of institutional, residential, commercial or industrial building in an appropriate zoning district, i.e., school campus, cluster housing, shopping center, industrial park, and so forth, as permitted by section 54-159(11). 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-9. Relationship to the comprehensive plan.
It is the intention of the town board of commissioners that this ordinance implement the planning policies adopted by the board as reflected in the comprehensive plan and other planning documents. While the town board of commissioners reaffirms its commitment that this ordinance and any amendment to it be in conformity with adopted planning policies, the town board of commissioners hereby expresses its intent that neither this ordinance nor any amendment to it may be challenged on the basis of any alleged nonconformity with any planning document. 
When acting on any proposed zoning amendment, the Town of Woodfin shall carefully consider its adopted plans and policies. In accordance with the state law, the town, including the planning board, when such zoning requests are heard, and the town board of commissioners when such requests are acted upon, shall note in written statements from each board whether such amendment is consistent with these plans. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-10. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use or structure means a use or detached structure subordinate to the principal use of a structure or land and located on the same lot or parcel serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use or the principal structure. 
Agriculture and horticulture (any form) means the use of land for agricultural purposes including farming, silviculture, viticulture, fish culture, animal and poultry husbandry and/or horticultural purposes including the growing and production for income of fruits, vegetables, flowers, nursery stock, or ornamental plants. 
Air conditioning and heating equipment manufacturing means companies in this industry manufacture residential, commercial, and industrial heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration (HVACR) equipment. Industry revenue includes miscellaneous receipts for the resale of products without further manufacturing, contract work done for others on respective items and acknowledgements for repair, scrap and refuse sales. Automotive units are excluded from this industry. 
Alcohol and alcohol beverage manufacturing means a manufacturer engaged in brewing, fermenting, distilling, rectifying or bottling alcoholic liquor, beer or malt beverage. 
Alley means a special public right-of-way affording only secondary access to abutting properties. 
Amusement, recreational and sporting goods manufacturing means processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of amusement, recreational and sporting goods products and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products. 
Animal hospitals means any building or portion of a building designed or used for the care, observation, or treatment of domestic animals. 
Assembly halls, coliseums, armories, ballrooms, and similar structures means a building or portion of a building in which facilities are provided for civic, educational, political, religious, or social purposes. 
Auction sales means any sale where tangible personal property is sold by an auctioneer who is either the agent for the owner of such property or is in fact the owner thereof. 
Automobile parts supplies, retail means stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation. 
Automobile repair garages means any building structure, improvements, or land used for the repair and maintenance of automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, trailers, or similar vehicles including but not limited to body, fender, muffler, or upholstery work, or oil change and lubrication painting, tire service and sales, or installation of CB radios, car alarms, stereo equipment, or cellular telephones. 
Automobile sales (new and used) means storage and display for sale of more than two motor vehicles or any type of trailer provided the trailer is unoccupied, and where repair or body work is incidental to the operation of the new or used vehicle sales includes motor vehicles retail or wholesale sales. 
Automobile wrecking and junking yards means any lot or place that is exposed to the weather and upon which more than five motor vehicles of any kind incapable of being operated and not currently licensed are placed, located, or found. 
Bakeries, manufacturing means a place for prepping, cooking, baking, and selling of products intended for off premise distribution. 
Bakeries, retail means a place for preparing, cooking, baking, and selling of products on the premises. 
Banks and other financial institutions means a financial institution that is open to the public and engaged in deposit banking, and that performs closely related functions such as making loans, investments, and fiduciary activities. 
Barber and beauty shop means any establishment where cosmetology services are provided including hair care, nail care and skin care on a regular basis for compensation. 
Boat and trailer repairs and manufacturing means a facility, including a boat repair garage or boat storage yard where boats are repaired and stored until repairs are completed. 
Bowling alleys and skating rinks means an establishment that provides indoor facilities for the sport of ten-pin or duck-pin bowling or participant skating, with customary accessory uses such as snack bars. 
Buffer strip shall consist of a planted strip at least ten feet in width, composed of deciduous or evergreen trees or a mixture of each, spaced not more than 20 feet apart and not less than one row of dense shrubs, spaced no more than five feet apart. 
Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
Building frontage means the linear length of only that portion of a building used by an individual tenant in a multiple tenant development and which faces a public street or alley. 
Building setback line means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. If the property line extends into a roadway or highway itself, then the setback line shall be measured from the edge of the traveled way (which is the edge of the road or the actual area that vehicles travel upon) when computing setback requirements on lots abutting highways. 
Canopy means a permanent attached structure which projects from and is supported by a building, which serves as a cover providing shelter or decoration and which extends beyond the building. 
Car wash means the use of a site for washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles, or other light duty equipment. 
Churches means a building wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain public worship, together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose. Includes synagogue, temple, mosque, or other such place for worship and religious activities. 
Clubs and lodges (nonprofit) means any person(s), partnership, association, corporation, or other group whose activities are conducted for civic or humanitarian motives and not for the gain of any private individual or group and may include, but shall not be limited to, social service, welfare, education, civic, fraternal, or cultural activities. 
Contractors' offices means any land or buildings used primarily for the storage of equipment, vehicles, machinery (new or used), building materials, paints, pipe, or electrical components used by the owner or occupant of the premises in the conduct of any building trades or building craft. 
Channel means those flood lands normally occupied by a stream of water under average annual high-water flow conditions while confined within generally well-established banks. 
Customary incidental home occupations means any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there are no retail sales or display on the premises and no person not a resident of the premises is employed by the following home occupations: lawyer, physician, optometrist, dentist, osteopath, and chiropractor. Provided further that no mechanical equipment is installed or used except such as normally used for domestic or professional purpose, and that not over 25 percent of the total floor space of any structure is used for home occupations. 
Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations means an establishment which launders or dry cleans articles dropped off on the premises directly by the customer or where articles are dropped off, sorted, and picked up but where laundering or cleaning is done elsewhere. 
Dwelling means a building that contains one or two dwelling units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living purposes. 
Dwelling, detached means a dwelling entirely surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
Dwelling, multiple-family means a dwelling containing three or more dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single-family means a dwelling containing one dwelling unit either attached, semi-attached, or detached. 
Dwelling unit means a single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, eating, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
Eave line means the extension of a roof line beyond the vertical wall of a building. 
Efficiency means a dwelling unit consisting of one principal room with no separate sleeping rooms. 
Erect means to construct, build, raise, assemble, install, place, locate, relocate, affix, attach, display, alter, use, create, paint, draw, illuminate or in any other way bring into being or establish. 
Facade means building sides including parapet and wing wall. 
Familial relationship, close means a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, or grandchild. The term includes the step, half, and in-law relationships. 
Farm machinery, sales, and repairs means establishments selling, renting, or repairing agricultural machinery, equipment, and supplies for use in soil preparation and maintenance, the planting and harvesting of crops, and other operations and process pertaining to farming and ranching. 
Feed and seed stores means a retail store selling primarily agricultural products, including the bulk storage of fertilizers and related agrichemicals. 
Florist means a retail business whose principal activity is the selling of plants which are not grown on the site and conducting business within an enclosed building. 
Funeral homes and mortuaries means a building or part thereof used for human funeral services. Such building may contain space and facilities for (a) embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial; (b) the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures; (c) the storage of caskets, funeral supplies funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies; (e) facilities for cremation where funeral home is permitted, a funeral chapel shall also be permitted. 
Game and amusement rooms, including pool halls means a place or facility where pinball or other similar electronic games are played for amusement only. Shall not be construed to include gambling devices prohibited by law. 
Grade means the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building. 
Gross floor area means the total floor area of all buildings in a project including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, exclusive of stairways and elevator shafts. Gross floor area excludes separate service facilities outside the main building such as boiler rooms and maintenance rooms. 
Group development means a group of two or more principal structures built on a single lot, tract, or parcel of land not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and which will not be subdivided, and designed for occupancy by separate families, businesses, or other enterprises. Examples would be: 
(1)	Cluster-type subdivisions; 
(2)	Row houses; 
(3)	Apartment courts; 
(4)	Housing projects; 
(5)	School and hospital campuses; 
(6)	Shopping centers; and 
(7)	Industrial parks. 
Height (building) means the height of any building shall be the average maximum vertical height measured at a minimum of three equidistant points from finished grade to the highest point on the building along each building elevation. Chimneys, ventilators, antennas, skylights, tanks, bulkheads, or solar panels shall not be considered part of the height of the building if they do not extend more than four feet above the specific height limit. Domes, towers, or spires which are the integral part of churches or religious buildings shall not be subject to these limitations, provided that such features shall in no way be used for living purposes. 
Hotels, inns and motels means an establishment providing, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and customary lodging services, including maid service, the furnishing and upkeep of furniture and bed linens, and telephone and desk service, related ancillary uses may include but shall not be limited to conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, and recreational facilities. 
Jewelry repair and pawn shops means any place of business which is regularly engaged in the business of making pawns but does not include a financial institution or any business that regularly loans money or any other thing of value on stocks, bonds, or other securities. 
Junkyard means a lot, land, or structure or part thereof, used primarily for the collecting, storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage and/or salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in operating condition and for the sale of parts thereof. 
Kennel means the boarding, breeding, raising, grooming, or training of two or more dogs, cats, or other household pets of any age not owned by the owner or occupant of the premises, and/ or for commercial gain. 
Kindergarten or day nursery means any day care center which receives children between the ages of two and six years and which is established and professionally operated primarily for educational purposes to meet the development needs of the children served. 
Launderette and laundromat means a facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. 
Libraries, museums and art galleries means a room or building for exhibiting, or an institution in charge of, a collection of books, artistic, historical, or scientific objects. 
Lot means a parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy for a building together with its accessory building. For the purposes for this chapter, the term "lot" means any number of contiguous lots or portions thereof, upon which one or more main structures for a single use are to be erected. 
Lot, corner means a lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection, provided that the corner of such intersection has an angel of 135 degrees or less, measured on the lot side. 
Lot coverage means the area under a roof and enclosed by the exterior permanent walls. 
Manufactured home means a transportable structure suitable for year-round single-family occupancy and having water, electrical, sewage connections similar to those of conventional dwellings. 
Manufactured home park means any parcel of land under one ownership that has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for rental purposes for non-transient use. 
Meat market means a building where live animals are killed and processed; and/or a building where meat, poultry, or eggs are cooked, smoked, or otherwise processed or packed but does not include a butcher shop or rendering plant. 
Medical and dental clinics means an establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, other health care professionals, or similar professions. 
Metal fabricating plants means the assembly of metal parts including blacksmith and welding shops, sheet metal shops, machine shops, that produce metal duct work, tanks, towers cabinets, and enclosures, metal doors and gates, and similar products. 
Mini storage warehouses means the operation of warehousing and storage wherein the storage capacity of individual units is less than 1,000 square feet of floor area and individual keys are provided to lock each unit during the term of a rental agreement. 
Multiple-tenant development means a development in which there exists a number of individual and or separate activities and in which there are appurtenant shared facilities (such as parking areas or pedestrian mall areas). 
Newspaper office means a publication, printed on newsprint, intended for general circulation, and published regularly at short intervals, containing information and editorials on current events and news of general interest. The events and news of general interest. The term "newspaper" does not include magazines, trade publications or journals, credit bulletins, and advertising inserts, circulars, directories, maps, racing programs, reprints, newspaper clipping and mailing services or listings, publications that include an updating or revision service, or books or pocket editions of books. 
Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, and community centers (public and private) means a place, structure, area, or facility used for and providing religious, fraternal, social, or recreational programs generally open to the public and designed to accommodate and serve significant segments of the community. Also includes clubs, lodges, golf courses, swimming pools and fishing lakes. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which was allowed when erected or displayed, but which does not conform with the standards of this chapter, and any sign which was not allowed, but was nonetheless impermissible erected or displayed before September 16, 1973. 
Nonconforming structure means any structure, by virtue of the use to which it is put, which does not comply with the use provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use means any land lawfully used or occupied at the time of September 16, 1973 which does not conform to the regulations of this chapter or amendments thereto pertaining to uses. 
Nonconforming lot means a lot that lawfully existed prior to the enactment of the requirements of this chapter, but which does not meet the minimum lot size or lot width requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
Offices (business, professionals, and public) means administrative, executive, professional, research, or similar organizations, and laboratories having only limited contact with public, provided that no merchandising services are sold on the premises, except such as are incidental or accessory to the principal permissible use. 
Outdoor recreation means recreational uses conducted almost wholly outdoors, including golf driving ranges, go-cart track, riding stables, miniature golf, firing ranges, water parks, amusement parks, and similar uses. 
Paper products manufacturing means the manufacturing of paper and paperboard, from both raw and recycled materials, and their conversion into products including paper bags, boxes, envelopes, wallpaper etc. 
Parapet means that portion of a building wall that rises above the roofline. 
Parking space means a graded and surfaced area of at least nine feet wide and 19 feet long, either enclosed or open, for the parking of a motor vehicle, having adequate ingress or egress to a public street or alley. 
Permanently affixed means anchored to a foundation. 
Photographic studios and camera supply stores means a facility primarily engaged in the retail sale, lease, and service of photography equipment and supplies, including limited on-site processing or development. 
Plastic products manufacturing means the manufacturing of rubber products including rubber footwear; mechanical rubber goods; heels and soles; flooring; and rubber sundries from natural, synthetic, or reclaimed rubber. Also includes establishments engaged in molding primary plastics for the trade and manufacturing miscellaneous finished plastics products; fiberglass manufacturing; and fiberglass application services. 
Printing and reproduction establishments means a commercial printing operation involving a process that is considered printing, imprinting, reproducing, or duplicating images and using printing methods including but not limited to offset printing, lithography, web offset, flexographic, and screen process printing. 
Public and private elementary schools means a public or private schools offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in schools within the state. 
Public safety facilities means a government facility for public safety and emergency services, including a facility that provides police or fire protection and related administrative facilities. 
Public works and public utility facilities means any improvement facility or service, together with its associated public site or right-of-way necessary to provide transportation, drainage, public or private utilities, energy, or similar essential services. 
Radio and television station means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished using electronic and telephonic mechanisms excluded are facilities classified as major utility services or broadcasting or communication towers typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, or film and sound recording facilities. 
Restaurants means any establishment, however designated, at which food is sold for consumption on the premises to patrons seated within an enclosed building, or elsewhere on the premises. Also includes drive-in restaurants. 
Retail establishment means a commercial enterprise that provides goods and/or services directly to the consumer, where such goods are available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser, where products include but are not limited to clothing, fabric, shoes, varieties, notions, drugs, hardware, furniture, appliances, floor coverings, paints, antiques, art goods, jewelry, gifts, music, toys, sporting goods, books and stationary, magazines, candy, tobacco, pets, hobbies, and crafts. 
Sawmills means a facility where logs or partially processed cants are sawn, split, shaved, stripped, chipped, or otherwise processed to produce wood products, not including the processing of timber for use on the same lot by the owner or resident of that lot. 
Service stations means any establishment whose primary activity is the provision of assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, business, industry, government, and other enterprises. 
Setback means the horizontal distance between the leading face of the curb of a street and the closest point of a sign or sign structure on such lot. Where there is no curb, the measurement shall be made from the edge of the pavement. 
Single tenant means a single business establishment, activity or use. 
Site plan means a scaled drawing and supporting text showing the relationship between lot lines and the existing or proposed uses, buildings, or structures on the lot. The site plan may include site-specific details such as building areas, building height and floor area, setbacks from lot lines and street rights-of-way, intensities, densities, utility lines and locations, parking, access points, roads and stormwater control facilities that are depicted to show compliance with all legally required development regulations that are applicable to the project and the site plan review. A site plan approval based solely upon application of objective standards is an administrative decision, and a site plan approval based in whole or in part upon the application of standards involving judgment and discretion is a quasi-judicial decision. A site plan may also be approved as part of a conditional zoning decision. 
Skirting means as related to manufactured homes, skirting shall be of noncombustible material or material that will not support combustion. Skirting material shall be durable and suitable for exterior exposures. Any wood framing used to support the skirting shall be of approved moisture resistant treated wood. Skirting manufactured specifically for this purpose shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications. 
Small electric and appliance repair shops means establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households, rather than businesses, but excluding automotive and equipment repair use types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, shoe repair, watch or jewelry repair shops, or repair of musical instruments. 
Soffit means the underside of a structural component such as an arch, beam or cornice. 
Street frontage means that portion of a lot abutting a publicly-maintained street or alley. 
Structure means any erection or construction, such as buildings, towers, mash poles, booms, signs, decorations, carports, machinery, and equipment excluding utility lines and appurtenances. 
Taxicab business means a service that offers transportation in passenger automobiles and vans to persons including those who are handicapped in return for renumeration. The business may include facilities for servicing, repairing, and fueling taxicabs or vans. 
Temporary health care structure means a transportable residential structure providing an environment facilitating a caregiver's provision of care for a mentally or physically impaired person that (i) is primarily assembled at a location other than its site of installation, (ii) is limited to one occupant who shall be the mentally or physically impaired person, (iii) has no more than 300 gross square feet, and (iv) complies with applicable provisions of the State Building Code and G.S. 143-139.1(b). 
Theatres, indoor means a building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances. 
Trademark means a name, symbol, or other device identifying a product which is officially registered and legally restricted to the use by its owner. 
Truck stop means an establishment engaged primarily in the fueling, servicing, repair or parking of tractor trucks or similar heavy commercial vehicles, including the sale of accessories and equipment for such vehicles. A truck stop may also include overnight accommodations, showers, or restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck crews. 
Use means the purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained. 
Utilities means public, quasi-public or private facilities such as water well water and sewage pumping stations, water storage tanks, power and communications transmission lines, electrical power substations, static transformer stations, telephone and telegraph exchanges, microwave radio relays, gas regulation stations, sewage disposal plants, sludge incinerators, warehouses, shops, and storage yards. 
Vision clearance means an unoccupied triangular space at the intersection of highways or streets with other highways or streets or at the intersection of highway or streets with railroads. Such vision clearance triangle shall be bounded by the intersection highway, street, or railroad right-of-way lines and a setback line connecting points located on such right-of-way lines by measurements from their intersection as specified in this chapter. 
Warehouse means a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. 
Wholesale establishments means an establishment or place of business primarily engaged in selling and/or distributing merchandise to retailers; to industrial, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies this is not considered a general commercial use. 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky, except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending a full width of the lot and situated between the street or property line and the front line of the building projected to the side lot lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lot lines of the lot. 
Yard, side means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-11. Bona fide farms exempt.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to bona fide farms. This chapter does not exercise any controls over crop lands, timber lands, pasture lands, apple orchards, idle or other farmlands, nor over any farmhouse, barn poultry house, or other farm buildings including tenant or other houses for a person working on the farms as long as such houses shall be in the same ownership as the farm and located on the farm. Such agricultural uses maintain the openness of the land and achieve the purposes of this chapter without the need for regulations. Residences for non-farm use or occupancy and other non-farm uses shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-12. Traffic visibility.
No obstruction, such as structures, parking, or vegetation, shall be permitted in any district above the height of three feet above the plane, through the mean centerline roadway grades, within the triangular space formed by any two existing or proposed intersecting street or alley right-of-way lines and a line joining points on such lines located 50 feet from their point of intersection. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-13. On-site sewage service.
The width and area of all lots not served by a public sanitary sewer system or other approved system shall be sufficient to permit the use of an on-site soil absorption sewage disposal system designed in accordance with the county health department regulations. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-14. Cemeteries.
Expansion of present cemeteries and new cemeteries may be allowed as a special use. The planning board of adjustment shall determine the district, location, size and number of cemeteries in the town. Consideration shall be given to topography, soil, groundwater, erosion, health hazards, and other such conditions before issuance of a special use permit for a cemetery. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-15. Projection and encroachments.
(a)	Every part of a required yard shall be kept open and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except for the ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, chimneys, flues, buttresses, ornamental features and eaves; provided, however, that none of the aforesaid projections shall project into a minimum side yard more than one-third of the width of such yard and in any case more than 24 inches. Chimneys or flues may be erected within a rear yard, provided they do not exceed five square feet in the aggregate and do not obstruct ventilation. 
(b)	Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways, and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a required yard not more than five feet shall be permitted where so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation. 
(c)	Unenclosed porches not more than one story in height shall be allowed to project not more than ten feet into the setback of the front yards and rear yards. 
(d)	Steps for entrance to a building may project into any yard. An oriel or bay window may project not more than three feet into any required yard. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 54-16—54-31. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
 
Sec. 54-32. Zoning administrator.
The board of commissioners shall appoint a zoning administrator to enforce the zoning and general provisions of the land use regulations. The assistance of other persons may be provided as the board of alderman may direct. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-33. Duties.
If the zoning administrator finds that any of the provisions of this article are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of the illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this article to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-34. Certificate of zoning compliance.
No building, sign or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered until an application for a zoning compliance permit is approved by the zoning administrator and a zoning compliance permit is issued. No zoning compliance permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. All applications for a zoning compliance permit shall be accompanied by two sets of plans showing the dimensions and shade of the parcel to be built upon, the exact sizes, uses, and location of the parcel or buildings already existing, if any, and the locations and dimensions of the proposed building or alterations. The application shall include such other information as may be necessary to determine conformance with and provide for the enforcement of this article. An application fee shall be charged for processing of each such application. Prior to issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance, the zoning administrator may consult with qualified personnel for assistance to determine if the application meets the requirements of this chapter. Zoning compliance permits, and all other development permits are valid for 12 months from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-35. Building permit required.
Upon receiving a zoning compliance permit a building permit shall be obtained from the county building inspection officer for the construction or alteration of any building, structure or mobile home. Stormwater and erosion control permits may be required prior to issuance of a building permit. Building permits are valid for six months beginning from the day issued, if the work authorized by the permit has not been commenced. If, after commencement, the work is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire. No work authorized by any building permit that has expired shall thereafter be performed until a new permit has been secured. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-36. Health department approval.
Where applicable, the zoning administrator shall not issue an application for a zoning compliance permit for any use, building, or purpose proposed for location inside of the incorporated municipality without written preliminary approval of any proposed water supply and sewage disposal facilities as required from the Metropolitan Sewerage District, Woodfin Water and Sanitary District, and appropriate state agency. Issuance and use of a certificate of zoning compliance shall be subject to all terms and qualifications imposed by the regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-37. Permit choice.
If an application is made in accordance with this chapter and a development regulation changes between the time the application was submitted and a decision is made, the applicant may choose which version of the development regulation will apply to the application as provided in [G.S.] 160D-108(b). 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-38. Site plans.
A site plan is a formal application submittal containing very detailed information, including engineering and construction drawings. All applications requiring a site plan shall submit two sets of plans drawn to scale with the following information: 
(1)	The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)	Accurate dimensions and the use of the proposed building or structure; 
(3)	The location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, including an outline of all proposed structures and the distances from all structures to adjoining property lines; 
(4)	The location of all underground and above ground utilities; 
(5)	All utilities, rights-of-way, culverts and drainage ways; 
(6)	The parcel identification number consistent with Buncombe County tax records; 
(7)	Such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance, including the architectural or building plans of the structure proposed to be erected or altered. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-39. Completeness review.
An application for a site plan shall be deemed complete if it is submitted on the required form, includes all requested information, and is accompanied by the applicable fee. A determination of application completeness shall be made within five working day of application filing. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the planning director shall provide written notice to the applicant along with the explanation of the application's deficiencies. No further processing of the application shall occur until the deficiencies are corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by the applicant within 20 working days, the application shall be considered withdrawn. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-40. Site specific vesting plan.
(a)	Establishment. An approved site-specific vesting plan precludes any zoning action by the Town of Woodfin, which would change, alter, impair, prevent, diminish or otherwise delay the development or use of the property as set forth in an approved site-specific vesting plan and in accordance with the applicable limitation and exceptions. Such plan may be in the form of any of the following plans or approvals: conditional zoning site plan, special use permit, preliminary plat for a minor or major subdivision, or any other land-use approval designation as may be utilized by the Town of Woodfin. 
(b)	Process. Each site-specific vesting plan shall include information required by the Town of Woodfin for the underlying type of development plan and shall provide the notice and hearing required. An approved site-specific vesting plan and its conditions may be amended with the approval of the owner and the local government in the same manner as the original approval. 
(c)	Permit period. A vested right established pursuant to this article shall run for a period of two years from the effective date of the approval. Upon following the same process as required for the original approval, the decision-making board or official may extend the vesting of a site-specific vesting plan up to three years upon finding that the permit has not yet expired, conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant a new application, and the extension is warranted in light of all other relevant circumstances including but not limited to the size and phasing of the development, the level of investment, the need for the development, economic cycles, and market conditions or other considerations. 
(d)	Limits of site-specific vesting plans. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the revocation of the original approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable terms and conditions of the approval of the zoning ordinance. New and amended zoning regulations that would be applicable to certain property but for the establishment of a vested right shall become effective upon the expiration or termination of the vested rights period provided by this article. Any vested rights for a site-specific vesting plan are subject to the exceptions specified at G.S. 160D-108. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-41. Notice(s) of violation.
(a)	Notice of violation procedures. Whenever the zoning administrator determines that a person is violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any plan, order, or condition issued pursuant to this chapter, a written notice of violation may be issued. The notice of violation shall be delivered by personal delivery, electronic delivery, or first-class mail to the holder of the development approval or occupant and the landowner of the property involved, if the landowner is not the occupant or holder of the development approval. The notice of violation may be posted on the property. The zoning administrator shall certify that the notice was provided. 
(b)	Appeal. Any owner or occupant who has received a notice of violation may appeal in writing the decision of the zoning administrator to the board of adjustment within 30 days following the date of the notice of violation. The board of adjustment shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and it may affirm, modify, or revoke the notice of violation. In the absence of an appeal, the remedies and penalties sought by the zoning administrator in the notice of violation shall be final. 
(c)	Penalties. Violations of this Code shall subject the offender to a civil penalty upon the issuance of a citation for a violation. The town may recover the civil penalty, if not paid to the town administrator within 30 days of the date the citation was issued, in a civil action in the nature of a debt pursuant to G.S. 160A-175. Each day that any violation of the provisions of this Code continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. The civil penalty shall be $50.00 for each violation unless otherwise provided in this Code. 
(d)	Continuing violation. For each day the violation is not corrected, the violator will be guilty of an additional and separate offense and subject to additional civil penalty. For purposes of determining the amount of the civil penalty pursuant to this section, the failure to pay the $50.00 civil penalty shall not constitute a separate and distinct offense that subjects the offender to an additional $50.00 civil penalty. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-42. Remedies available.
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained or any building or land is used in violation of this article, the zoning administrator or any other appropriate county authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such violation. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-43. Performance guarantees.
For group developments, mixed use developments and cottage clusters, the town may enter into an agreement with the petitioner, whereby the petitioner shall agree to complete all required improvements. The requirements for performance guarantee agreements are found in section 46-81(b) of the Town of Woodfin Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-44. Conflicts of interest.
No staff member shall make a final decision on an administrative decision required by this chapter if the outcome of that decision would have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the staff member or if the applicant or other person subject to that decision is a person with whom the staff member has a close familial, business, or other associational relationship. If a staff member has a conflict of interest under this section, the decision shall be assigned to the supervisor of the staff person or such other staff person as may be designated by the development regulation or ordinance. 
No staff member shall be financially interested or employed by a business that is financially interested in a development subject to the regulation under this chapter unless the staff member is the owner of the land or building involved. No staff member or other individual or an employee of a company contracting with a local government to provide staff support shall engage in any work that is inconsistent with his or her duties or with the interest of the local government, as determined by the local government. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 54-45—54-68. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. BOARDS
 
Sec. 54-69. Planning board.
The planning board shall consist of five members appointed by the board of commissioners. All appointments to vacancies on the board shall be for three-year terms. The members of the planning board shall be residents of the town. Planning board members must take an oath of office prior to commencing duties. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-70. Alternate members.
The board of commissioners shall also appoint two alternate members to serve on the planning board in the absence, for any cause, of any regular members. Such alternate members shall be appointed for three-year terms. Such alternate members, while attending any regular or special meeting of the board and serving in the absence of any regular members, shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of such regular member so absent. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-71. Proceedings.
A quorum shall consist of three members for the purpose of taking an official action required by the ordinance. The alternate member may vote in the absence of a regular member but his/her presence shall not be counted when establishing a quorum. All meetings of the planning board shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-72. Powers and duties of the board.
In addition to its powers and duties under the subdivision ordinance, it shall be the duty of the planning board: 
(1)	To prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan to the board of commissioners, and to conduct ongoing related research, data collection, mapping and analysis. 
(2)	To facilitate and coordinate citizen engagement and participation in the planning process. 
(3)	To advise the board of commissioners on all zoning text and map amendments with review and comment. 
(4)	To develop and recommend policies, ordinances, development regulations and other means of carrying out plans. 
(5)	To review all major subdivision plats and make recommendations to the board of commissioners. 
(6)	To perform any other duties that the governing board may direct. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-73. Amendments and changes.
(a)	General. Every proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification, or repeal to this article shall be referred to the planning board for its recommendation and report. Any development regulation other than a zoning regulation may be referred to the planning board for review and comment. Failure of the planning board to make recommendations for a period of 60 days after the amendment has been referred to shall constitute a favorable recommendation. All petitions for a change in the zoning map shall include a legal description of the property involved and the names and addresses of current abutting property owners. 
(b)	Notice. The owners of affected parcels of land and the owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of land, including properties separated by a street, railroad, or other transportation corridor, shall be mailed a notice of the hearing on a proposed zoning map amendment by first-class mail at the last address listed for such owners on the county tax abstracts. The notice must be deposited in the mail at least ten but not more than 25 days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition, notice of the hearing shall be prominently posted on the site proposed for the amendment or on an adjacent pubic street or highway right-of-way within the same time period specified for mailed notices. 
(c)	Optional notice for large scale rezoning. If the zoning map amendment directly affects more than 50 properties, owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners, the town may elect to either make the mailed notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section or may as an alternative elect to publish notice of the hearing, as required by G.S. 160D-602, but, provided that each advertisement shall not be less than one-half of a newspaper page in size. The advertisement shall only be effective for property owners who reside in the area of general circulation of the newspaper which publishes the notice. Property owners who reside outside of the newspaper circulation area, according to the address listed on the most recent property tax listing for the affected property, shall be notified according to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)	Planning consistency. When conducting a review of proposed zoning text or map amendments pursuant to this section, the planning board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed action is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted. The planning board shall provide a written recommendation to the governing board that addresses plan consistency. 
(e)	Governing board review. If no written report is received from the planning board within 30 days of referral of the amendment, the governing board may act on the amendment without the planning board report. When adopting or rejecting any zoning text or map amendment, the governing board shall approve a brief statement describing whether its action is consistent or inconsistent with an adopted comprehensive plan and the minutes should provide that the governing board was aware of and considered the planning board's recommendation. 
(f)	Third-party initiated map amendment. Unless initiated by the Town of Woodfin, no down zoning amendments to zoning regulations or the zoning map are enforceable without written consent of all property owners whose property is subject to the down zoning amendment. Down zoning is defined as decreasing development density to be less dense or reducing the range of permitted uses of the property to fewer allowed uses. 
(g)	Citizen comments. Citizen comments and amendments in zoning ordinances may follow the provisions of G.S. 160D-603. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-74. Conflicts of interest.
Members of the planning board shall not vote on any advisory or legislative decision where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member. Members shall not vote on any zoning amendment if the landowner of the property subject to a rezoning petition or the applicant for a text amendment is a person with whom the member has a close familial, business, or other associational relationship. 
If an objection is raised to a board member's participation at or prior to the hearing or vote on a particular matter and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the board shall by majority vote rule on the objection. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-75. Board of adjustment.
The board of adjustment shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. All appointments to vacancies on the board shall be for three-year terms. The members of the board of adjustment shall be residents of the town. Board of adjustment members must take an oath of office prior to commencing duties. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-76. Alternate members.
The board of commissioners shall also appoint two alternate members to serve on the board of adjustment in the absence, for any cause, of any regular members. Such alternate members shall be appointed for three-year terms. Such alternate members, while attending any regular or special meeting of the board and serving in the absence of any regular members, shall have and exercise all the powers and duties of such regular member so absent. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-77. General process and duties.
It is the intention of this article that: 
(1)	All questions arising in connection with the enforcement of this article shall be presented first to the zoning administrator. 
(2)	Such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the zoning administrator. 
(3)	From the decision of the board of adjustment, recourse shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
(4)	The duties of the board of commissioners in connection with this article shall include considering and passing upon any proposed amendments or repeal of this article as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-78. Powers and duties of the board.
The board of adjustment shall have the authority to rule on matters of interpretation of this ordinance, consider appeals from decisions of the zoning administrator, issue special use permits, grant variances and perform other duties as defined in this ordinance. Any appeal from a decision of the board of adjustment shall be subject to review by the superior court pursuant to G.S. 160D-1402. 
(1)	Variances. When unnecessary hardships would result from carrying out the strict letter of a zoning regulation, the board of adjustment shall vary any of the provisions of the zoning regulation upon a showing of all of the following: 
a.	Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the regulation. It is not necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property. 
b.	The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for granting a variance. A variance may be granted when necessary and appropriate to make a reasonable accommodation under the Federal Fair Housing Act for a person with a disability. 
c.	The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance is not a self-created hardship. 
d.	The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the regulation, such that public safety is secured and substantial justice is achieved. 
(2)	Special use permits. It shall be the duty of the board to decide requests for permits for special uses and grant them in particular cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, where they meet the findings listed in this section. The uses permitted only as a special use are identified with a "S" in the permitted uses table, located in Appendix A. In addition, the board of adjustment shall find the following to exist: 
a.	The establishment, maintenance, or operation of the special use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort, or general welfare; 
b.	The special uses will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other property in the immediate vicinity for the purposes already permitted nor substantially diminish and impair property values within the neighborhood; 
c.	The establishment of the special use will be in harmony with or compatible with its neighbors and generally consistent with the comprehensive plan; and 
d.	Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage, and or other necessary facilities have been or are being provided; 
e.	Adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; and 
f.	The special use shall, in all other respects, conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. 
In granting such a permit, the board of adjustment may designate such conditions in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, are reasonable and appropriate to ensure that the proposed use will conform to the requirements and spirit of this chapter, but only those conditions consented to by the petitioner in writing may be incorporated into the zoning regulations. If at any time after a special use permit has been issued the zoning administrator finds that the conditions imposed and agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit, a zoning violation notice shall be issued to the permit holder. Upon issuance of a zoning violation notice, the permit shall be terminated and the operation of such use discontinued. If a special use permit is terminated for any reason, it may be reinstated only after a public hearing is held. 
(3)	Appeals. The board shall hear and decide all appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator. It shall also hear and decide upon all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass, in accordance with zoning ordinance of the town. No appeal shall be heard by the board unless notice thereof is filed within 30 days after the interested party receives notice of the order, requirements, decision or determination by the zoning administrator. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-79. Notice.
The board of adjustment shall mail a notice of hearing (i) to the party whose appeal, application, or request is the subject of the hearing; (ii) to the owner of the property that is the subject of the hearing; (iii) to the owners of all parcels of land within 150', including properties separated from the subject property by street, railroad, or other transportation corridor, of land that is the subject of the hearing; and (iv) to any other persons entitled to receive notice under this chapter. The notice of hearing must be deposited in the mail at least ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. The town shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the property that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street right-of-way at least ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-80. Quorum.
A quorum shall consist of three members of the board, but the board shall not decide, upon any question relating to an application for a variance when there are less than four members present. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-81. Proceedings.
(a)	After receipt of notice of appeal, variance, special use, or other matters requiring a hearing before the board, staff shall schedule a hearing which shall be at a regular or special meeting within a reasonable time from the filing of such notice. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney at the hearing. 
(b)	Staff shall transmit to the board all applications, reports and written materials relevant to the matter being considered. The materials shall become part of the hearing record and may be provided in written or electronic form. At the same time they are distributed to the board a copy shall also be provided to the applicant and to the landowner if that person is not the applicant. 
(c)	The applicant, local government and any person who would have standing to appeal the decision shall have the right to participate as a party at the hearing. Other witnesses may present competent, material, and substantial evidence that is not repetitive as allowed by the board. 
(d)	Objections to administrative materials or jurisdictional issues, may be made to the board. The board chair shall rule on any objections and the chair's rulings may be appealed to the full board. 
(e)	The chair to the board and the clerk to the board are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any matter coming before the board. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-82. Decisions.
Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record, and shall be made within a reasonable time. The decision shall be reduced to writing and shall reflect the board's determination of contested facts and their application to the applicable standards, and be signed by the chair. The written decision shall be given to the applicant by first-class mail, electronic mail or personal delivery as soon as practicable after the case is decided. Also, written notice shall be given to owners of the subject property and to other persons who have made written request for such notice. 
Where a variance is granted, the concurring vote of four out of five of the total members shall be necessary. The record shall state in detail any exceptional difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon which the appeal was based and which the board finds to exist. 
When hearing an appeal, the decision may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the decision which was appealed from. 
Where a special use is granted, the record shall state in detail any facts supporting the findings required to be made prior to the issuance of such permit. The record shall state in detail what, if any, conditions and safeguard are imposed by the board in connection with the decision. 
The decisions of the board, as filed in its minutes, shall be a pubic record available for inspection at all reasonable times. 
Unless otherwise specified, any order or decision of the board granting a special use or variance shall expire if a building permit or certificate of occupancy for such use is not obtained by the applicant within two years from the date of the decision. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-83. Reapplication.
An application for a rehearing may be made in the same manner as provided for an original hearing. Evidence in support of the application shall initially be limited to that which is necessary to enable the board to determine whether there has been a substantial change in the facts, evidence, or conditions in the case. The application for rehearing shall be denied by the board if from the record it finds that there has been no substantial change in facts, evidence or conditions. If the board finds that there has been a change, it shall thereupon treat the request in the same manner as any other application. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-84. Appeals of board decision.
Appeals from the board of adjustment decision may be taken to the superior court pursuant to G.S. 160D-406(k). 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-85. Conflicts of interest.
Members of the board of adjustment shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons' constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex-parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter. 
If an objection is raised to a board member's participation at or prior to the hearing or vote on a particular matter and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the board shall by majority vote rule on the objection. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 54-86—54-118. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 54-119. Districts.
For the purpose of this article the town is hereby divided into the use districts with the designations and purposes as listed below: 
(1)	R-43 Residential District; 
(2)	R-21 Residential District; 
(3)	R-10 Residential District; 
(4)	R-7 Residential District; 
(5)	T-R Transitional District; 
(6)	M-V Mountain Village District; 
(7)	C-S Community Shopping District; 
(8)	C-S-2 Community Shopping District; 
(9)	C-S-3 Community Shopping District; 
(10)	L-I Light Industrial District; 
(11)	H-I Heavy Industrial District. 
(12)	CZ Conditional District 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-120. District boundaries.
The boundaries of the districts are shown on the map entitled "The Official Zoning Map, Town of Woodfin, North Carolina," on file in the office of the town administrator. The zoning map and all the notations, references and amendments thereto, and other information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this article the same as if such information set forth on the map were all fully described as set out herein. The zoning map, properly attested, is posted at the town hall and is available for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-121. Due consideration.
In the creation, by this article, of the respective districts, careful consideration is given to the peculiar suitability of each district for the particular uses and regulations applied to it, and the necessary and proper grouping and arrangements of various uses and densities of population in accordance with a well-considered comprehensive plan for the physical development of the town. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-122. Rules governing interpretation.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts, as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Where such district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street, alley, or highway lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerline of streets, alleys, or highways, or the right-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distances therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. 
(4)	Where a district boundary line divides a lot or tract in single ownership, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot or tract shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof provided such extensions shall not include any part of a lot or tract more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. The term "least restricted" means use restrictions, not lot or tract size. 
(5)	Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered previously in this section, the board of adjustment shall interpret the distinct boundaries. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 54-123—54-142. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. USES, DISTRICT REGULATIONS, AND CONSIDERATIONS
 
Sec. 54-143. Uses allowed.
Only the following uses and their essential services may be allowed in any district: 
(1)	Permitted uses specified for a district. 
(2)	Accessory uses and structures are permitted in any district, but not until their principal structure is present or under construction. Uses accessory to residential district developments shall not involve the conduct of any business, trade, or industry except for customary incidental home and professional occupations defined as any use: 
a.	Conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of dwelling for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with which there are no retail sales or display on the premises and no person, not a resident on the premises, is employed specifically in connection with the activity, except that not more than one assistant may be employed by the following home occupations: lawyer, physician, optometrist, dentist, osteopath, and chiropractor. 
b.	Provided, further, that no mechanical equipment is installed or used except such as is normally used for domestic or professional purposes and that not over 25 percent of the total floor space of any structure is used for home occupations. 
(3)	Special uses and their accessory uses shall be permitted in specified districts after review and approval by the board of adjustment in accordance with procedures and standards established in section 54-72. 
(4)	Temporary uses, such as real estate sales field offices or shelter for materials and equipment being used in the construction of a permanent structure, may be permitted by the zoning administrator, provided they do not create health, safety or nuisance hazards. Temporary uses shall be removed within 30 days following the end of necessity. 
(5)	A temporary health care structure is permitted in R-43, R-21, R-10, and R-7 zoning districts. One temporary structure is allowed per lot and must meet all setback requirements of the applicable district. The temporary health care structure must be removed within 30 days after the need for the use ceases. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-144. General requirements for all districts.
The following general requirements shall pertain to all zoning districts and any structure or building therein: 
(1)	Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any required front yard. 
(2)	Building height. 
a.	Heights of buildings shall not exceed 35 feet unless written permission is first secured from the appropriate district or town fire chief in order to determine: 
1.	If the height of the structure exceeds the firefighting capability of the fire department. 
2.	To determine if the structure meets fire safety standards (including fire escapes, etc.). 
b.	In all cases, the depth of the front yard and total width of the side yards required herein shall be increased by one foot for each two feet, or fraction thereof, building height in excess of 35 feet. 
(3)	Off-street parking shall be provided as required in section 54-176. 
(4)	The maximum permissible lot coverage by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed the following requirements: 
a.	30 percent of the total lot area for one unit; 
b.	35 percent of the total lot area for a duplex; or 
c.	50 percent of the total lot area for three or more units. 
(5)	Customary accessory uses and structures including private garages, swimming pools, and other accessory structures shall not be erected in: 
a.	Any required front yard or side yard setback; 
b.	Within 20 feet of any street or highway line; or 
c.	Within ten feet of any lot line not a street or highway line. 
(6)	An accessory use or structure may be located in a rear yard provided it is located not less than ten feet from any property line. The accessory use or structure shall not cover more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-145. R-43 Residential District.
(a)	Purpose. This district, characterized by steep slopes, is intended to be a quiet, low-density neighborhood consisting of single-family residences along with limited home occupations and limited private and public community uses. It is expected that public water and sewer facilities may not be available to each lot. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the R-43 zoning district. Also see Appendix A. Permitted Uses Table. 
Permitted by Right 	Special Uses 
Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the sale of products on the property where produced 	Churches and their customary related uses 
Customary incidental home occupation 	Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters 
Noncommercial, public or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools and fishing lakes 	Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 
Public elementary schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools 	
Residential: Single-family 	

(c)	Dimensional requirements. Within the R-43 Residential District, as shown on the zoning map, the minimum lot size is 43,000 sq. ft. The following dimensional requirements per dwelling unit shall be complied with: 
Min. Yard Requirements 	Setbacks 
Min. Lot Size 
(sq. ft). 	Min. Lot Width at Building Line (feet) 	Front Setback (feet) 	Side Setback (feet) 	Rear Setback (feet) 
43,000 	100 	30 	15 	20% mean lot depth, or 30 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-146. R-21 Residential District.
(a)	Purpose. This district is intended to be a quiet, low density neighborhood consisting of single-family residences and limited home occupations and limited private and public community uses. It is expected that public water and sewer facilities will be available to each lot, providing a healthful environment. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the R-21 zoning district. Also see Appendix A. Permitted Uses Table. 
Permitted Uses 	Special Uses 
Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the sale of products on the property where produced 	Churches and their customary related uses 
Customary incidental home occupation 	Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters 
Noncommercial, public or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools and fishing lakes 	Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 
Public elementary schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools 	Rest and convalescent homes 
Residential: Single-family dwelling 	

(c)	Dimensional requirements. Within the R-43 Residential District, as shown on the zoning map, the minimum lot size is 21,000 sq. ft. The following dimensional requirements per dwelling unit shall be complied with: 
Min. Yard Requirements 	Setbacks (feet) 
Lot Size 
(sq. ft). 	Lot Width at Building Line (feet) 	Front 	Side 	Side-Abutting Street/Right-of-Way 	Rear (whichever is less) 
21,000 	90 	30 	15 	20 	20% mean lot depth, or 30 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-147. R-10 Residential District.
(a)	Purpose. The R-10 Residential District is intended to be a quiet medium density residential district in which the principal use of the land is for residential purposes, with provisions for limited group residential areas and limited private and public community uses. It is expected that public water and sewer facilities will be available to each lot. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the R-10 zoning district. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the R-43 zoning district. Also see Appendix A. Permitted Uses Table. 
Permitted Uses 	Special Uses 
Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the sale of products on the property where produced 	Churches and their customary related uses 
Customary incidental home occupation 	Group Development 
Noncommercial, public or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools and fishing lakes 	Kindergartens and day nurseries 
Public elementary schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools 	Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters 
Residential: Single-family dwelling 	Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 
Residential: Two-family dwelling 	Rest and convalescent homes 
Residential: Multi-family dwelling 	
Residential: Class A double wide mobile homes 	

(c)	Dimensional requirements. Within the R-10 Residential District, as shown on the zoning map, the minimum lot size is 6,000 sq. ft. The following dimensional requirements per dwelling unit shall be complied with: 
# of units 	Min. Yard Requirements 	Setbacks (feet) 
	Lot Size 
(sq. ft.) 	Lot Width at Building Line 
(feet) 	Front 	Side 	Rear (whichever is less) 
First unit 	10,000 	70 	25 	10 (15 if abutting street) 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 
Second unit 	6,000 	90 	25 	20 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 
Three units or more 	4,500 (each add. unit; max. 8 units) 	100 	25 	25 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-148. R-7 Residential District.
(a)	Purpose. The R-7 Residential District is established as a district where two-family and multifamily dwellings will be permitted along with single-family dwellings. It is expected that public water and sewerage facilities will be available to each lot in such districts. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the R-7 zoning district. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the R-43 zoning district. Also see Appendix A. Permitted Uses Table. 
Permitted Uses 	Special Uses 
Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the sale of products on the property where produced 	Churches and their customary related uses 
Customary incidental home occupations 	Group Development 
Noncommercial, public or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools and fishing lakes 	Kindergartens and day nurseries 
Office supplies and equipment, sales and service 	Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters 
Public elementary schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools 	Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 
Residential: Single-family dwelling 	Rest and convalescent homes 
Residential: Two-family dwelling 	
Residential: Multi-family dwelling 	
Residential: Class A double-wide mobile homes 	

(c)	Dimensional requirements Within the R-7 Residential District, as shown on the zoning map, the minimum lot size is 6,000 sq. ft. The following dimensional requirements per dwelling unit shall be complied with: 
# of units 	Min. Yard Requirements 	Setbacks (feet) 
	Lot Size 
(sq. ft.) 	Lot Width at Building Line 
(feet) 	Front 	Side 	Rear 
First unit 	7,000 	50 	20 	10 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 
Second unit 	6,000 	80 	20 	20 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 
Three units or more 	5,000 	100 	20 	25 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-149. Transitional District.
(a)	Purpose. The Transitional District serves as a transition between residential and commercial land uses. Within this district, dwellings and businesses have an equal priority and are encouraged to coexist. Commercial uses should primarily serve the neighborhood or local community rather than the region. Square footage limitations ensure that the scale of overall development is kept moderate. It is expected that properties within this district will have above average access to roads and that public water and sewer are available. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the Transitional Zoning District. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the R-43 zoning district. Also see Appendix A. Permitted Uses Table. 
Permitted Uses (Residential) 	Permitted Uses (Commercial) 
Single-Family Dwellings 	Banks 	Medical and dental clinics 
Two-Family Dwellings 	Barber and beauty shops 	Office supplies and equipment sales 
Multi-Family Dwellings 	Bicycle sales and service 	Business, professional and public offices with no outside storage of materials or equipment 
	Catalog sales 	Opticians 
Special Uses 	Clothing stores 	Photos and camera sales and service 
Churches 	Crafts retail and supplies 	Physical culture, such as dance studios, martial arts, bodybuilding and aerobics facilities 
Group Developments 	Dairy bars or ice cream shops 	Public Safety Facilities 
	Floral shops 	Public works and public utilities facilities 
	Electronics retail stores 	Grocery stores and specialty food shops 
	Kindergartens 	Restaurants without drive thru facilities 
	Libraries and museums 	Radio and TV repair 
	Medical and dental clinics 	Shoe sales 
	Office supplies and equipment sales 	Tailors and dressmaking 
	Business, professional and public offices with no outside storage of materials or equipment 	

(c)	Access requirements. Adjacent residential land uses and adjacent residential zoning districts shall be protected from excessive traffic generated by uses within this district. All commercial developments permitted within this district must place their entrances and exits in the front yard of their lot. Entrances and exits from parking areas shall not be provided alongside and rear lot lines. 
(d)	Buffer strip. All commercial developments in the Transitional District shall establish a buffer strip along property lines that abut adjacent residential land uses and adjacent residential zoning districts. A solid, opaque privacy fence eight feet in height may be used in place of vegetative buffers. 
(e)	Dimensional requirements. Within the Transitional District, as shown on the zoning map, the minimum lot size is 6,000 sq. ft. The following dimensional requirements per dwelling unit shall be complied with: 
# of units 	Min Yard Requirements 	Setbacks (feet) 
	Lot Size 
(sq. ft.) 	Lot Width at Building Line 
(feet) 	Front 	Side 	Rear 
First unit 	7,000 	50 	20 	10 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 
Second unit 	6,000 	80 	20 	20 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 
Three units or more 	5,000 	100 	20 	25 	20% mean lot depth or 30 feet 
Density: Maximum residential density is eight dwelling units per acre. 


(f)	Parking. C-S parking requirements. 75 percent of the parking must be provided in the side or rear of the structure. 
(g)	Drive thru facilities. Drive thru facilities are prohibited for all approved uses. 
(h)	Hours of operation. Hours of operation for any business or service provided on the site are limited to 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m. All illuminated signs shall be limited to these hours of operation. 
i.	Outside storage of materials or equipment. Outside storage of materials or equipment is prohibited. Materials and equipment may be stored in approved accessory buildings. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-150. Mountain Village District (CZ).
(a)	Established. The Mountain Village (MV) District is established as a district to permit a range of mixed high density single-family and multifamily housing types along with limited office, public, civic, and retail uses appropriate within higher density residential areas. It is intended that this district be located near employment centers, shopping facilities, roads and other urban infrastructure capable of handling the demand generated by higher density residential development and/or capable of being upgraded to handle the demands. The Mountain Village District may only be established in accordance with the procedure in section 54-156 Conditional Districts. 
(b)	Uses. The Mountain Village District shall be structured to provide a mix of uses, like residential, retail, employment, civic, and recreational uses. In addition, a variety of housing options is required to allow a greater diversity of residents within the neighborhood. 
A minimum of 15 percent of the land area within a Mountain Village District should be devoted to nonresidential uses. Residential uses are allowed on the upper floors of these uses, as appropriate. 
(c)	Development standards.
(1)	Density standards. Mountain Village Districts shall maintain a minimum average density of at least eight units per acre. 
(2)	Structure size standards. None required. 
(3)	Lot size standards.
a.	There is no minimum lot size for the Mountain Village Residential District. It is expected that any property zoned Mountain Village will be five acres or more in size. Layout and configuration of the (buildings, structures, amenities, roads, etc.) actual dwelling units will be in the form of a master plan approval that will guide the placement and development of residences, commercial buildings, and amenity areas. 
b.	Significant changes to an approved conditional zoning will need approval from the planning board and will be subject to public hearing and review as outlined elsewhere in this Code for conditional zoning districts. The master plan shall provide all information indicated in the conditional zoning provisions. Shall be submitted to the town for approval. 
(4)	Lot width standards. Lots in the MV District shall have no minimum width. 
(5)	Setback standards. There are no setback requirements imposed by the Mountain Village zoning classification. Landscaping and buffering requirements between the Mountain Village and adjacent properties may result in setbacks from adjacent properties; if so, the landscaping and buffering requirements shall be met. Within the village center, buildings shall be located no further than five feet from the edge of the sidewalk, with the exception of buildings that provide a courtyard or green. Buildings providing a courtyard or green may be setback up to 25 feet from the edge of the sidewalk and the main facade of these buildings shall face the green. The minimum spacing between structures shall, in addition, be as per the county fire code. 
(6)	Impervious surface standards. A maximum of 70 percent of the total land area in the Mountain Village shall be impervious. The amount of impervious surface may be increased provided that a stormwater management plan that incorporates low impact development standards is provided for the entire development. The stormwater management plan shall provide for, and guarantee, zero stormwater runoff for the impervious surfaces that exceed 70 percent of the total land area of the Mountain Village. 
(7)	Height standards. As described elsewhere in this Code. 
(8)	Landscaping/buffering standards. Landscaping and/or buffering shall be provided as part of an approved master plan. Such plan will be designed by a licensed state landscape architect and must be approved as part of the master plan. At a minimum the landscape plan shall provide for a landscape buffer between the Mountain Village and adjacent uses; street trees on both sides of new and existing streets at a ratio of one tree per 40 feet of street frontage; buffering of parking areas from streets and adjacent uses with a minimum ten foot wide planting strip planted with trees and shrubs; interior landscaping of parking lots at a ratio of one tree and two shrubs per five parking spaces with the landscaping evenly distributed throughout the parking area with no parking space located more than 60 feet from a tree; and buffering of residential uses from nonresidential uses with a landscaped buffer with a minimum width of 15 feet except when these uses are located in the village center. A minimum of 75 percent of the plant material used to meet the landscaping and buffering requirements shall be native plants. 
(9)	Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by section 54-176. Parking areas with more than 100 parking spaces shall have a landscape aisle with a minimum width of ten feet within the parking area that separates the parking area into subareas of approximately equal size. On street parking provided within the Mountain Village may provide up to 50 percent of the required parking for the uses in the Mountain Village. Parking for bicycles, in the form of bike racks or other device, shall be provided by all nonresidential uses. 
(10)	Recreational/open space standards. Open space shall be provided as a requirement of the master plan. Options for recreational/open space shall include passive parks, playgrounds, and public sports facilities. The recreational/open space shall be accessible and useable by residents of and visitors to the Mountain Village. Recreational/open space shall be provided at a ratio of 300 square feet per residential dwelling unit and 100 square feet per 1,000 gross square feet of nonresidential uses. Recreational/open space and public spaces shall be provided in the Mountain Village to provide opportunities for recreation, public gathering, stormwater infiltration, and enhanced aesthetics. Recreational/open space areas may be developed for active and/or passive recreational purposes or left in their natural state. Rooftop gardens accessible to the public may be counted toward recreational/open space requirements. Public spaces may be landscaped, hardscaped, or a combination of these treatments. Recreational/open space and public space shall be provided at the ratio of 500 square feet per residential unit and 100 square feet per 1,000 square feet of nonresidential gross floor area. 
(11)	Sidewalks/trails. Pedestrian connectivity is required throughout the Mountain Village. Sidewalks and/or trails shall be provided to connect all sections of the development and uses within the Mountain Village. Sidewalks, greenways, and/or trails shall provide pedestrian connectivity and access to all sections of the Mountain Village. Where provided, sidewalks shall be located adjacent to streets and roads and separated from the street by a planting strip with a minimum width of four feet. Sidewalks in residential areas shall have a minimum width of five feet and meet all standards of the town; sidewalks in mixed use and nonresidential areas shall have a minimum width of six feet and meet all standards of the town. Greenways and/or trails may be constructed in lieu of and/or in addition to sidewalks. The minimum width for greenways and trails shall be six feet and they must meet all standards of the town. Greenways, trails, and sidewalks shall connect to existing greenways, trails, and sidewalks on adjacent property and/or shall provide for future connections to adjacent properties and public ways. All sidewalk, greenway, and trail locations and design shall be shown on the master plan for the Mountain Village and must be approved by the planning board. 
(12)	Building design.
a.	The design of buildings in the Mountain Village should reflect the character of western North Carolina and should be designed and constructed to achieve the goal of creating sustainable buildings that can serve multiple uses as the village grows and changes over time. Applications and master plans for Mountain Villages shall be accompanied by urban and architectural design guidelines to be prepared by the applicant. Building materials within the Mountain Village should be quality, sustainable materials that contribute to the long-term economic viability of the Mountain Village. Vinyl and similar artificial materials should be avoided when possible. Architecture within the Mountain Village should reflect and enhance the natural and manmade environment found in western North Carolina. Guidelines for structures include: 
1.	Front porches should be located on small scale multifamily residential structures. 
2.	It is suggested that pitched roofs of single-family residential structures should have a minimum 6-in-12 pitch with a central ridge and flat roofs of single-family residential structures be designed and constructed as a green roof or other energy saving design. 
3.	Front doors should be located on the street side of small scale multifamily residential structures. 
b.	Guidelines for nonresidential structures include: 
1.	Buildings should front on the street, with parking located beside or behind the building. 
2.	Doors should be located on the street side of buildings. 
3.	A pedestrian connection should be provided from the sidewalk to the front door of the building. 
4.	Safe pedestrian connections should be provided from and through parking areas to the entrances of all buildings and to sidewalks. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-151. C-S Community Shopping Districts.
(a)	Purpose. The C-S Community Shopping District is established as the district in which retail trade and consumer services uses will expand as the community's and region's population increases. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the C-S Community Shopping zoning district. 
Permitted Uses
Any form of agriculture or horticulture 	Libraries, museums and art galleries 
Assembly halls, coliseums, armories, ballrooms 	Locksmiths and gunsmiths 
Automobile parts and supplies, retail 	Meat markets, retail only 
Automobile repair garages, excluding body works and open storage of wrecked cars 	Medical and dental clinics 
Automobile sales, new and uses 	Miniature golf 
Bakeries, retail 	Newspaper offices 
Banks and other financial institutions 	Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, community centers 
Barber and beauty shops 	Office supplies and equipment, sales and service 
Boat and trailer sales 	Offices, businesses, professional and public 
Bowling alleys and skating rinks 	Opticians and optical goods 
Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, music and dance studios 	Photographic studios and camera supply 
Car wash 	Physical culture and reducing salons 
Catalogue sales 	Public and private elementary schools 
Clubs and lodges, fraternities, sororities 	Public works and utility facilities, excluding service and storage yards 
Contractors' offices with interior storage 	Radio and television stations 
Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail sales 	Radio and television repair shops 
Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations 	Restaurants, including drive-ins 
Floral shops 	Retail establishments 
Funeral homes and mortuaries 	Shoe repair and shine shops 
Furriers and fur storage 	Small electric and appliance repair shops 
Hotels, inns and motels 	Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops 
Industrial trade schools and research laboratories 	Taxicab stands 
Jewelry repair and pawn shops 	Telephone and telegraph offices 
Launderette and laundromats 	Theatres, indoors 
	Warehousing 
Special Uses
Alcohol and alcohol beverage manufacturing 	Group development 
Animal hospitals 	Kennels 
Auction sales, except livestock 	Kindergartens and day nurseries 
Churches 	Public safety facilities 
Game and amusement rooms 	Public works and utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations and water towers 
	Service stations 

(c)	Dimensional requirements. Within the C-S Community Shopping District the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with: 
Density 	Parking and Loading 	Landscaping and Buffering 
No yards are required except that where a lot abuts a residential district there shall be a side and rear yard clearance of at least 15 feet. 	Off-street loading and unloading. Buildings constructed or converted to commercial use after September 16, 1973 shall provide off-street loading and unloading berths as required in section 54-182. 	A densely planted and maintained buffer strip shall be planted on any side or rear yard which abuts a residential area. Such a buffer need not extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the adjoining lot. No buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard which abuts a public street. 
All buildings and apparatus shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area. 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-152. Community Shopping Type 2 Zone.
(a)	Purpose. The Community Shopping Type 2 Zone (C-S-2) is intended to accommodate a small number of commercial activities along with complementary public uses, residential and services concentrated in mixed-use developments along strategic points of the secondary transit system. 
The purpose of the Community Shopping Type 2 Zone will be to minimize the distance individuals will need to travel between home, work, and necessary services. The mixture of acceptable uses will include a core group of non-invasive commercial, medical and educational uses distinctly different from normally accepted commercial applications and in deference to existing and proposed residential uses. In addition, to reducing dependence upon our increasingly stressed transportation system, the Community Shopping Type 2 Zone will allow maximum developmental value to be achieved along designated strategic corridors. It is the intention of the Community Shopping Type 2 Zone to enhance and diversify development of the town's strategic corridors and to prevent commercial, residential and industrial uses that are incompatible with the long-range development goals of the town. 
The proposed definition will read as follows: Community Shopping Type 2 Zone (C-S-2). The following mixed-use district is established: 
The purpose of the Community Shopping Type 2 Zone is to provide for a significant and steady increase in the economic development of the town in key areas while protecting and safeguarding existing and future residential development from encroachment by incompatible uses. This zone will allow a degree of latitude for potential development along designated strategic corridors in close proximity to major transportation corridors that is unavailable in transitional zoning districts. The C-S-2 Zone will allow for controlled development with a mixture of uses that are designed for their compatibility with residential development. It is also expected that the C-S-2 Zone will reduce demands on local transportation infrastructure, thereby preserving quality of life within the town. 
(1)	The Community Shopping Type 2 Zone is intended to provide for commercial and limited high-density residential uses in specific areas that are in close proximity to major transportation corridors and residential development. 
(2)	Suitable development of a residential nature will be allowed as a special use within the Community Shopping Type 2 Zone within the confines developed by the planning board of adjustment. 
(3)	This article will allow for the specific prohibition of certain residential and commercial applications within the Community Shopping Type 2 Zone. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the C-S Community Shopping Type 2 zoning district. 
Permitted Uses
Any form of agriculture or horticulture 	Miniature golf 
Banks and other financial institutions 	Newspaper offices 
Barber and beauty shops 	Offices, businesses, professional and public 
Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, music and dance studios 	Opticians and optical goods 
Catalogue sales 	Photographic studios and camera supply 
Customary incidental home occupation 	Physical culture and reducing salons 
Floral shops 	Printing and reproduction establishments 
Jewelry repair and pawn shops 	Printing, engraving and publishing establishments 
Libraries, museums and art galleries 	Radio and television repair shops 
Locksmiths and gunsmiths 	Shoe repair and shine shops 
Meat markets, retail only 	Small electric and appliance repair shops 
Medical and dental clinics 	Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops 
Office supplies and equipment, sales and service 	Telephone and telegraph offices 
	Theatres, indoors 
Special Uses
Animal hospitals 	Kindergartens and day nurseries 
Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared food products for wholesale distribution 	Launderette and laundromats 
Bakeries, retail 	Musical instrument manufacturing 
Car wash 	Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, community centers 
Churches and their customary related uses 	Paper products and manufacturing 
Clubs and lodges, fraternities, sororities, and social, civic, and other similar organizations 	Printing plants 
Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing 	Public and private elementary schools 
Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations 	Public safety facilities 
Exterminators 	Public works and public utilities 
Feed and seed stores 	Public works and public utilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 
Funeral homes and mortuaries 	Radio and television stations 
Furniture manufacturing 	Residential: Single-Family 
Group development 	Residential: Two-Family 
Hotels, inns, and motels 	Residential: Multi-Family 
Industrial trade schools and research laboratories 	Rest and convalescent homes 
Kennels 	Retail establishments 

(d)	Dimensional Requirements. Within the C-S Community Shopping Type 2 District the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with: 
Density 	Parking and Loading 	Landscaping and Buffering 
No yards are required except that where a lot abuts a residential district there shall be a side and rear yard clearance of at least 15 feet. 	Off-street loading and unloading. Buildings constructed or converted to commercial use after September 16, 1973 shall provide off-street loading and unloading berths as required in section 54-182. 	A densely planted and maintained buffer strip shall be planted on any side or rear yard which abuts a residential area. Such a buffer need not extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the adjoining lot. Buffering may be required on any side or rear yard, which abuts a public street at the discretion of the board. 
All buildings and apparatus shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area. 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-153. Community Shopping Type 3 Zone.
(a)	Purpose. The Community Shopping Type 3 Zone (C-S-3) is intended to accommodate high density commercial activities along with complementary public uses, and or high-density residential developments concentrated along strategic points of the primary transit system that meet the town's specifications for extraordinary commercial signage. 
The purpose of the Community Shopping Type 3 Zone will be to identify and maximize the utility of certain parcels of land that are determined by the town to meet certain criteria that prevent the application of chapter 34 as applied in similarly situated properties within other zoning districts from being effective. Inclusion within the Community Shopping Type 3 Zone is based upon a non-binding determination by staff on the need for such application, a recommendation by the planning board of adjustment of the town after a duly called public hearing and an independent and binding finding by a majority of the board of aldermen meeting at a duly called public hearing on such a matter. In the event of a successful protest petition then a super majority of the board of aldermen would be required to enact such a zoning as outlined within the town land use ordinance. 
Parcels contained within C-S Type 3 Zone will necessarily be adjacent to major transportation corridors alternately known as primary arterial roads as defined by and adopted by the board of aldermen of the town as they should see fit. Further such parcels will lend themselves to large scale and/or high-density commercial enterprise due to: location, access to major transportation, visibility, lot size, or topography. Application for inclusion within C-S Type 3 Zone may be made by any property holder owning title to property which he believes meets any one of the criteria for inclusion, however, a property owner application is not required in order for staff to recommend a site for inclusion within the C-S Type 3 Zone. 
The mixture of acceptable uses within the C-S Type 3 Zone may include everything from normally accepted commercial applications to light industry to high-density residential. In addition, to reducing stress upon our local transportation system, the revised C-S Type 3 Zone is designed to allow large scale commercial investment within the town to be achieved along designated strategic corridors. It is the intention of the board of aldermen that the C-S Type 3 Zone enhances opportunities for desirable commercial, light industrial and high-density residential development along the town's strategic corridors and to permit commercial, residential and industrial uses that are compatible with the long-range development goals of the town. Further it is the intention of this article to limit the potential negative impacts of such development by regulating their location within the municipality to a higher degree than the traditional Community Shopping Type 3 Zoning designation currently allows. 
The proposed definition will read as follows: Community Shopping Zoning (C-S Type 3). The following mixed-use district is established: 
The purpose of the Community Shopping Type 3 (C-S Type 3) Zone is to provide for the economic development of the town with a focus on areas of intense commercial value located adjacent to primary arterial roads as designated by the board of aldermen of the town. This zone will allow maximum latitude for potential development along strategic corridors in close proximity to major transportation corridors. In addition to opening designated sections of the town for high value controlled development, the mixture of uses contained within the C-S Type 3 Zone is expected to enhance opportunities for large scale commercial investment within the corporate limits of the town. Further, it is the intent of this article to encourage development of commercial, light industrial and or high density residential development in a manner that will best serve the citizens of the town by enhancing tax base, limiting stress on municipal services and infrastructure, and creating opportunities for employment and investment that are deemed in the best interest of and to meet the needs of the citizens of the town as may change from time to time and are best interpreted in zoning matters by their elected officials. 
(1)	The C-S Type 3 Zone is intended to provide for commercial, light industrial, and limited high-density residential uses in specific areas that are adjacent to primary arterial corridors. 
(2)	Properties located within the C-S Type 3 Zone will be subject to the chapter 34 regulations laid out within chapter 34 for this standalone district. Within said district, should a conflict arise between chapter 34's general requirements and the C-S Type 3 Zone requirements, then the C-S Type 3 Zone requirements shall be deemed the defining regulations. 
(3)	Suitable development of a residential nature will be allowed only as a special use within the C-S Type 3 Zone, within the confines as approved by the board of aldermen. Typically, residential developments allowed within this district will be apartment and/or condominium complexes of a high density nature. 
(4)	Suitable development of certain light industrial applications will be allowed as a special use within the confines approved by the board of aldermen. Property owners seeking inclusion within the C-S Type 3 Zone will need to specifically identify why their proposed use should be included within the C-S Type 3 Zone classification unless recommendation for inclusion within said district comes from staff or independent action by the board of aldermen. This article will allow for the specific prohibition of certain residential and light industrial applications within the Community Shopping Type 3 Zone. 
(5)	Significant change in use without obtaining prior approval from the board of aldermen or discontinuation of use of any commercial, light industrial or residential use operating under a special use permit within the C-S Type 3 Zone shall be deemed grounds for the planning board of adjustment to begin review of the property in question for a change in zoning status to traditional C-S. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the C-S Community Shopping Type 3 zoning district. 
Any form of agriculture or horticulture 	Funeral homes and mortuaries 
Assembly halls, coliseums, armories, ballrooms 	Furniture manufacturing 
Automobile parts and supplies, retail 	Game and amusement rooms, including pool halls 
Automobile repair garages, excluding body works and open storage of wrecked cars 	Glass, ceramic and tile manufacturing 
Automobile sales, new and used 	Group development 
Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared food products for wholesale distribution 	Libraries, museums and art galleries 
Bakeries, retail 	Locksmiths and gunsmiths 
Banks and other financial institutions 	Meat markets, retail only 
Barber and beauty shops 	Medical and dental clinics 
Boat and trailer sales 	Miniature golf 
Bowling alleys and skating rinks 	Newspaper offices 
Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges, music and dance studios 	Office supplies and equipment, sales and service 
Car wash 	Offices, businesses, professional and public 
Catalogue sales 	Opticians and optical goods 
Customary incidental home occupation 	Photographic studios and camera supply 
Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail sales 	Physical culture and reducing salons 
Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations 	Printing and reproduction establishments 
Floral shops 	Printing, engraving and publishing establishments 
Furriers and fur storage 	Public and private elementary schools 
Hotels, inns and motels 	Radio and television repair shops 
Industrial trade schools and research laboratories 	Restaurants, including drive-ins 
Jewelry repair and pawn shops 	Retail establishments 
Launderette and laundromats 	Shoe repair and shine shops 
Special Uses 	Small electric and appliance repair shops 
Alcohol and alcohol beverage manufacturing 	Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops 
Amusement, recreational and sporting goods manufacturing 	Telephone and telegraph offices 
Animal hospitals 	Theatres, indoors 
Apparel and clothing manufacturing, including hosiery 	Auction sales, except livestock 
Automobile parts and accessories manufacturing 	Kindergartens and day nurseries 
Automobile repair garages, including body works and open storage of wrecked cars 	Leather products, including luggage and shoe manufacturing 
Bedding and carpet manufacturing and cleaning establishments 	Manufactured home display area 
Belting and brake lining manufacturing 	Musical instrument manufacturing 
Boat and trailer repairs and manufacturing 	Noncommercial parks, playgrounds, community centers 
Bottling works 	Outdoor recreation uses such as go-cart track and riding stables 
Building materials storage and sales yards 	Paper products and manufacturing 
Business machines manufacturing 	Plumbing and heating supply houses 
Cabinet, caskets and woodworking 	Precision instruments manufacturing 
Churches and their customary related uses 	Printing plants 
Clubs and lodges, fraternities, sororities, and social, civic, and other similar organizations 	Public safety facilities 
Coffee, tea and spices processing 	Public works and public utilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 
Contractors' offices with storage yards 	Public works and utility facilities, excluding service and storage yards 
Drugs, medicines and cosmetics manufacturing 	Radio and television stations 
Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations 	Residential: Single-Family 
Electrical appliances and electronic equipment manufacturing 	Residential: Two-Family 
Electrical wholesale supply house and repair shops 	Residential: Multi-Family 
Exterminators 	Rest and convalescent homes 
Farm machinery, sales and repairs 	Service stations 
Feed and seed stores 	Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing, heating and refrigeration shops 
Freezer lockers and ice plants 	Taxicab stands 
Hardware and housewares manufacturing 	Textile and cordage manufacturing 
Industrial supplies and equipment, sales and service 	Trailer manufacturing 
Industrial trade schools and research laboratories 	Truck stop 
Insulation materials and wall boarding manufacturing 	Warehousing, except for storage of dangerous and offensive items such as uncured hides and explosives 
Kennels 	Wholesale establishments 
	Window and door manufacturing 

(c)	Dimensional requirements. Within the C-S Community Shopping Type 3 District the following dimensional requirements shall be complied with: 
Density 	Parking and Loading 	Landscaping and Buffering 
No yards are required except that where a lot abuts a residential district there shall be a side and rear yard clearance of at least 15 feet. 	Off-street loading and unloading. Buildings constructed or converted to commercial use after September 16, 1973 shall provide off-street loading and unloading berths as required in section 54-182. 	A densely planted and maintained buffer strip shall be planted on any side or rear yard which abuts a residential area. Such a buffer need not extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the adjoining lot. No buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard, which abuts a public street. 
All buildings and apparatus shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area. 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-154. L-I Light Industrial District.
(a)	Purpose. The L-I Light Industrial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for light industrial and warehousing uses which normally seek locations on large tracts of land where the operations involved do not detract from the development potential of nearby undeveloped properties. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the L-I Industrial District. 
Permitted Uses
Alcohol and alcohol beverage manufacturing 	Industrial trade schools and research laboratories 
Amusement, recreation and sporting goods manufacturing 	Insulation materials and wall board manufacturing 
Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the sale of products on the property where produced 	Kennels 
Apparel and clothing manufacturing, including hosiery 	Launderette and laundromats 
Assembly halls, coliseums, armories, ballrooms, and similar structures 	Leather products, including luggage and shoe manufacturing 
Auction sales, except livestock 	Libraries, museums and art galleries 
Automobile parts and supplies, retail 	Locksmiths and gunsmiths 
Automobile parts and accessories manufacturing 	Manufactured home display area 
Automobile repair garages, but excluding body works and open storage of wrecked cars 	Meat markets, retail only, excluding the killing or dressing of any flesh or fowl 
Automobile sales, new and uses 	Medical and dental clinics 
Bakeries and other establishment manufacturing prepared food products for wholesale distribution 	Miniature golf 
Bakeries, retail 	Mini storage warehouses 
Bedding and carpet manufacturing and cleaning establishments 	Musical instrument manufacturing 
Belting and brake lining manufacturing 	Newspaper offices 
Boat and trailer repairs and manufacturing 	Noncommercial public or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools and fishing lakes 
Boat and trailer sales 	Offices, business, professional and public 
Bottling works 	Paper products manufacturing 
Bowling alleys and skating rinks 	Plastic products manufacturing 
Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges and schools, music and dance studios 	Plumbing and heating supply houses 
Business machines manufacturing 	Precision instruments manufacturing 
Cabinet, caskets and woodworking 	Printing and reproduction establishments 
Car wash 	Printing, engraving and publishing establishments 
Clubs and lodges, fraternities, sororities, and social, civic, and other similar organizations operating on a nonprofit basis 	Printing plants 
Coffee, tea and spices processing 	Public and private elementary schools 
Contractors offices with interior storage of materials 	Public works and utility facilities, excluding service and storage yards 
Drugs, medicines and cosmetics manufacturing 	Radio and television stations 
Dry cleaning and laundry plants 	Radio and television repair shops 
Electrical appliances and electronic equipment manufacturing 	Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants 
Electrical wholesale supply house and repair shops 	Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing, heating and refrigeration shops 
Exterminators 	Textile and cordage manufacturing 
Felt and sandpaper manufacturing 	Theatres, indoor 
Freezer lockers and ice plants 	Trailer manufacturing 
Funeral homes and mortuaries 	Truck stop 
Furniture manufacturing 	Warehousing, except for the storage of dangerous or offensive items such as uncured hides and explosives 
Furriers and fur storage 	Wholesale establishments 
Glass, ceramic and tile manufacturing 	Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products, including bottled gas and oxygen 
Hardware and housewares manufacturing 	Window and door manufacturing 
Hotels, motels and inns 	
Special Uses
Animal hospitals 	Group development 
Automobile repair garages, including body works and open storage of wrecked cars 	Industrial supplies and equipment, sales and service 
Building materials storage and sales yards 	Kindergartens and day nurseries 
Churches and their customary related uses 	Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters 
Contractors' offices with storage yards 	Public works and public utilities facilities 
Farm machinery, sales and repairs 	Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 
Feed and seed stores 	Rest and convalescent homes 
Game and amusement rooms, including pool halls 	Service stations 

(c)	Dimensional Requirements. Within the L-I Industrial District, as shown on the zoning map, the following dimensional requirements per dwelling unit shall be complied with: 
Min. Yard Requirements 	Setbacks (feet) 
Lot Size (acres) 	Lot Width at Building Line (feet) 	Front 	Side 	Side (from each principle building) 
One 	200 	50 	15 	25 
Coverage 	The total ground area covered by the principal building and accessory buildings shall not exceed 40 percent of the total lot area. 
Buffering 	A densely planted and maintained buffer strip shall be planted on any side or rear yard which abuts a residential area. Such a buffer need not extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the adjoining lot. No buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard which abuts a public street. 


(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-155. H-I Heavy Industrial Districts.
(a)	Purpose. The H-I Heavy Industrial District is designed to accommodate all but the most obnoxious industries. However, it is expected that industries permitted here by right, as well as those special uses, will minimize their emission of smoke, dust, fumes, glare, noise and vibrations. 
(b)	Uses. The chart below indicates the uses generally permitted in the H-I Industrial District. 
Permitted Uses
Air conditioning and heating equipment manufacturing 	Furniture manufacturing 
Alcohol and alcohol beverage manufacturing 	Furriers and fur storage 
Amusement, recreation and sporting goods manufacturing 	Glass, ceramic and tile manufacturing 
Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the sale of products on the property where produced 	Hardware and housewares manufacturing 
Apparel and clothing manufacturing, including hosiery 	Insulation materials and wall board manufacturing 
Apple packing sheds 	Kennels 
Assembly halls, coliseums, armories, ballrooms, and similar structures 	Leather products, including luggage and shoe manufacturing 
Auction sales, except livestock 	Manufactured home display area 
Automobile parts and supplies, retail 	Metal fabricating plants, including boiler and tank works 
Automobile parts and accessories manufacturing 	Mini storage warehouses 
Automobile repair garages, but excluding body works and open storage of wrecked cars 	Musical instrument manufacturing 
Automobile repair garages, including body works and open storage of wrecked cars 	Noncommercial public or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools and fishing lakes 
Automobile sales, new and uses 	Offices, business, professional and public 
Bakeries and other establishment manufacturing prepared food products for wholesale distribution 	Outdoor recreation uses such as go-cart track and riding stables 
Bedding and carpet manufacturing and cleaning establishments 	Paper products manufacturing 
Belting and brake lining manufacturing 	Plastic products manufacturing 
Boat and trailer repairs and manufacturing 	Planting works 
Boat and trailer sales 	Plumbing and heating supply houses 
Bottling works 	Pottery, porcelain, or vitreous china manufacturing 
Bowling alleys and skating rinks 	Precision instruments manufacturing 
Business machines manufacturing 	Printing and reproduction establishments 
Cabinet, caskets and woodworking 	Printing, engraving and publishing establishments 
Car wash 	Printing plants 
Carbon and battery products manufacturing 	Radio and television stations 
Clubs and lodges, fraternities, sororities, and social, civic, and other similar organizations operating on a nonprofit basis 	Restaurants, including drive-in restaurants 
Coffee, tea and spices processing 	Sawmills, planning mills, pallet and basket factories 
Contractors offices with interior storage of materials 	Service stations 
Drugs, medicines and cosmetics manufacturing 	Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing, heating and refrigeration shops 
Dry cleaning and laundry plants 	Textile and cordage manufacturing 
Electrical appliances and electronic equipment manufacturing 	Trailer manufacturing 
Exterminators 	Truck stop 
Felt and sandpaper manufacturing 	Warehousing, except for the storage of dangerous or offensive items such as uncured hides and explosives 
Fertilizer manufacturing and sales 	Wholesale establishments 
Flour and feed mills 	Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products, including bottled gas and oxygen 
Freezer lockers and ice plants 	Window and door manufacturing 
Special Uses
Animal Hospitals 	Group development 
Automobile wrecking and junkyards 	Industrial supplies and equipment, sales and service 
Building materials storage and sales yards 	Kindergartens and day nurseries 
Churches and their customary related uses 	Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters 
Contractors' offices with storage yards 	Public works and public utilities facilities 
Farm machinery, sales and repairs 	Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 
Feed and seed stores 	

(c)	Dimensional requirements. Within the H-I Industrial District, as shown on the zoning map, the following dimensional requirements per dwelling unit shall be complied with: 
Min. Yard Requirements 	Setbacks (feet) 
Lot Size (acres) 	Lot Width at Building Line (feet) 	Front 	Side 	Side (from each principal building) 
One 	200 	50 	20 	25 
Setback from Residential Districts and Right-of-Way 	No building shall be less than 50 feet from the right-of-way line of the street or highway. Where the rear of a lot abuts a residential district, there shall be a 50-foot rear yard clearance and where a lot abuts a side yard of a lot zoned residential there shall be a side yard clearance of at least 40 feet. 
Buffering 	A densely planted and maintained buffer strip shall be planted on any side or rear yard which abuts a residential area. Such a buffer need not extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the adjoining lot. No buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard which abuts a public street. 


(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-156. Conditional Districts.
(a)	Purpose. For each general use zoning district, this ordinance authorizes the creation of parallel conditional zoning districts that have the same requirements as the general use district, as modified by one or more site-specific conditions. The conditional zoning district classification allows the board of commissioners to consider proposed uses and tailor the zoning to accommodate those uses while addressing anticipated problems that may arise from the establishment of the proposed uses. This section sets forth the types of conditional zoning districts and explains their relationship to the general use districts. 
(b)	District. Each general use district shall have a corresponding conditional zoning district and shall be indicated on the Official Zoning Map by the initials "CZ" in front of the associated base zoning district designation. The Mountain Village district may only be established through the conditional zoning process in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)	Conditions and requirements. The approval for each conditional zoning district shall specify all conditions of development and use of land that differ from the requirements of the corresponding general use district. Specific conditions may be proposed by the petitioner, by staff, or by the board of commissioners, but only those conditions approved the board of commissioners and consented to by the petitioner in writing may be incorporated into the zoning regulations. Such conditions must be designed to help the project conform to the town's adopted ordinances and plans, and/or mitigate the impacts reasonably expected to be generated by the developer or use of the site. Reclassification of land to a conditional zoning district allows a landowner to propose, and the board of commissioners to consider, additional conditions or restrictions on the range of allowable uses, use standards, development intensities, development standards, and other regulations applicable in the parallel general zoning district. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, upon request of the applicant, the board of commissioners may waive or vary a specific development standard or requirement if the board of commissioners find that such waiver or variance is not contrary to the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purposes of this chapter. 
(d)	Applicant and property information. Conditional zoning districts are intended for voluntary proposals submitted in the names of the owners of all property included in the petition/application. A conditional zoning district shall consist of land under unified control which may be planned and developed as a single development or as an approved programmed series of development phases by multiple developers. The applicant shall be legally capable of providing commitment to the town that the conditional zoning district development will comply with all documents, plans, standards, and conditions ultimately approved by the town. 
(e)	Approval process. The approval process for a conditional zoning district rezoning is as follows: 
(1)	Initial information meeting with staff. The applicant may submit a sketch plan to Woodfin Planning Staff and discuss any questions or concerns with the proposed development project in order to ensure the applicant fully understands the review and approval process, submittal requirements, appliable deadlines, fees and overall expectations for the project and application submittal process. The sketch plan, at a minimum, shall address the following: 
a.	The underlying zoning districts and a full list of proposed uses consistent in character in those zoning districts. Such use classifications may be selected from any of the uses, whether permitted by right or with supplemental standards, allowed in the general zoning district upon which the conditional zoning district is based. Uses not otherwise permitted in the general zoning district, shall not be permitted in the conditional zoning district. 
b.	General traffic routes to and from the development with major access points identified. 
c.	Tabular data, including the range and scope of proposed land uses, proposed densities, floor area ratios and impervious surface ratios as applicable to development type; and land areas devoted to each type of general land use and phase of development. 
d.	A proposed development schedule if the project is to be phased. 
(2)	Public information meeting. In connection with all requests for any conditional zoning district rezoning application for a nonresidential proposed use abutting a residentially zoned district and any proposed development project that meets the traffic thresholds requiring a traffic impact analysis, the applicant shall hold a public information meeting. The purpose is to provide a framework for creating a shared vision with community involvement and is designed to facilitate communication between an applicant and adjacent and surrounding property owners and to alert town planning staff and the town planning board and board of commissioners to additional potential issues and concerns with the proposed development project. The applicant shall develop and provide to town planning staff an agenda, schedule, location and list of participants to answer questions from citizens. The town may post the public information meeting to its website. town planning staff may attend the public information meeting but is not required to do so. 
(3)	Traffic impact analysis. A traffic impact analysis prepared by a licensed engineer is required only when it is estimated that either peak hour trips from the proposed development project are estimated to exceed 200 or the total daily trip volume from the proposed development project is estimated to exceed 2,000. If the project meets N.C.D.O.T. Traffic Impact Analysis guidelines, a single analysis meeting both N.C.D.O.T.'s requirements and the requirements of this ordinance may be submitted. The traffic impact analysis shall include at a minimum: 
a.	Existing traffic conditions within the study area boundary 
b.	Traffic volumes generated by the existing and proposed development on the parcel, including the morning peak, afternoon or evening peak and average annual daily traffic levels 
c.	The distribution of existing and proposed trips through the street network 
d.	Analyses of the capacities of intersections located within the study area boundary 
e.	Recommendations of improvements designed to mitigate traffic impacts; and 
f.	Other information reasonably requested by the administrator that is reasonably related to the traffic impact of a proposed development. 
(4)	Application submittal and acceptance. This zoning option is intended only for development proposals that are ready to proceed from plan approval to construction in a timely manner. As a result, each project must include a site plan that meets the requirements listed [in section] 54-157, as modified by any site-specific conditions, as well as any other plans, drawings, renderings, elevations, maps and documents specifically included as development documents for approval. 
a.	Formal staff review. Town staff shall review the Master Plan to identify issues with the proposed development and determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. Town staff will provide detailed comments to the applicable reviewing board regarding issues identified and recommend any needed changes or conditions to the Master Plan to bring it into compliance with the requirements of this chapter and/or other legal requirements. 
b.	Public hearing, planning board recommendation, and board of commissioners decision. The conditional zoning district rezoning approval decision is a legislative process subject to judicial review using the same procedures and standard of review as apply to general use district zoning decisions. The conditional zoning application shall be considered and treated as a zoning map amendment. In considering any petition for a conditional zoning district rezoning, the town shall follow all of the procedures set forth in section 54-73. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-157. Site plan.
All applications for conditional zoning shall be accompanied by two sets of plans drawn to scale showing: 
a.	The boundary/property lines of the property being developed as well as the location of the property lines which interest the boundaries of the property being subdivided or developed: 
b.	Water courses (including all perennial and intermittent streams) and flow paths on the land to be developed: 
c.	Location of existing and proposed conveyance systems and concentrated flows such as grass channels, swales and storm drains as well as the location of ponds; 
d.	Contour map of two-foot intervals extending 100 feet beyond the property boundary: Wetland limits (with a copy of appropriate federal and state permits). If permits have not been obtained, permit applications are to be submitted. Verification to be submitted with preliminary plans; 
e.	Impervious area calculations: 
f.	The location, names and rights-of-way of any existing street(s) on or within 300 feet of the land to be subdivided or developed; 
g.	Rough finished grades and the location of any building restriction flood lines: 
h.	The location of proposed streets (include street cross sections), buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces as well as the location of parks or other open spaces: 
i.	Zoning information for the proposed project site and adjacent properties: 
j.	The location and width of required stream and/or lake buffers: 
k.	Preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls to be installed for compliance with the appropriate post-construction stormwater ordinance; 
l.	Location of undisturbed open space as required by the ordinance; 
m.	The scale of the plan, which shall not be smaller than 100 feet to the inch, the north point and the date; and 
n.	A small scale vicinity map. 
Site Analysis Required: 
a.	Existing use of land (i.e., single-family, farm or vacant); 
b.	Boundaries and description of existing vegetation; 
c.	Existing drainage pattern, including the area up to 300 feet from perimeter of property; 
d.	Soil types (if applicable, identify areas suitable for septic field location); 
e.	Slope analysis (identification of moderate and steep slopes; e.g., ten percent to 25 percent and greater than 25 percent); 
f.	Existing utility right-of-way (overhead power lines, sewer easements, etc.); 
g.	Location and description of environmentally sensitive features or natural resource areas that provide opportunities or constraints for development; and 
h.	Existing creek and buffer condition. 
Additional Site and Development Specific Information Required: 
a.	Proposed limits of clearing and grading; 
b.	Description of proposed creek crossings (i.e., method for crossing, materials, permits required to cross); 
c.	All proposed and existing landscaping which will remain, including street trees; 
d.	Earthen berm detail (i.e., location, height); 
e.	Common/public open space (provide acreage and planned improvements); 
f.	Required front, rear, side yard setbacks and dimensional lot requirements; 
g.	Proposed utility information (public water, sewer, well, septic or community well); 
h.	Right-of-way cross section(s), (existing and proposed) and include the cross section identified in the Comprehensive Transportation Plan; 
i.	Preliminary architectural renderings with depictions of elevations exposed to the public street, if applicable; 
j.	Pedestrian connectivity plan (existing and proposed infrastructure to accommodate pedestrians) and identify pedestrian routes to schools, common areas, commercial areas or proposed greenways, etc.; 
k.	Range in lot sizes; and 
l.	Cul-de-sac usage requires a description that justifies its use (i.e., to prevent crossing creek, wetland etc.). 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-158. Development agreements.
(a)	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards and procedures for the town entering into development agreements for long-term, large-scale developments. The intent of development agreements is to allow the town board of commissioners flexibility in managing large projects which may have a variety of uses and purposes included in a master plan, or which would otherwise not be appropriate for a traditional neighborhood development or other zoning district designation available at the time of the development plan approval. 
(b)	Authority. The town may enter into a development agreement with a developer, subject to the procedures and standards of this section. In entering into such a development agreement, the town may not exercise any authority or make any commitment not authorized by general or local act and may not impose any tax or fee not authorized by otherwise applicable law. 
(c)	Vested rights. Development agreements are intended to provide assurances of vested rights for a period of up to five years, unless a timeframe is otherwise provided in the development agreement itself, in cases where a project may be constructed over tine or in phases. 
(d)	Relationship to zoning, subdivision, and other ordinances. In conjunction with this ordinance all development proposals shall meet any and all local, state, and federal requirements which include but are not limited to the North Carolina Building Code, North Carolina Fire Code, and local stormwater and flood hazard prevention ordinances. To the extent that the development plan does not fall specifically within existing town zoning, the development agreement ordinance will create a new zoning district specifically for the development agreement's planning area. The development agreement may also state that land use intensities, heights, setbacks, floor area, lot sizes and widths, recreation space, parking requirements, impervious surface limitations and other dimensional standards be specified in the agreement. 
(e)	Application. The application shall include a master plan that depicts the general configuration and relationship of the principal elements of the proposed development, including major uses, building types, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, open space, public utilities, and phasing. An application for a development agreement shall included a proposed development agreement that shall, at a minimum, including all of the following: 
(1)	A legal description of the property subject to the agreement and the names of its legal and equitable property owners. 
(2)	The duration of the agreement. 
(3)	A development schedule, including commencement dates and interim completion dates at no greater than five-year intervals. 
(4)	The development uses permitted on the property, including population densities and building types, placement on the site, and design. 
(5)	A description of public facilities that will service the development, including who provides the facilities, the date any new public facilities, if needed, will be constructed, and a schedule to assure public facilities are available concurrent with the impacts of the development. 
(6)	A description, where appropriate, of any reservation or dedication of land for public purposes and any provisions to protect environmentally sensitive property. 
(7)	A description of all local development permits approved or needed to be approved for the development of the property together with a statement indicating that the failure of the agreement to address a particular permit, condition, term, or restriction does not relieve the developer of the necessity of complying with the law governing their permitting requirements, conditions, terms, or restrictions. 
(8)	A description of any conditions, terms, restrictions, or other requirements determined to be necessary by the local government for the public health, safety, or welfare of its citizens. 
(9)	A description, where appropriate, of any provisions for the preservation and restoration of historic structures. 
(10)	An indemnification and "hold harmless" clause whereby the developer/property owner holds the town and its agents harmless from liability for damages, injury or death that may arise from the direct or indirect operations of the owner, developers, contractors, and subcontractors that relate to the project. 
(f)	Procedure.
(1)	As part of staff review of the application, the town administrator may negotiate revisions to the proposed development agreement consistent with the provisions of this section. 
(2)	Following staff review and preparation of a staff report, the development agreement shall be forwarded to the planning board for public input and planning board comment. Before a development agreement is presented to the planning board, staff shall prominently post a notice of the public hearing on the site of the proposed development agreement not less than ten days no more than 25 days prior to the hearing. Within the same time frame, staff shall provide first class mail to all property owners within 150 feet of the property boundary. For the purpose of this section, properties are abutting even if separated by a street, railroad, or other transportation corridor. 
(3)	The board of commissioners shall consider the recommendation of the planning board in a legislative hearing. In addition to the notice requirements in section (f)(2), staff shall place notification in a newspaper of general circulation once a week for two successive calendar weeks. The board of commissioners may decide to: 
i.	Enter into the development agreement as submitted. 
ii.	Enter into the development agreement application subject to modifications agreed to by the application in writing, 
iii.	Not enter into the development agreement, or 
iv.	Remand the application back to the planning board for further consideration. 
(g)	Recordation. Within 14 days after entering into a development agreement, the city shall record the agreement with the Buncombe County Register of Deeds. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
ARTICLE VI. SPECIAL USES
 
Sec. 54-159. Special uses.
Each special use is unique in nature, and needs special consideration and conditions. Section 54-78(2) provides conditions applicable to all uses listed as special in the designated zoning district that the board of adjustment must find to exist. The following special uses have additional specific conditions that the board of adjustment must find to exist before granting the special use permit. These special requirements are not conclusive, in that, the board of adjustment may add or modify such requirements as they deem necessary. 
(1)	Animal hospital.
a.	No pens or kennels shall be located closer than 20 feet to any property line. 
b.	All outside facilities will be screened from sight from adjacent properties. 
(2)	Auction sales, except livestock. All auction sales in C-S must be in an enclosed area. 
(3)	Automobile repair garages, but excluding body works and open storage of wrecked cars.
(4)	Automobile wrecking and junkyards.
a.	All motor vehicles stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept that they will not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed and so that they will not constitute a place in which rates, mice, or other vermin may be harbored, reared, or propagated. 
b.	Because of the tendency for salvage yards to promote the breading of vermin, no such operation shall be permitted closer than 200 feet from any established residential zone. 
c.	All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed opaque fence, screen, or wall, excepting driveway areas, from eight to 12 feet in height. Storage between the road or street and such fence, screen, or wall for screening purposes shall be properly painted or otherwise maintained in good condition. 
d.	All such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary condition and so as not to be a menace to the public health or safety. 
e.	The number of vehicular access driveways permitted on any single street frontage shall be limited to: 
1.	One driveway where the parcel to be used has a maximum road street frontage of 100 feet or less. 
2.	Two driveways where the road or street frontage exceeds 100 feet. 
f.	Driveways used for ingress and egress shall be limited to 25 feet in width. 
(5)	Building materials storage and sales yard. All open storage shall be fenced by a solid fence not less than six feet in height. 
(6)	Churches and their customary related uses.
a.	All buildings shall be set back at least 40 feet from any property line. 
b.	A vegetative buffer, as defined in section 54-10, shall be placed in any yard which abuts a residential zone. 
(7)	Contractor's office and storage yard. All open storage shall be fenced by a solid fence not less than six feet in height. 
(8)	Farm machinery, sales and repairs. All open storage shall be fenced by a solid fence not less than six feet in height. 
(9)	Feed and seed stores. All open storage shall be fenced by a solid fence not less than six feet in height. 
(10)	Game and amusement rooms including pool halls.
a.	The hours of operation shall be limited to 10:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight. 
b.	There shall be no alcohol sold or consumed on the premises. 
(11)	Group developments. As a special use, in the case of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of ground of at least two acres not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and which will not be so subdivided, the application of this article may be varied by the planning board of adjustment in a manner that will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood, provided: 
(1)	Such uses are limited to those permitted within the zoning district in which the project is located. In no case shall the planning board of adjustment authorize a use prohibited in the district in which the project is to be located. 
(2)	The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall meet the front year setback and side yard requirements of the district in which the project is located. 
(3)	A proposed group development project should be designed by a licensed architect. It shall be so designed that the overall intensity of land use shall be no greater than that permitted in the zoning district in which the project is located. Furthermore, the design should guarantee permanent retention of open space and ensure its care and maintenance. 
(4)	Group developments shall follow the review procedures for special uses as outlined in section 2-71. (See bylaws of the planning board of adjustment set forth in chapter 2, article III.) 
(5)	The procedure for approval of group development plans shall include the submission of a design plan showing the proposed layout, including the location of buildings, driveways, street parking spaces, and recreation areas, to the planning board of adjustment for study prior to final approval. Where applicable, the design plan package shall include approvals for the proposed sanitary sewer and water distribution systems from the appropriate state and local agencies. An approved project must be started within 12 months and be completed within a reasonable time after its approval. 
The following checklist shall be completed by the applicant. The applicant shall infer that all information is required at the public hearing, unless prior arrangements have been made. 
SPECIAL USE GROUP DEVELOPMENT SITE PLAN REVIEW CHECKLIST 
Site plans for special use permits for group developments require the following: 
(A)	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. 
___ 1) Submission of at least three sets of site plans prepared by an appropriate registered professional. 
___ 2) Identification of property by street address and tax map reference. 
___ 3) Site plans shall also contain the following general information: 
a)	North arrow, legend, and seal of registered professional; 
b)	A vicinity map showing relative location of project to surrounding area; 
c)	Adjoining property liens, ownership, and land use; 
d)	Existing and proposed topography at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and 
e)	The plan shall not be drawn to a scale of less than one inch to 100 feet. 
___4) Name and location of project and contact information of applicant or owner 
(B)	LAND AND LANDSCAPING, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE PLAN. The following requirements shall be provided on a single detached plan: 
___ 1) If the proposed development is to be located in a designated flood hazard area. All base flood elevation data shall be provided by the developer. 
___ 2) Location of wooded areas and all trees of 12 inches or more in diameter. 
___ 3) Amount of wooded area to be removed. 
___ 4) Existing and proposed contours at intervals of no less than two feet. 
___ 5) Streams, ponds, drainage ditches shall be illustrated. 
___ 6) Location of existing and proposed utilities. 
___ 7) Area to be covered by structures, parking, and streets and the like. 
___ 8) Buffering shall be illustrated, and meet the standards as found in section 54-10. 
___ 9) Location and heights of all fences, walls, and hedges. 
___ 10) Type and location of proposed plantings. 
___ 11) A minimum of 20 feet of open space between individual and unattached buildings in a residential development. 
___ 12) Areas intended for open space and common areas. 
(C)	STRUCTURE AND UTILITY SYSTEM PLAN. The following requirements shall be provided on a single detached plan: 
___ 1) Location and dimension of all existing and proposed structures, including gross floor area and number of stories. 
___ 2) Location of entrances and loading points. 
___ 3) Proposed schedule of development including stages likely to be followed. 
___ 4) Existing and proposed use of all structures. If multifamily use, list number of bedroom units proposed: 1 bedroom ___ 2 bedroom ___ 3 bedroom ___ 4 bedroom ___. 
___ 5) Water and sewer system. 
a)	Location and size of all existing and proposed lines. 
b)	Letter from the Woodfin Water and Sewer District or the City of Asheville Water and Sewer Department stating availability of water and sanitary sewer. The letter shall state the results of a flow and pressure test for water lines and the volume of capacity/current flow for sewer lines. 
c)	Estimated daily and peak demand for water consumption and waste water discharge. 
d)	Location and size meters. 
e)	Rights-of-way and easements. 
___ 6) Underground utility lines including electrical power, telephone, gas, cablevision, fire alarm system and exterior area lighting. 
___ 7) Fire protection system. 
a)	Location of nearest fire hydrant and proposed fire hydrant. 
b)	Letter of adequacy of water pressure from the Woodfin Fire Department. 
c)	Hydrants shall be placed on six-inch water lines and be located within 100 feet of the development. 
d)	A 15-foot area around the hydrant shall be kept clear of all obstructions. 
e)	Only the Woodfin Fire Chief may suggest a change from these standards. 
___ 8) Stormwater drainage system as described in part (E). 
___ 9) Seal and signature of registered professional engineer. 
(D)	STREET, PARKING, AND LOADING AREA PLAN. The following requirements shall be provided on a single detached plan: 
___ 1) An approved North Carolina Department of Transportation (N.C.D.O.T.) Driveway Permit for any driveway or other curb cut on a state system street or highway. 
___ 2) Curb design and material. 
___ 3) Street plans and profiles. 
___ 4) Rights-of-way and pavement widths. 
___ 5) Existing and proposed storm drainage facilities including pipes, drop inlets, catch basins, junction boxes, man holes, etc. 
___ 6) Location of traffic control devices. 
___ 7) Street lighting. The developer is advised that there is a charge by Carolina Power and Light for each pole required for street lighting utilizing underground wiring. This is a one-time service fee and the Town will not assume responsibility for this payment. 
___ 8) Adequate parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with section 54-176 and illustrated on plan. 
___ 9) Parking spaces shall be no less 8.5 feet by 18 feet (Handicapped spaces shall be 12.5 feet wide). 
___ 10) Type of surfacing and curbing in all parking and loading areas. 
___ 11) An illustration of the interior flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
___ 12) Fire lanes for commercial development. 
___ 13) Location of dumpsters, illustrating access areas. 
(E)	STORMWATER DRAINAGE PLAN. The following requirements shall be provided on a single detached plan: 
___ 1) The developer should be familiar with Buncombe County's Soil Erosion Control Ordinance. 
___ 2) The stormwater plan shall illustrate the outline of all areas to be cleared, graded, or otherwise disturbed, outline of areas to be cut, and outline of areas to be filled. 
___ 3) If on-site cut and fill do not balance, identify location of borrow and/or spoil areas. 
___ 4) Show approximate location of proposed silt fences and similar work to be installed to protect the site and adjacent property during construction. 
___ 5) Show, by flow lines, direction of runoff of stormwater. 
___ 6) Provide estimate of stormwater runoff rates both before and after development and approximate size and location of retention walls. 
___ 7) Existing and proposed storm drainage facilities including pipes, drop inlets, catch basins, junction boxes, manholes, etc. 
(12)	Industrial supplies and equipment, sales and services. All open storage shall be fenced by a solid fence not less than six feet in height. 
(13)	Kindergartens and day nurseries.
a.	There shall be not less than: 
1.	25 square feet of building floor area per child. 
2.	75 square feet of open playing area per child. 
b.	A chain link fence shall surround the entire playing area. Such a fence shall be at least four feet in height and its access shall be controlled by a childproof gate. 
c.	A copy of the approved state license shall be submitted to the town. 
d.	A site plan of the child day care center shall be submitted to and approved by the planning board of adjustment. The required site plan shall include: 
1.	All building locations and dimensions; 
2.	Delineation of parking areas with the required amount of spaces as found in section 54-176; 
3.	Traffic flow patterns which are designed to maximize child safety; 
4.	A vegetative buffer, as defined in section 54-10, shall be placed in any yard which abuts a residential zone; 
5.	Any other criteria deemed necessary by the planning board of adjustment. 
(14)	Public safety facilities such a fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters.
a.	All vehicles and equipment shall be stored indoors. 
b.	All buildings shall be setback at least 20 feet from all property lines; 
c.	Shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area; and 
d.	A vegetative buffer, as defined in section 54-10, shall be placed in any yard which abuts a residential zone. 
(15)	Public works and public utility facilities. All open storage shall be fenced by a solid fence not less than six feet in height. 
(16)	Public works and public utilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges.
a.	No vehicles or materials shall be stored on the premises; 
b.	All buildings and apparatus shall be set back at least 20 feet from all property lines; 
c.	Shall be designed and landscaped in such a way as to blend in with the surrounding area; and 
d.	A vegetative buffer, as defined in section 54-10, shall be placed in any yard which abuts a residential zone. 
(17)	Rest and convalescent homes. See Appendix A. 
(18)	Service stations.
a.	All gasoline pumps and other stationary equipment shall be located at least 12 feet from any property line. 
b.	All sides where such stations abut residential districts, a six-foot-high fence and suitable landscaping shall be provided. No such fence, however, is required upon any yard which abuts a public street. 
(19)	Upholstery and trim shop. See Appendix A. 
(20)	Warehousing, except for the storage of dangerous or offensive items such as uncured hides and explosives. See Appendix A. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 54-160—54-175. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. PARKING REQUIREMENTS
 
Sec. 54-176. Off-street parking, storage and access.
Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established. At the time of the erection of any building or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, or before conversion from one type of use to another, permanent off-street parking space in this article shall be provided. Such parking space may be provided in a parking garage or properly graded open space. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-177. Certification.
Each application for a certificate of zoning compliance submitted to the zoning administrator shall include information as to the location and dimension of off-street parking and loading space and the means of ingress and egress to such space. This information shall be in sufficient detail to enable the zoning administrator to determine whether the requirements of this section are met. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-178. Combination of required parking space.
The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to the use may not be assigned to another use, except that half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to uses which will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-179. Remote parking space.
If the off-street parking space required by this article cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, such space may be provided on any land within 500 feet of the main entrance to such principal use, provided such land is in the same ownership as the principal use. The land shall be used for no other purpose so long as other adequate provisions for parking for the principal use are not available. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-180. Requirements in residential districts.
Where parking lots for more than five automobiles are permitted or required in residential districts, the following provisions shall be complied with: 
(1)	The lot may be used only for parking and not for any type of loading, sales, repair work, dismantling or servicing. 
(2)	All entrances, exits, barricades at sidewalks, and drainage works shall be approved by the zoning administrator prior to construction. 
(3)	A densely planted and maintained buffer strip shall be planted on any side or rear yard which abuts a residential area. Such buffer need not extend nearer to a street right-of-way line than the established building line of the adjoining lot. No buffer shall be required on any side or rear yard which abuts a public street. 
(4)	Only two signs, not larger than four square feet in area may be erected at each entrance or exit. No other signs shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-181. Minimum parking requirements.
The required number of off-street parking spaces specified below for each use shall be provided: 
(1)	Automobile sales and repair garages. One space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift, plus two spaces for each 300 square feet of repair or maintenance space. 
(2)	Car washes. One space for each two employees. Reserve spaces equal to three times the capacity of the facility at the location of ingress and egress. 
(3)	Bowling alleys. Two spaces for each lane, plus one additional space for each two employees. 
(4)	Churches and funeral homes. One space for each four seats in the main chapel. 
(5)	Elementary schools and junior high schools, both public and private. One space for each classroom and administrative office for every elementary and junior high school, both public and private. 
(6)	Hospitals. One space for each two rooms, plus one additional space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each four employees. 
(7)	Hotels. One space for each two rooms, plus one additional space for each five employees. 
(8)	Kindergartens and nurseries. One space for each employee and four spaces for off-street drop-off and pick-up. 
(9)	Libraries. One space for each four seats provided for patron use. 
(10)	Medical offices and clinics. Four spaces for each doctor practicing at the clinic, plus one space for each employee. 
(11)	Motels, tourist homes, and tourist courts. One space for each accommodation, plus one additional space for each two employees on the shift with greatest employment. 
(12)	Offices, business, professional or public, including banks. One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
(13)	Places of public assembly, including private clubs and lodges, auditoriums, dance halls, pool rooms, theaters, stadiums, gymnasium, amusement parks, community centers, and all similar places of public assembly. One space for each 100 square feet of floor or ground area used for amusement or public assembly but not containing fixed seats. 
(14)	Rescue squads and armories. Parking space equivalent to three times the floor space in the main building. 
(15)	Residential dwellings, single-family and two-family dwellings. Two spaces for each dwelling and two-family unit. 
(16)	Residential dwellings, multifamily. One and one-half spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(17)	Restaurants, drive-in. Parking space equivalent to five times the floor space in the main land use. 
(18)	Restaurants, indoor. One space for each three seats or stools, plus one space for each two employees on the shift of largest employment. 
(19)	Retail business and consumer service outlets. One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
(20)	Sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes for the aged, and similar institutions. One space for each patient bed, plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each four employees. 
(21)	Senior high schools and colleges, both public and private. One space for each ten students for whom the school was designed, plus one space for each classroom and administrative office. 
(22)	Service stations. Five spaces for each grease rack or similar facility. 
(23)	Shopping centers. One parking space for each 200 feet of gross floor area. 
(24)	Wholesaling and industrial uses. One space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-182. Off-street loading and unloading.
Every building or structure used for business, trade, or industry hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley, or if there is no alley, to a street. For the purposes of this section, an off-street loading space shall have a minimum dimension of 12 feet by 40 feet and an overhead clearance of 14 feet in height above the ally or street grade. 
(1)	Retail operations. One loading space for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
(2)	Industrial and wholesale operation. One loading space for each 50,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 54-183—54-202. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. FLOODWAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 54-203. Statutory authorization, finding of fact, purpose and objective.
(a)	Finding of fact.
(1)	The flood hazard areas of the town are subject to periodic inundation which potentially can result in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)	These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other properties which are inadequately elevated, floodproof or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(b)	Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(c)	Objectives. The objectives of this section are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	To minimize long business interruptions; 
(5)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and street and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)	To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-204. Definitions.
The following definitions are directly related to the flood management regulations and shall supplement the definitions listed in section 54-10. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled or roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls in new construction. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the local administrator's interpretation of any provision of section 54-203 or a request for a variance. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 15 percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means the lowest level or story which has its floor below grade on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. A breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten or no more than 20 pounds per square foot and requires an architecture professional engineer's certificate. 
Building means any structure built for support shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Existing manufactured home parks or manufactured home subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lot on which the manufactured home is to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, whether final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, or the construction of streets) is completed before September 16, 1973. 
Flood, 100-year recurring interval means a hypothetical flood anticipated to be reached or exceeded on the average of once during a 100-year period. For the purpose of section 54-203, the 100-year recurring interval flood shall be as shown on the flood insurance rate maps. 
Flood fringe areas means those areas outside the F-1 Floodway District that lie below the elevation of the 100-year recurring interval flood. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the most recent adopted version of an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood profile means a graph showing the relationship of the floodwater surface elevation for a flood event of a specific recurrence interval to the streambed and other significant natural and manmade features along a stream. 
Flood stage means the elevation of the floodwater surfaces above an officially established datum plane. 
Floodway means the channel of a river that other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term "floor" does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Functionally-dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally-dependent facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Habitable floor means any floor useable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes in not a habitable floor. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed wall of the structure. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are reconstructed and operated in accordance with sound and engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or floor resistant enclosure, unable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of section 54-203. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. Mean sea level is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of section 54-203, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after September 16, 1973. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance ways that impacts may be reduced, substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
Start of construction means substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of street and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation of the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground. A manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank, or other manmade facilities or infrastructures. 
Substantial improvement means: 
(1)	Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure, either: 
a.	Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
b.	If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
(2)	For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
a.	Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state and local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
b.	Any alterations of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic place. 
(3)	The term "substantial improvement" shall be cumulative for the life of the structure. 
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in sections 54-4 and 54-119 through 54-122 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-205. General provisions.
(a)	Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the town. 
(b)	Basis for establishing the areas of special hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in its flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) 370380 1 and 2, dated February 1, 1980 and any revisions thereto are adopted by reference and declared part of this article. 
(c)	Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)	Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, or extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)	Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing casements, covenants or deeds restrictions. However, where this article and another law conflict or overlay, whichever imposes a more stringent restriction shall prevail. 
(f)	Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the board of alderman; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)	Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-206. Administration.
(a)	Designation of local administrator. The zoning administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the local administrators on forms furnished by him prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
(2)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproof; 
(3)	A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproof structure meets the floodproofing criteria in this article; 
(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
(5)	A floor elevation or floodproofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the local administrator certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproof elevation, or the elevation of the bottom of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. The certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work done within the 21-day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The local administrator shall review the holder's risk. The local administrator shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections required hereby, shall be caused to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-207. Local administrator.
Duties of the zoning administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)	Review of all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)	Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)	Notify adjacent communities and the state department of crime control and public safety, division of emergency management, state coordinator for the National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)	Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of the watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(5)	Prevent encroachments within flood fringes unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of chapter 14 are met. 
(6)	Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, in accordance with section 54-206(b). 
(7)	With assistance from the county building inspector verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 54-206(b). 
(8)	When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, the local administrator shall obtain certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 54-206(b). 
(9)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions the local administrator shall make the necessary interpretation). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10)	When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 54-206 then the local administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state, or other source, including data, floodway data and preliminary map developed in order to administer the provisions of this article. 
(11)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the local administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-208. Variance procedures.
(a)	The board of adjustment, as established by the town, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the local administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning adjustment board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to superior court, as provided in G.S. ch. 7A. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(e)	In passing upon such applications, the planning board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this article, and: 
(1)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)	The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use; 
(7)	The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)	The relationship of the proposed use to comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)	The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(f)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the planning board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this article. 
(g)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(h)	Conditions for variances. 
(1)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)	Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.	A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notification of the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and a written statement that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
(4)	The local administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 54-209—54-314. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IX. EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
 
Sec. 54-315. Front yard setback.
The front yard setback requirements of this article for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback of existing buildings located wholly or partially within 100 feet on either side of the proposed dwelling and on the same side of the street in the same block and use district as such lot is less than the minimum required front year depth. In such case the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks of the aforementioned lots, or a distance often ten feet from the street right, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-316. Height limitations.
The height limitations of this article shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, radio towers, television towers, masts, aerials, and similar structures, except as otherwise provided in the vicinity of airports. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-317. Fences, retaining walls.
In any residential district fences or walls may be erected in a required rear or side yard adjacent to a side lot line, provided such wall or fence does not exceed six feet in height. For retaining walls, the height limitations specified herein shall apply only to the height above the top of the soil retained by such wall. In addition, all fences shall be erected and maintained in accordance with the following requirements and restrictions: 
(1)	Inside the property lines and shall not encroach upon a public right-of-way; 
(2)	In a safe, sound and upright condition, and present a uniform appearance; 
(3)	Such that all supporting members of a fence shall be located on the inside of the fence, and if erected or maintained along or adjacent to a property line, the supporting members of the fence shall face the principal portion of the tract of land of the property upon which the fence is erected or maintained. The finished side of fences and walls shall face adjacent properties; 
(4)	No fence shall block the vision from any street, roadway, and/or driveway; nor shall it be erected or maintained in such a fashion as to present a hazard to life or property regardless of the height, material, construction and/or location. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
[Sec. 54-318. Reserved.]
 
Sec. 54-319. Administrative minor modifications.
(a)	Minor modifications. The planning director is authorized to review and approve administratively a minor modification to subsequent plans and permits for a development within a conditional zoning district or approved by special use permit. 
(1)	General limitations. The minor modification shall not involve a change in uses permitted or the density of the overall development or increase the impacts generated by the development on traffic, stormwater runoff, or similar impacts beyond what was projected for the original development. The modification shall meet all other ordinance requirements. 
(2)	Site design. Site design minor modifications are limited adjustments to the terms or design of an approved development plan or plat, including a site plan attached as a condition to a conditional zoning or special use permit. In addition to the general limitations for minor modifications, a site design minor modification must: 
a.	Comply with underlying zoning standards and other applicable conditions of the approval; 
b.	Be limited to a minor change such as, without limitation, a minor adjustment to road configuration or internal circulation, a minor adjustment to building location, or a minor adjustment to utility alignment. 
(3)	Dimensional standards. Dimensional standard minor modifications are adjustments to the dimensional standards of the zoning ordinance. Dimensional standards may only be modified upon a finding by the planning director, based on evidence from the permit holder, that the modification is needed to address a site characteristic or technical design consideration not known at the time of initial approval. In addition to the general limitations for minor modifications, dimensional standard minor modifications are limited to: 
a.	An adjustment to parking requirements up to the greater of five spaces or 20 percent. 
b.	An adjustment to setback requirements up to greater of 24 inches or ten percent. 
c.	An adjustment to building floor areas up to greater of 20 percent. 
d.	An adjustment to building or structure heights up to greater of ten percent. 
(4)	Appeals and variances. A decision on a minor modification may be appealed to the board of adjustment as an administrative determination. An application for a minor modification does not preclude an applicant from seeking a variance from the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Secs. 54-320—54-339. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE X. NONCONFORMING USES
 
Sec. 54-340. Definition.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nonconforming use means any building, structure, sign or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of this article or any amendment thereto not permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. However, any existing nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or higher classifications provided that the other conditions in the section are compiled with. For the purpose of this article, the rank, order or used form, high to lower, shall be: residential, public, commercial, and industrial. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-341. Limitation on nonconforming use.
When a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may not be extended or enlarged; nor shall a nonconforming structure be altered except as follows: 
(1)	Structural alterations as required by law or ordinance as ordered by the zoning administrator to secure the safety of the structure are permissible. 
(2)	Maintenance and repair necessary to keep a nonconforming building, structure or sign in sound condition are permissible, provided that the costs do not exceed 40 percent of the current replacement costs of the building, structure or sign or portion of the structure being repaired. 
(3)	Existing single-family residential structures in business or industrial districts may be enlarged, extended, or structurally altered, provided that no additional dwelling units result therefrom. However, any such enlargement, extension or alteration shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the R-7 Residential District. 
(4)	Any existing nonconforming use which ceases to exist at any time for any reason, on any particular piece of property may not be reestablished or replaced after a period of 180 days. 
(5)	Any manufactured home park may be allowed to continue to operate as a nonconforming use as long as they are not increased in number of units beyond the permitted number by the county health department (enlarged) or increase the geographical boundaries of the park (extended). 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-342. Continuance.
It is the intent of this chapter to recognize that the elimination as expeditiously as is reasonable, uses that are not inconformity with the provisions of this chapter is as much a subject of health, safety, and welfare as is the prevention of the establishment of new uses that would violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
Sec. 54-343. Preexisting substandard lot.
These regulations shall not prohibit the erection of a single-family dwelling in a residential district on any lot which was a lot of record on July 23, 1974, and which does not meet the width or area requirements of the applicable residential district, provided that: 
(1)	Such lot does not abut one or more unoccupied lots in the same ownership at any time since September 16, 1973, with which it could be combined. This provision of common ownership shall not apply to lots in a duly recorded and accepted subdivision existing prior to September 16, 1973. 
(2)	All yard requirements in the applicable residential district are met. No zoning permit shall be issued for a principal use located on a lot of record which does not abut a public street unless an access easement of not less than 25 feet shall be provided to connect said lot to said public street. The access easement shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds. 
(3)	For accessory buildings on preexisting substandard lots of record, as defined in this section, the side yard setback shall be computed as five percent of the average lot width, but not less than five feet. 
(Ord. of 5-18-2021)
 
APPENDIX A. PERMITTED USES TABLE
The following table establishes what permitted uses will be allowed in a particular zoning district within the Town of Woodfin. The uses in this table will be permitted as indicated by the letter "P" and shall conform to all regulations of the applicable zoning district. When shown with an "S", the use is permitted only as a special use permit and will be approved in accordance with section 54-159 of this chapter. 
Uses not listed. The zoning administrator shall determine whether or not an unlisted use is part of an existing use category or is substantially similar to an already defined use type. Where a particular use type is not specifically listed in the Permitted Uses Table, the zoning administrator may permit the use upon due consideration to the purpose and intent statement in this ordinance concerning the base zoning district involved, the character of the uses specifically identified, and the character of the use(s) in question. 
Use Category 	Permitted Uses 
	R-43 	R-21 	R-10 	R-7 	C-S 	C-S-2 	C-S-3 	M-V 	T-R 	L-I 	H-I 
Residential											
Single-family dwellings 	X 	X 	X 	X 		S 	S 	X 	X 		
Two-family dwellings 			X 	X 		S 	S 	X 	X 		
Multi-family dwellings 			X 	X 		S 	S 	X 	X 		
Double-wide manufactured homes 			X 	X 							
Business											
Animal hospitals 					S 	S 	S 			S 	S 
Auction sales, except livestock 					S 		S 			X 	X 
Automobile parts and supplies, retail 					X 		X 			X 	X 
Automobile repair garages, but excluding body works and open storage of wrecked cars 					X 		X 			X 	X 
Automobile repair garages, including body works and open storage of wrecked cars 							S 			S 	X 
Automobile sales, new and used 					X 		X 			X 	X 
Bakeries, retail 					X 	S 	X 	S 		X 	
Banks and other financial institutions, including loan and finance companies 					X 	X 	X 		X 		
Barber and beauty shops 					X 	X 	X 	S 	X 		
Boat and trailer sales 					X 		X 			X 	X 
Car wash 					X 	S 	X 			X 	X 
Catalogue sales 					X 	X 	X 		X 		
Dairy bars and ice cream manufacturing for retail sales on the premises only 					X 	S 	X 		X 		
Dry cleaning and laundry pickup stations 					X 	S 	X 				
Electrical wholesale supply house and repair shops 							S 			X 	
Exterminators 						S 	S 			X 	X 
Feed and seed stores 						S 	S 			S 	S 
Floral shops 					X 	X 	X 		X 		
Funeral homes and mortuaries 					X 	S 	S 			X 	
Game and amusement rooms, including pool halls 					S 		S 			S 	
Jewelry repair and pawn shops 					X 	X 	X 				
Kennels 					S 	S 	S 			X 	X 
Launderette and laundromats 					X 	S 	X 			X 	
Locksmiths and gunsmiths 					X 	X 	X 			X 	
Manufactured home display area 							S 			X 	X 
Meat markets, retail only, but excluding the killing or dressing of any flesh or fowl 					X 	X 	X 			X 	
Medical and dental clinics 					X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	
Miniature golf 					X 	X 	X 			X 	
Newspaper offices 					X 	X 	X 			X 	
Office supplies and equipment, sales and service 				X 	X 	X 	X 		X 		
Offices, business, professional and public 					X 	X 	X 	S 	X 	X 	X 
Opticians and optical goods stores 					X 	X 	X 		X 		
Outdoor recreation uses such as go cart track and riding stables 							S 				X 
Photographic studios and camera supply stores 					X 	X 	X 	S 	X 		
Printing and reproduction establishments 						X 	X 			X 	X 
Printing, engraving and publishing establishments 						X 	X 			X 	X 
Radio and television stations 					X 	S 	S 			X 	X 
Radio and television repair shops 					X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	
Rest and convalescent homes 		S 	S 	S 		S 	S 			S 	
Restaurants, including drive-in 					X 		X 		X 	X 	X 
Retail establishments 					X 	S 	X 				
Service Stations 					S 		S 			S 	X 
Shoe repair and shine shops 					X 	X 	X 		X 		
Small electric and appliance repair shops 					X 	X 	X 				
Tailor, dressmaking and millinery shops 					X 	X 	X 		X 		
Taxicab stands 					X 		S 				
Telephone and telegraph offices 					X 	X 	X 				
Theatres, indoor 					X 	X 	X 			X 	
Truck stop 							S 			X 	
Warehousing, except for the storage of dangerous or offensive items such as uncured hides or explosives 					X 		S 			X 	X 
Wholesale establishments 							S 			X 	X 
Industrial											
Automobile wrecking and junkyards 											S 
Building materials storage and sales yards 							S 			S 	S 
Contractors' offices with the interior storage of materials 					X 					X 	X 
Contractors' offices with storage yards 							S 			S 	S 
Farm machinery, sales and repairs 							S 			S 	S 
Flour and feed mills 											X 
Freezer lockers and ice plants 							S 			X 	X 
Industrial supplies and equipment, sales and service 							S 			S 	S 
Metal fabricating plants, including boiler and tank works 											X 
Mini storage warehouses 										X 	X 
Planting works 											X 
Plumbing and heating supply houses 							S 			X 	X 
Sawmills, planning mills, pallet and basket factories 											X 
Sheet metal, roofing, plumbing, heating and refrigeration shops 							S 			X 	X 
Wholesale storage of gasoline and oil products, including bottled gas and oxygen 										X 	X 
Manufacturing											
Air conditioning and heating equipment manufacturing 											X 
Alcohol and alcohol beverage manufacturing 					S 		S 			X 	X 
Amusement, recreational and sporting goods manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Apparel and clothing manufacturing, including hosiery 							S 			X 	X 
Apple packing sheds 											X 
Automobile parts and accessories manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared food products for wholesale distribution 						S 	X 			X 	X 
Bedding and carpet manufacturing and cleaning establishments 							S 			X 	X 
Belting and brake lining manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Boat and trailer repairs manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Bottling works 							S 			X 	X 
Bowling alleys and skating rinks 					X 		X 			X 	X 
Business machines manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Cabinet, caskets and woodworking 							S 			X 	X 
Carbon and battery products manufacturing 											X 
Coffee, tea and spices processing 							S 			X 	X 
Drugs, medicines, and cosmetics manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Dry cleaning and laundry plants 							S 			X 	X 
Electrical appliances and electronic equipment manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Felt and sandpaper manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Fertilizer manufacturing and sales 											X 
Furniture manufacturing 						S 	S 			X 	X 
Furriers and fur storage 					X 		X 			X 	X 
Glass, ceramic and tile manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Hardware and housewares manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Hotels, inns and motels 					X 	S 	X 			X 	
Insulation materials and wall board manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Leather products, including luggage and shoe manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Musical instrument manufacturing 						S 	S 			X 	X 
Paper products manufacturing 						S 	S 			X 	X 
Plastic products manufacturing 										X 	X 
Pottery, porcelain, or vitreous china manufacturing 											X 
Precision instruments manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Printing plants 						S 	S 			X 	X 
Textile and cordage manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Trailer manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Window and door manufacturing 							S 			X 	X 
Civic, Educational, and Governmental											
Assembly halls, coliseums, armories, ballrooms, and similar structures 					X 		X 			X 	X 
Business colleges, barber and beauty colleges and schools, music and dance studios 					X 	X 	X 	S 	X 	X 	
Churches and their customary related uses 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Clubs and lodges, fraternities, sororities, and social, civic, and other similar organizations operating on a nonprofit basis 					X 	S 	S 	S 		X 	X 
Industrial trade schools and research laboratories 					X 	S 	S 			X 	
Kindergartens and day nurseries 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	S 	S 
Libraries, museums and art galleries 					X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	
Noncommercial, public or private parks, playgrounds, community centers, clubs and lodges, golf courses, swimming pools and fishing lakes 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	S 	S 	X 		X 	X 
Public elementary schools and private schools having curricula approximately the same as ordinarily given in public schools 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	S 	X 	S 		X 	
Public safety facilities such as fire and police stations and rescue squad headquarters 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	X 	X 	S 	S 
Public works and public utility facilities 						S 		S 	X 	S 	S 
Public works and public utility facilities such as transformer stations, pumping stations, water towers and telephone exchanges 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 	S 
Public works and utility facilities, but excluding service and storage yards 					X 	S 	S 	S 		X 	
Other											
Any form of agriculture or horticulture, including the sale of products on the property where produced 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 	X 
Customary incidental home occupation 	X 	X 	X 	X 		X 	X 	S 			
Group development 			S 	S 	S 	S 	S 		S 	S 	S 

(Ord. of 5-18-2021)

