




ORDINANCE NO. 277



AN	ORDINANCE	ESTABLISHING	QUALIFICATIONS	FOR	OBTAINING	AN	ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE WITHIN THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.





BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:
1.	License Reguired.	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of beer, liquor or alcoholic beverages within the City	without first obtaining a license therefore. (NDCC 40-05-01(29)).
)	2.	Qualifications.	In	addition	to	qualifications	or	other
requirements which are now or may hereafter be prescribed by the

laws of the State of North Dakota or by the ordinances or resolutions of the governing body of the City of Beulah, no license shall be issued to any applicant unless such applicant shall file a sworn application therefore, accompanied by the required fee, and shall show in such application that he possesses the following qualifications:
a.	Applicant other than corporate applicant must be a legal and

bona fide resident and citizen of the State of North Dakota, and have been a resident of the City of Beulah for at least thirty (30) days immediately prior to the filing of the application. The residency requirement herein is  a continuing requirement during the term of any license issued hereunder.

- 1 -
 
b.	Applicant	or manager	must not have been convicted of an	n
offense determined by the attorney general to have a direct bearing upon an applicant's or manager's ability to serve the public as an alcoholic beverage retailer; or, following conviction of any offense, is determined not to be sufficiently rehabilitated under Section 12.1-33-02.1.
c.	Applicant shall not have had revoked, within five (5) years next preceding his application for any license issued to him pursuant to ordinances or resolutions of the City of Beulah to the laws of the State of North Dakota, or any state, to sell beer, alcohol, or alcoholic beverages.
d.	If	the	applicant	is a partnership,	all	members	of	the

partnership	must	be	personally	qualified	to	obtain	a
license,	except	that	the	limited	or	managing	partner	)

(provided that the limited or managing partner has a 10% or

more interest in the partnership), shall be the only partner required to meet the requirement that he be a resident of the City as set out above.
e.	If	the	applicant	is	a	corporation,	all	officers	and

directors thereof, and any stockholders holding more than five percent (5%) of stock of such corporation, and the person or persons who shall conduct and manage the licensed premises for the corporation must possess all the qualifications required herein for an individual licensee, provided; however, that the requirements as to being a
resident and citizen of the State of North Dakota and a
resident of this City shall not apply to non-resident  J
 

officers, directors and stockholders of such corporation, but such requirements shall apply to any officer, director, or stockholder who is also the manager of the licensed premises or who is engaged or employed at the licensed premises, in any capacity, in the conduct and operation of the licensed premises.
f.	No license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation engaged in business as the representative of agent of another and the license will be issued only to the owner or owners of the business to be conducted at the location for which the license is sought.  No applicant
shall	directly	or	indirectly	own,	control	or	have	any

)	interest whatsoever in any other liquor establishment which
is licensed	to sell beer	or liquor within	the City of

Beulah.

g.	No applicant shall enter into any agreement or understanding with any other person with respect to the use, operation, or management	of any beer or liquor establishment licensed within the City.


3.	Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance shall be

grounds for revocation of the license.

4.	That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this

ordinance are hereby repealed.

5.	This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage and adoption.



- 3 -
 



 




ATTEST:


ROBERT F. WENDEL, City Auditor First Reading:	April 16, 1984.

Second Reading: May 7, 1984
 
r' )
 

Final Passage and Adoption:	May 7, 1984












)

































- 4 -
 
I I '


ORDINANCE NO. 391


AN ORDINANCE WITH RESPECT TO SPECIAL ALCOHOL EVENT PERMITS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY,NORTH DAKOTA.
BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE CITY COUNCIL  OF THE CITY OF BEULAH,

MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

II

SPECIAL ALCOHOL EVENT PERMITS

That all prior ordinances, with respect to special alcohol event permits are hereby amended and re-enacted as follows, to-wit:
1.	Event Permit

The City Council may by permit authorize a qualified alcoholic beverage licensee to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages at events designated by the permit. For purposes by this Ordinance, "qualified alcoholic beverage licensee" shall be a licensee holding a valid license to dispense and sell alcoholic ·beverages. The fee for the local pemiit shall be Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00). The permit shall not be valid for a period greater than fourteen (14) days, and may include Sundays.

2.	Application for Event Permit.

An alcoholic beverage licensee desiring to conduct an event, public dance, music festival,wherein alcoholic beverages will be sold,or to sell alcoholic beverages at an event, public dance or music festival conducted by any other person who has been granted a permit to do so by the City Council, shall make an application for a permit to do so to the City Council. The following shall be included in the application:

a.	Name of licensee;
b.	Name of business;
c.	Mailing address;
d.	State Alcoholic Beverage License Number;
e.	Name of local licensor;
f.	Local license number;
g.	Dates of the event; and
h.	A description in full of the special event.

3.	Refusal and Revocation of Permit For Cause.

The City Council shall refuse to issue such permit , and shall revoke a permit already
issued, where it appears that:


1
 
\  '

I I


a.	The permitted site is or is likely to become a public nuisance or detrimental to public morals;
b.	Alcoholic beverages or controlled substances are being sold or given away
except as provided by such permit ;
c.	Any of the ordinances of the City or the laws of the State of North Dakota are
being violated ; or
d.	In the sole judgment of the governing body, protests to the issuing of such
permit are made, either orally or in writing, of the site for which application for such permit is made to warrant refusal or revocation of such permit as
being in the public interest.

4.	Penalty.

Any person who dispenses, sells, or permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages is in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for not more than thirty days (30), or both such fine and imprisonment.

5.	SEVERABILITY

All Ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are hereby rescinded and repealed.

6.	EFFECTIVE  DATE

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect on its final passage, and publication
)	of its title and penalty provision.
7.	SAVINGS CLAUSE

Ifany provision of this Ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.

DATED this 19th day of July, 2010.

DARRELLJERKE, yor ATTEST:
)E: _Q9
'IJINijA A. WIEDRICH, City Auditor Introduction and First Reading:July 6, 2010 Second Reading: July 19, 2010
Final Passage:   July 19, 2010

Publication Date: July 29, 2010


2
 
. •'	Filed ·City of Beulah
.,	:t. :: ¥.k
City Auditor


ORDINANCE NO . 320

AN ORDINANCE  PROVIDING  FOR  THE  CONTROL  OF  NOXIOUS  WEEDS  WITHIN  THE  CITY  OF BEULAH,  NORTH  DAKOTA.

BE  IT ORDAINED  BY THE  CI'IY  COUNCIL  OF THE  CI 'IY OF BEULAH,  MERCER  COUN'IY .•

NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS:

1.	N.oxioua Weeda are hereby declared to be a nuisance when located within the City Limits or the .Jurisdiction of the City of Beulah.
2 .	De.finili.Qn:	Whenever used in this ordinance , the term "noxious

weeds" shall mean and include excessively long grass and all weeds of the kind known as Canada Thistle, sow thistle, quack grass, leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula or Euphorbia virgata), field bindweed, Russian knapweed, (Centaurea picris), hoary cress (Lapidium draba, Lepidium repens, and Humenophysa pubescens), dodder, or any vegetation over eight inches in height.
3.	Weeda Prohib :	No owner of any lot, place or area within the City

or the agent of such owner, shall permit on such lot, place or area and the one- half of any road or street lying next to the lands or boulevards abutting ther·eon noxious weeds or other deleterious, unhealthful growths.
4.	Notice   to   Deatroy:	The City Auditor is hereby authorized and

empowered to notify in writing the owner of any such lot, place, or area within the City or the agent of such owner, to cut, destroy, and/or remove any such noxious weeds found growing, lying, or located on such owner's property or upon the one-half of any road or street lying next to the lands or boulevards abutting thereon . Such notice may be sent by regular mai l addressed to said owner or· agent of said owner at his last reasonably ascertainable known address and shall give such owner or his agent a minimum of five days to cut or destroy said noxious weeds .
 
'\






5.	Action Upon Non-Compliance : Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to cut, destroy and/or remove noxious weeds growing, lying or located upon the owner's property or upon the one-half of any road or street lying next to the lands or boulevards abutting thereon, within five (5) days after mailing of the written notice provided for in Section 4 above , the City Auditor is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the cutting , destroying, and/or removal of such noxious weeds or to order their removal by the City.
6.	Coat Asaeaaed to Property:	When the City has effected the removal of such noxious weeds or has paid for their removal, the actual cost thereof , if not paid by said owner prior thereto, shall be charged and assessed against
the property upon which the noxious weeds were cut or destroyed . An assessment

)	list showing the lots or tracts to be assessed with the costs against such lot

or tract shall be prepared as are other special assessment lists, and shall be approved by the governing body and shall bear interest at eight percent. Such assessments shall be subject to the same procedure for certification to the county auditor, payment and collection as are other· special assessments under state law.
7.	Penalty Section:	Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of the Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment .
8.	Effective Date:	This Ordinance shall be in force and effect from and after its final passage and approval and the publication of its title and penalty clause.
 
'I







9.	Rereal: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are hereby rescinded and repealed.
10.	Savjngs  Clause:	If any provision	of this Ordinance	or its

application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected .
DATED this 15th day of July, 1991.	·--
 	4'/d_,e' -
DAROLD BENZ, Mayor





ROBERT F. WENDEL, City Auditor


Introduction and First Reading:	July 1, 1991 Second Reading and Final Passage:		July 15, 1991 Publication Date:	July 25, 1991
 
..
.-	''
' .




ORDINANCE NO. 320

AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE CONTROL OF NOXIOUS WEEDS WITHIN THE CITY OF BEULAH, NORTH DAKOTA.

Penaltv   Section:	Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of the Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
The title and penalty section to the above ordinance are published pursuant to North Dakota Statute. The complete ordinance may be reviewed at the City Auditor's Office, City of Beulah.
DATED this 16th day of July,
199


ROBERT F. WENDEL, City Auditor
)
 
 
..	Filed .City  of  Beulah



City Auditor
ORDINANCE NO. 325

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING PROHIBITION OF VIEW OBSTRUCTIONS, INCLUDING TREES AND SHRUBS, ON STREET RIGHTS-OF-WAYS; ESTABLISHING TREE PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION; AND PROVIDING PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS


BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLWWS:
Article  I.	In General.


Sec.  L Definitions.

(1)	"City" is the city of Beulah, county of Mercer, state of North Dakota.

(2)	"Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,

company , or organization of any kind.

(3)	"Street" refers to the entire width of every public way or right of

)	way open for the purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, including
sidewalks and boulevards.

(4)	"Public trees" are all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter

growing on any street or in any public place or park.

(5)	"Public places" include all property owned by the city.

(6)	"Opaque Object"	includes all ob,iects through which clear visibility

cannot be obtained.

Sec. 2. Nonliability of city.

Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city or upon any of its officers or employees nor to relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep trees and shrubs upon private property or under his control in a safe condition.


1
 


Sec. 3.	Separability.

Should any part or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the article as whole, or any part thereof, other than the part declared to be invalid.


 



Sec. 1.	General.
 
Article  II.	Administration.
 

The city council or its appointee shall have the authority and ,iurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance, and removal of public trees to insure safety or to preserve the aesthetics of public places. The city council or its appointee shall also have the authority to regulate opaque objects when in violation of this ordinance. The city council or its appointee is responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance.


Article III. Public Safety and Protection of Property.

Sec.  L	Hazard.a  defined and prohibited.

All trees, shrubs, and opaque objects within the city shall be pruned or removed when such trees, shrubs or opaque objects constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a threat to other trees and shrubs within the city.  Such hazards include:
(1)	Any tree, shrub, or hedge, or any part of such, which is diseased or

overaged and is clearly deteriorating.






2
 
.. ',.
I \  I




(2)	Any living or standing elm tree (Ulmus spp.), or part of any tree, infected to any degree with the dutch elm disease fungus (Ceratocystis ulmi), or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles capable of transmitting this fungus. (Scolytus multistriatus or Hylurgopinus rufipea).
(3)	Any dead elm tree or part of any tree, including logs, branches, stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not been removed and properly disposed of.
(4)	Any tree, shrub, hedge, or opaque object, or any part of such, which is obstructing or shading streetlights, obstructing the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstructing the vision of traffic signs, or obstructing the view of any street or alley intersection. All branches extending from tree trunks less than eight feet (8') above the ground level shall be removed and all
)	overhanging branches shall be pruned so as to maintain a minimum of twelve feet (12')vertical clearance above the established street grade.

The maintenance of any of the above hazards shall be unlawful and shall be a violation of this ordinance.
Sec.  2.	Notice to remove such hazards.

The city shall have the power and authority to prune or remove, or order the pruning or removing of any such trees, shrubs or opaque objects on private property. The city council or its appointee shall notify a property owner in writing to prune or remove any such trees, shrubs or opaque objects on the owner's property, at the owner's expense within ten (10)days after notification. Said notification shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested and




3
)
 
..




the ten (10)days shall begin on the date of receipt, if signed for, or mailing,

if refused.

Sec.3. Action of city upon noncompliance; coats.

Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner so notified to prune or remove the specified trees,- shrubs or opaque objects, the city council its appointee shall have the authority to prune or remove the specified trees, shrubs or opaque objects. Actual cost thereof shall be billed to the property owner. If the costs of remedying the condition are not paid within thirty (30)days after receipt of a statement from the city auditor, the amount shall become a lien upon the property to be included in the next tax bill rendered to the
property owners, and shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as other

taxes against such property.

)	Sec. 4.	Elm firewood.
It shall be unlawful to transport to, through, and within the city any elm

wood with bark attached for firewood or any other use, without a permit from the city forester.
Sec. 5. Inspection and investigation.

The city council, its employees or agents, are authorized to inspect all premises and places within the city as often as practicable to determine whether any condition described in section 1 exists therein. The city council or its employees or agents may enter upon private premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out any of the duties assigned to them under this article.





)	4
 

,•	....  '
'.,	'	'




Sec_ 6_	Outside storage of wood_

Any outside storage of wood, including cut trees used for fuel, shall be elevated off the ground at least six inches to provide sufficient clearance for ventilation and to deter infestation and inhabitation by rats and other vermin_


Article IV_	Penalty_ Sec_ l_	Penalty for violation of ordinance_
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.


 

)
Sec_ l_	Effective date_
 
Article V_	Effective date_
 

This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final

passage and approval and the publication of	clause.



DAROLD BENZ , Mayor





ROBERT F. WENDEL. City Auditor

Introduction and First Reading:	November 4, 1991 Second Reading:	November 18, 1991
Final Passage:	November 18, 1991
Publication Date:	November 27, 1991






5
 


ORDINANCE NO . 348



AN ORDINANCE .REGULATING THE USE OF SKATEBOARDS. ROLLERBLADES. AND ROLLERSKATES WITHIN THE CITY OF BEULAH. MERCER COUNTY. NORTH DAKafA .

. .
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE,CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH. MERCER COUNTY.

NORTH DAKafA. AS FOLLOWS:

1.	INTENTION

Section 1. It ia the intention of this ordinance to partially regulate the use of skateboards, rollerbladea. and rollerskates within the jurisdiction of the City of Beulah. North Dakota.
2.	PROHIBITION WHEN SIGNED

A person may not ride skateboard, rollerblades, or rollerskates on any public or private property, including streets and sidewalks. when said property is signed to prohibit those activities .
3.	YIELD OF RIGHT-OF-WAY

Whenever any person is riding a skateboard, rollerblades. or rollerakates upon a sidewalk, or other public property .such persons shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and to all other traffic.
4 .	PENALTY

Any person violating this ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
5.	SEVERABILITY

If any section. sentence. clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be  invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court


1
 


of competent jurisdiction. such decision shall not affect the validity of

the remaining portions of this ordinance.

6.	EFFEcrIVE DATE

Thia ordinance shall take effect following final passage and adoption .

DATED this lat day of July. 1996.
'·




DAROLD BENZ, Mayor ATI'EST:

LINDA A. WIEDRICH, City Auditor



 
Introduction and First Reading: Second Reading
Final Passage: Publication Date:
 
July 1, 1996
July 15, 1996
July 15, 1996
July 25, 1996


























2
 
I .


ORDINANCE NO. 352

AN ORDINANCE REVISING AND RE-ENACTING ORDINANCE NO. 230 OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, WITH RESPECT TO THE RESTRAINT OF MINORS.


BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNC IL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH,

M ERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS:

1.	That Beulah City Ordinance No. 230 is hereby repealed and re-

enacted as follows:

SECTION 1.	CURFEW.

It is unlawful for the persons under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play in or upon, or drive or ride about in a vehicle, or be in or upon the publi c streets , highways , roads , alleys, or publi c building s, places or ground s, between the hours of 11:00 P.M . and 5:00 A.M. This section does not apply to persons accompanied by a parent , guard ian or other adult person having their care and custody , or to person s upon emergency errands, or legitimate business directed by their parents , guardian, or other adult person having their care and custody , or to persons traveling to or from a location outside the City on legitimate business. This section also does not apply to a person in attenda nce at, or traveling between that person's home and a place of legitimate emp loyment or an event or activity sponsored by or associated with a school , church, or similar organiza tion , or an organized sporting , politica l, theatrical, or other like event or
 
activity, within thirty	(30) minutes of the end of the work shift ,

or the conclusion of the event or activi ty .

SECTION 2 . DUTY OF PARENTS I

It shall be unlawful for any paren t , guardian, or other person having the legal care and custody of any child under eighteen (18) years of age, to allow or permit	any such child, ward or other person under such age, while in such legal custody, to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play in or upon, or drive or ride about in a vehicle or be in or upon any public streets, highways, roads, alleys, or public  buildings,	places,	or grounds within	the City of Beulah , Mercer	County,	North	Dakota,	within	the time prescribed	by,	or contrary to, the provisions of this article.
SECTION 3.	PENALTY.

Any	person violating	the provisions	of this article shall,

)	upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding Two Hundred

Fifty Dollars ($250 .00), or ten (10) days imprisonment, or both fine and imprisonment.
SECTION 4.	SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.

If any provision of this Ordinance or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance, or the application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances is not affected.







2
 
SECTION 5.	EFFECTIVE  DATE .

This ordinance shal l be in full force and effect after its final reading and passage and approval thereon by the Mayor and City Auditor, and after publication in the officia l newspaper of the City of Beulah.







ATTEST:

 	,d (J,,2ted'- /v
LI DA A. WIEDRICH
City Auditor



Introduction and First Reading:  7/02/98 	

Second Reading:	7/20/98
)		Publication Date :  	 7/23/98	Final Passage:  	7/23/98	Effective Date:  	 7/23/98 	




















:J
 










Scott T. Solem Loren McCray
 
T
ALEXANDER & SOLEM
Attorney s at Law
133 West Main St.
P.O Box 249
Beulah, Nonh Dakota 58523
July 21 , 1998	Telephone:  (701)  873-5555
Fax: (701) 873-4958
 

 
Robert E. Alexander Raymond  M. Hagen Of Counsel

Editor
Beulah Beacon
Beulah, ND 58523
 











Re:	Ordinance #352
Title and Penalty Clause
 


Dear Editor:

Please find enclosed the title and penalty clause of the above Ordinance #352. I would appreciate it if you would publish this once in the Beulah Beacon, and then return an Affidavit of Publication to this office.

Please forward the bill to Linda A. Wiedrich . City Auditor. City of Beulah.

I thank you for your cooperation and consideration .


....    


STS/lh
Enclosure
pc: Linda A. Wiedrich , City Auditor
 
ORDINANCE NO. 361



AN ORDINANCE REVISING AND RE-ENACTING CHAPTER 2, ARTICLE 3, SECTION 2-301 OF THE REVISED ORDINANCES OF 1972, OF THE CITY OF BEULAH , MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , WITH RESPECT TO REGULA R MEETING DATES AND TIMES.



BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS :
1.	That Chapter 2, Article 3, Section 2-30 1 of the Revised Ordinances of 1972, of the


City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota, is hereby repealed and re-enacted as


follows :


2-301	1 Meetings of the City Council


That the City Council of the City of Beulah shall hold regular meetings on the first and third Mondays of each month, said meetings to begin at 7:00 P.M., at which time all City business of every nature and kind that may be regularly transacted by the City Council will be transacted at said meeting s, and that the records of said meetings shall be published as prescribed by law.
2.	SEVERABILITY.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith , are hereby rescinded and repealed. Ifany section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any Court of competent j urisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainin g portions of this ordinance.
3.	EFFECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall take effect following final passage and adoption.
 
Dated this 191
 
day of August , 2002.
 

 

ATTEST:

,.d,JQ .
LINA A. WIEDRICH, City Auditor



Introduction and First Reading : August 5, 2002 Second Reading: August 19, 2002
Publication Date:	Not required Final Passage: August  19, 2002
































2
 
(	ORDINANCE NO. 362

AN ORDINANCE RESTRICTING THE PARKING OF HEAVY VEHICLES WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS Of THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNC IL OF THE CITY Of BEULAH , MERCER


COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:


PARKING Of HEAVY VEHICLES REGULATED


1.	It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public street, avenue, or alley, within the City Limits of the City of Beulah, except as otherwise provided below, any semi- tractors, semi-trai lers, or tandem axle trucks. The foregoing motor vehicles, and semi-trailers may park on a public street or avenue within the City Limits of the City of Beulah, for the purpose of delivery and if being actively loaded or unloaded.   The City of Beulah may waive the above
restrictions of this ordinance for motor vehicles and/or semi-trailers used in construction, street
)
repair, or other appropriate temporary circumstances.


The above referenced motor vehicles and/or semi-trailers may be parked or left standing on


the following public streets, avenues, alleys, or property:

 
a)	Frontage road paralleling Highway #49 from 91
 
Street to l 91
 

Street;
 

b)	Commercia l area north of Front Street paralleling the railroad tracks;


c)	City owned property consisting of a 67' x 325' parcel located adjacent to the Dakota


Farms Inn Parking Lot;


2.	SEVERABILITY.  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are

hereby rescinded and repealed. Ifany section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any
 
reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any Court of competent jurisdiction ,


such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.


3.	PENALTY	Any person who violated this ordinance shall pay a fine in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00) for a first violation of this Ordinance.  Any person who commits the second v iolation of this ordinance shall be fined the amount of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00). Any and all subsequent violations shall be deemed an offense subject to the maximum penalty of thirty (30) days incarceration , a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or both.
4.	EffECTIVE DATE. This ordinance shall take effect following final passage, adoption, and publication of the penalty provi sion.
Dated this 71  day of October, 2002.

)	 

ATIEST:

d.<<2·	9(
LDA A. WIEDRICH, City Auditor



Introduction and First Reading:	September  16, 2002 Second Read ing :	October  7, 2002
Publication Date:	October  10, 2002


Final Passage: October  10, 2002








2
 
ORDINANCE NO. 368

AN ORDINANCE REVISING BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE NO. 341, REGULATING ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PUBLIC WAYS; PROPERTY FOUND ON PRIVATE LANDS; AND JUNK AUTOMOBILES WITHIN THE CITY OF BEULAH,
·MERCER COUNTY, NORIB DAKOTA.



BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, THAT BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE NO. 341 IS HEREBY REPEALED AND RE-ENACTED AS FOLLOWS:
Article I. Personal Property on Public Ways.

Sectionl.          Definitions.

(A)	"Abandoned personal property" shall he any personal property, which has been located on a street, alley, other public way, or parking lot of the city or which has been removed from such a location to a public parking lot, city storage or city building by proper authorities to prevent a nuisance, to safeguard the property or to avoid obstruction of the public ways.
(B)	"Abandoned motor vehicle" means a motor vehicle, as defined in Section 39-01-01 of the North Dakota Century Code, that has remained for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours on public property illegally or lacking vital component parts or has remained for a period more than forty-eight (48) hours on private property without consent of the person in control of such property or in an inoperable condition such that it has no substantial potential
further use consistent with  its useful functions unless  it is kept  in an enclosed garage or storage building.
Section2:        Removal.

After a period of forty-eight (48) hours shall have elapsed from the commencement of the abandonment, thc;i city s all be entitled to take and store the property.
 
., .







Section 3:	Notice to owner of abandoned vehicle.

(A)	When an abandoned motor vehicle is more than seven (7) model years of age, is lacking vital components parts, and does not display a license plate currently valid in North Dakota, or any other state or foreign country, it is immediately eligible for disposition, and must be disposed of to a scrap iron processor licensed by the State of North Dakota, and is not subject to the notification,  reclamation,  or title provisions  of this ordinance.
(B)	When an abandoned motor vehicle does not fall within Section 3(A) above, the city shall take it into custody and shall further give notice of the taking within ten (to) days.
(C)	The notice shall set forth the date and place of the taking, the year, make, model, and serial number of the abandoned motor vehicle and the place where the vehicle is being held. The city shall inform the owner and any lienholders or secured parties of their right to reclaim the motor vehicle as specified below in this ordinance, and shall state that failure of the owner or lienholders or secured parties to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle is deemed a waiver by them of all right, title, and interest in the vehicle and a consent to the sale of the vehicle at a public  auction pursuant  to this ordinance.
(D)	The owner, secured parties, or lienholder of an abandoned motor vehicle, which has been taken into custody, have a right to reclaim such vehicle form the city upon payment of all towing and storage charges resulting from taking the vehicle into custody provided said vehicle is reclaimed within fifteen (15) days after the notice specified in Section 3(C).
Section 4:	Sale.

An abandoned vehicle, not more than seven (7) model years of age, taken into custody and not reclaimed pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance must be sold to the highest bidder at public


2
 

auction following a reasonable public notice thereof. One publication of said sale at least ten (l 0) days prior to the sale shall be deemed reasonable public notice. The purchaser must be given a receipt and a form prescribed by the State of North Dakota which shall be sufficient title to dispose of the vehicle. The receipt also entitles the purchaser to register the vehicle and receive a certificate of title free and clear of all liens and claims of ownership. License plates displayed on an abandoned vehicle must be removed and destroyed prior to the purchaser taking possession of the vehicle.
Section 5:        When proceeds may be claimed.

From the proceeds of the sale of abandoned motor vehicle, the city shall reimburse itself for the costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle and all notice and publication costs incurred pursuant to this ordinance. Any remainder from the proceeds of sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder or secured parties for ninety (90) days and then shall be deposited in the state treasury of the State ofNorth Dakota as provided in Section l of Article IX of the Constitution of North Dakota and credited to the permanent school fund.
Article II. Property found on private lands. Section I.	Definitions.
The following words or terms when used herein shall be deemed to have the meanings set forth below:
(A)	Abandoned vehicle shall include without limitation any vehicle which has remained on private property for a period of forty-eight (48) continuous hours, or more, without consent of the owner or occupant of the property or for a period of forty-eight (48) continuous hours or more, after the consent of the owner or occupant has been revoke.





3
 
·..






(B)	Blighted structure shall include without limitation any dwelling, garages, or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, warehouse or any other structure or part of a structure which because of fire, wind, or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for the purpose for which it may have been intended.
(C)	Building materials shall include without limitation, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electric wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure.
(D)	Inoperative shall mean a condition ofbeingjunked, wrecked, wholly or partially, dismantled, discarded, abandoned, or unable to perform the functions or purposes for which a vehicle was originally constructed.
(E)	Junk shall include without limitation parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused furniture, stoves, refrigerators, or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal, or any other castoff material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use.
(F)	· · Junk automobiles shall include without limitation any motor vehicle which is not licensed for use upon the highways of the state for a period in excess of sixty (60) days and shall also include whether licensed or not any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period in  excess of sixty (60) days, provided that there is excepted from this definition unlicenced but operative vehicles which are kept as a stock in trade of a regularly licensed and established new or used  automobile  dealer.
(G)	Person shall include all natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporations, and all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting by themselves


4
 

or by a servant, agent, or employee. All persons who violate any of the provisions of this article, whether as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, servant or employee shall, except as herein otherwise provided, be equally liable as principals.
(H)	Trash and rubbish shall include any and all forms of debris not herein otherwise classified.

Section 2.  Storage of junk, junk automobUes - Contrary to public health and safety-nuisance.

It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles, abandoned vehicles, building materials, and the maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the city tends to result in blighted and deteriorated  neighborhoods, increased criminal activity, spread of vermin and disease and is contrary to the public peace, health, safety and general  welfare of the community and therefore constitutes a nuisance.
Section 3.	Unlawful to store or accumulate junk, junk automobiles, etc.
)		It shall be unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person to store, or permit the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles, or abandoned vehicles on any private property in the city except as follows:

(A)	Within a completely enclosed building.

(B)	Upon the business premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer. However, any junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used parts or dealer in second hand goods or junk gatherer shall store said items in an area which shall be enclosed in a building or located behind a site fence approved by the city and shall be stored in a manner so as not to create an unsightly mess, deterioration of the neighborhood,  increased criminal activities, spread of vermin and disease or in any way create a situation contrary to the public peace,  health, safety, or general welfare of the community.


5
 
(C)	Vehicles which are covered by a secured automobile cover, specifically designed to cover the individual vehicles in question, when the vehicles are not being used or worked on. Said vehicles shall be located in such an area on the vehicle owner's property and in a manner so as not to create an unsightly mess, deterioration or the neighborhood, increased criminal activities, spread of vermin and disease, or in any other way create a situation contrary to the public peace, hell.Ith, safety, or general welfare of the community. Where practicable storage should be out of sight or as near out of sight as possible from a public street or neighbor's yard.
(D)	Antique vehicles, special interest vehicles, or parts cars owned by a collect.or or car enthusiast, and which are located, stored and maintained strictly in areas within the City of Beulah zoned with the "Industrial District" designation.   Such storage and maintenance  must be in
compliance with Beulah City Ordinance No. 369 and any subsequent amendments thereto.

)	Section 4.	Unlawful to dismantle automobile except on business premises.

It shall be unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person to dismantle, cut up, remove parts from, or otherwise disassemble any automobile, whether or not the same is a junk automobile, abandoned v_ehicle or otherwise, or any appliance or machinery, except as set forth below:
(A)	Dismantling may take place in a completely enclosed building;

(B)	Dismantling may take place upon the business premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer.
(C)	Automobiles may be dismantled on private property, for purposes ofmaking necessary repairs or improvements to said vehicles provided that said vehicles may not be dismantled for a period of time longer than sixty (60) consecutive days and that said dismantling shall be done


6
 
in a manner so as not to create an unsightly mess, unreasonable noise, deterioration of the neighborhood, increased criminal activities, spread of vermin and disease or in any other way create a situation contrary to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the community. In all cases, vehicles dismantled on private property shall be the property of the owner or resident of the property. Vehicles which have tires or other external parts removed from them shall be covered, as specified in Section 3(C) of this ordinance, when such vehicles are not being worked on.
(D)	Automobiles may be dismantled by car enthusiast and/or collector on private property located within industrial districts pursuantto Beulah City Ordinance No. 369. Such dismantling shall be done in a manner so as not to create an unsightly mess, unreasonable noise, deterioration of the neighborhood, increased criminal activity, spread of vermin and disease or in any other
way create a situation contrary to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare of the

)		community. In all such cases, vehicles dismantled on private property within an industrial district shall be the property of the owner or resident of the property.

Section 5.	Unlawful to maintain blighted structure.

Itshall be unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store, or warehouse unless the same is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by unauthorized persons or unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time.





7
 
".	..






Section 6.	Unlawful to store building materiaJs except on business premises.

It shall be unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person to store or permit the storage or accumulation of building materials on any private property, except as follows:
(A)	When in a completely enclosed building.

(B)	When stacked in a neat and orderly manner so as not to be unsightly. No storage method or arrangement shall be allowed if it presents a safety or health hazard or contributes to the spread of vermin or disease.
(C}	When building materials are part of the stock in trade of a business located on the property.

(D) When such materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city.
Section 7.	Police department may remove junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles.

(A)	The chief of police is hereby authorized and empowered, to notify the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent of the owner, of any property within the city to obey and remove junk, junk automobiles, or any other items or materials found accumulated, lying or located on such property (whether private or public). Such notice shall be served personally or delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last reasonably know address of the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent of the owner. Ifsuch address is reasonably ascertainable or shall be posted on the premises at least twenty (20) days prior to abatement of the nuisance. The notice shall specify the legal description of the premises and shall set forth, if possible, the street address of the premises. It shall include an explanation of the right to a hearing on the necessity for the abatement which is provided in this ordinance.
(B)	Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent of the



8
 
. ,.







owner, so notified to abate and remove the nuisance caused by the accumulation ofjunk, junk automobiles, or other nuisances as specified  in this ordinance, the chief or police is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the abatement and removal of said nuisance.   Ifwithin twenty (20) days after the date of any  letter  containing  such notice is returned  to the city because of inability to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, occupant, or agent of the owner, and if the chief of police is unable to contact such owner, occupant or agent by telephone upon reasonable effort, the chief of police may also pay for the abatement of the nuisance or order its removal by the city. In order to abate said nuisance, the Chief of Police or his Agent is authorized to enter upon the premises  described  in  such notice and to take whatever  steps as might  be reasonably required to abate the nuisance and such entry, if reasonable in nature and undertaken in good faith, shall not constitute a trespass  or conversion.
(C)	The costs of abatement or removal of the nuisance which are incurred by the city shall be certified by the chief of police to the city auditor for assessment against property, provided however, that if the property has any value it may be disposed of as previously provided in this ordinance and funds retained shall first be applied to expenses, as specified in  this ordinance, and then shall be returned to the owner of the property, ifthe owner can be located within ninety (90) days. If the owner cannot be located, the funds shall be returned to the treasury  of the City of Beulah .
(D)	Such removal by the police department shall not excuse or relieve any person of the obligation imposed by this ordinance to keep his property free from storage or accumulation of junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or


9
 
...	... .,.






parts of either, or from any other violation of this ordinance, nor from the penalties for violation thereof.
Section 8.	Opportunity for hearing

Any owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent of owner, of any property within the city, who has been ordered to remove junk, junk  automobiles, or other items or materials found accumulated, or blighted structures, and in violation of this ordinance may seek a hearing before the Municipal Judge of the City of Beulah for the purpose of making a determination whether or not the items ordered to be removed by the Chiefof Police are in violation of this ordinance. Any person desiring said hearing shall notify the Municipal Judge, in writing, within twenty (20) days of the receipt of or posting of the required notice and shall be given an opportunity to appear before the Municipal Judge within thirty
(30) days after said notification of a desire for hearing. The city shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the conditions of which it complains, constitute a nuisance as set forth in this ordinance. The Municipal Judge shall either find for the owner of the property, in which case no further action may be taken by the city without the issuance of another notice, pursuant to this ordinance, which shall be issued only in the event of a material change in circumstances, or the Municipal Judge shall find for the city, in which case the owner shall have an additional ten (I 0) days from the date of service upon him by mail or in person of a copy of the Municipal Judge's decision in which to abate the nuisance. Ifthe owner fails, neglects, or refuses to abate the nuisance within that period of time, then the Chief of Police may proceed to enter upon the property and to abate the nuisance and such actions, if reasonable in nature and undertaken in good faith. shall not constitute a trespass or conversion.





JO
 
i  •	, .






Section 9. Disposition of junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles determined to be of no value.

Any junk automobile, abandoned vehicle, or part of either removed from unenclosed private property as provided by this ordinance, or coming into the possession of the police department by abandonment on public property in the city, which is determined by the chief of police to be of no value other than as scrap metal shall be disposed of by the city in such a manner as to eliminate the unsightly accumulation of such worthless hulks and the hazards to public health attendant thereto with the least practicable delay.
Section 10.	Abatement without prior notice.

In the event a nuisance as defined herein shall, in the opinion of the Chief of Police constituted immediate and serious danger to the health of any person, or shall constitute immediate and serious danger to private or public property, the city may, without prior notice to the owner of the premises immediate enter upon the premises and take whatever steps are required to abate the nuisance. Ifsuch actions are reasonable in nature and undertaken in good faith, such action shall not constitute trespass or conversion. Any attempt by the city to give the owner prior notice shall not constitute a waiver of the right under this section to act without prior notice.
Section 11.	Other remedies:	Harboring a nuisance.

The provisions of this ordinance shall not constitute the exclusive remedy of the City of Beulah to abate nuisances. The city reserves the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction to obtain an injunction requiring abatement of the nuisance and such remedy may be asserted without regard to the notice requirements of this ordinance and the provisions for administrative relief set forth herein. Moreover the harboring or maintenance of a nuisance shall constitute an offence punishable under this ordinance as set forth below.


II
 
o  JI






Article ID. Penalty Section

Section 1. The first time nuisance penalty for any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance shall be a fine ofnot more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), for each infraction and a separate infraction shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the nuisance exists. Any and all subsequent violations shall be deemed an offense subject to a maximum penalty of thirty (30) days incarceration, a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00), or both such incarceration and fine.
Article IV. Effective Date

Section 1. This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage and approval and the publication of its title and penalty clause.
Article V. Conflicts.

Section 1. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded and appealed.
Article VI. Savings Clause

Section 1. Ifany provision of this ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.




ARD, Mayor

, ATTEST:


 

12
_)
 
.I
'




 
First Reading: Second Reading: Publication Date: Effective Date:
 
November  17, 2003

December I, 2003

December 11, 2003

December  11, 2003
 



















)


























13

)
 
ORDINANCE NO. 371


AN  ORDINANCE  RESTRICTING  THE  THROWING  OR   BLOWING  OF  SNOW   INTO STREETS  AND  ALLEYS  IN  THE  CITY  OF  BEULAH,   MERCER   COUNTY,   NORTH DAKOTA





BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH ,

MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:



1.	No person or entity shall throw or blow in any manner snow or ice into any street or alley in the City of Beulah . The City Council of the City of Beulah has determined that the throwing or blowing  of snow or ice into City streets and alleys constitutes a hazard to and impedes vehicular travel within the City of Beulah . Any person or entity violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction .
2 . All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded and repealed .
3.	. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon final passage and publication of its title and penalty clause .
4.	If any provision of this Ordinance or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.
 
DATED this
 
  1_9_th 	
 
day of
 
  Ap_r_i_l  	
 
, 2004.
 

 

Mayor

ATTEST:








Introduction and First Reading:			April     5,    2004 		 Second Reading and Final Passage:			April  19, 2004 		 Publication Date :	May 6, 2004 			
Effective Date :       Hay 6, 2004



)


























2
 



QRDINANCE NO. 371


Nt ORDINANCE  RESTRICTING  THE  THROWING  OR  BLOWI:NG  OF  SNOW  INTO  STREETS  AND ALLEYS   IN  THE  CITY   O!'  BEULAH,   MERCER   COUNTY,   NORTH  DAKOTA


1.	No person or entity shall throw or blow in any manner snow or ice into any street or alley in the City of Beulah. The City Council of the City of Beulah has determined that the throwing or blowing of snow or ice into City streets and alleys
,constitutes a hazard to and impedes vehicular travel within the City of Beulah. Any person or entity violating· the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction.


The title and penalty provision of the above Ordinance is published

)	in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.

DATED  '!'his  19th day of  April, 2004 .
 


'•   \
 
..  .
 



ORDINANCE NO. 377

AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE COLLECTION, SEPARATION, AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE AND RECYCLABLE  MATERIALS  AT  THE  CITY  OF  BEULAH  TRANSFER STATION  WITHIN  THE  CITY  OF  BEULAH,   MERCER  COUNTY,   NORTH  DAKOTA.


BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH , MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS :
SECTION 1 . Rules and Regulations	/

These rules and regulat ions govern the collection , separation and disposal of solid waste and establish a fee system for the disposal of selected solid wastes and for the sale of available recycled materials at the City Beulah Transfer Station located at 1729 Ar ikara Drive , Beulah , North Dakota
SECTION 2.  Special Use Permi t

The Transfer Station operates under a Special Use Permit from the
)
State of North Dakota Department of Health and will be operated at

all times in complete adherence to the criteria outlined in the current Special Use Permit. If any conflict between this ordinance and the current Special use Permit occurs, the Special Use Permit requirements will take precedence .
SECTION 3 . HOURS OF OPERATION

The Trans fer Station scheduled days and hours of operation shall be determi ned by the City Council. Such schedule shall be maintain ed and be available for public inspection at the office of the Beulah City Audi tor located at Beulah City Hall during regular office hours. The facility shall also be open during such other times as the City Council shall deem necessary to support special circumstances or events .  The Transfer Station shall be closed on
 
. .




the following holidays : New Year 's Day, Memorial Day, Labor Day ,
)
Thanksgivin g Day , Good Friday , Fourth of July , Veteran 's Day , and Christmas Day .
SECTION 4 . USAGE PERMIT

All entities wishing to use the Transfer Station are required to present to the Transfer Station Attendant a valid Transfer Station Usage Permit to gain admittance .
1. Transfer Station Usage Permits issued to Beulah residents with

an account in good standing are valid for one year . Shorter time period permits (daily, weekly , etc .) will be available at City Hall and issued to those residents requiring adjusted time periods .
2 .	Permits will be granted at no charge to any resident of the

City	of Beulah , or	a	resident	living	within	the	extra-
)
territorial	jurisdiction	of the City of Beulah,	having	a current sanitation account in good standing.
3.	Permits will be available to any non-resident of the City of Beulah for a fee determined by the City Council . Said fee schedule will be maintained for public inspection during regular office hours at the office of the Beulah City Auditor located at Beulah City Hall .
4.	. Any fraudulent use of a Transfer Station Usage Permit shall result in the Permit being revoked and the Permit holder losing the usage of the Transfer Station for one calendar year . Fraudulent usage is defined as use of the Permi t by any

2
 
, .




party other than the party assigned to the Usage Permit . Loss
)
of usage will not eliminate any monthly Transfer Station fees that are assessed to the account as a capital improvement cost generated in the City of Beulah utility billing system .
5.	Permits are not required for disposal of materials on the recycle list . This recycle list will be generated by the City Council and reviewed and modified as the City Council deems necessary	to support the best interests of the Transfer Station , the City of Beulah , and the environment . This recycle list shall be maintained and be available for public inspection during regular office hours at the office of the Beulah City Auditor located at Beulah City Hall .
SECTION 5. SAFETY PROCEDURES

Disposing of solid waste can be a dangerous job . Splinters from
)
wood , broken glass, rusting scrap metal , sharp objects , etc. are

potentially dangerous and shall be handled with care . All persons using the Transfer Station shall follow the directions of the Attendant and adhere to the following safety procedures :
1.	. All persons shall wear shoes or boots covering the entire foot or will not be allowed on the site . Absolutely no bare feet or sandals will be allowed inside the fenced perimeter area.
2.	All children under the age of 14 shall be accompanied and monitored by an adult.
3.	No person is allowed to enter any areas signed as a prohibited , restricted or closed area , or climb onto any drop off container or wall .


3
 
. '




4.	Vehicles within the Transfer Station grounds shall be limited to a maximum speed of 10 miles per hour .
5 .	Once accepted by the Attendant , removal of iterns from the

 
Transfer	Station , prohibited .
 
"scavenging"	or	"dump	picking",	is
 
6.	Persons entering the facility do so at their own risk .

SECTION 6. MATERIAL TO BE ACCEPTED

All acceptable waste materials deposited at this facility shall be separated into categories as listed in this Section or as directed by the Attendant. Unseparated and unacceptab le waste materials will not be accepted . The following classes of separated material will be accepted .
1.	HOUSEHOLD - typical waste generated by a residentia l

household
)
2.	CONSTRUCTION - typical waste generated by construction

such as wood scraps , drywall, insulation etc .

3.	. APPLIANCES - this includes both Freon containing and non-Freon containing white ware and small appliances
4.	TIRES - tires with the exception of tractor tires and

tires on wheels

5.	TREES - any type of tree or bush

6.	LEAVES - any type of leaves

7.	GRASS - all grass except "noxious weeds" including but not limited to Canada Thistle , Sow Thistle, Quack Grass, Leafy	Spurge (Euphorbia Esula or Euphorbia Birgata), Field	Bindweed , Russian  Knapweed,  Centaurea  Picris,


4
 
.•




Hoary	Cress	(Lapidium	Draba ,	Lapidium	Repens ,	and
)
Humenophysa Pubescens) and Dodder.

8.	.	GARDEN - any garden , flower bed and landscape materials.

9.	RECYCLE - As per recycle list maintained for public inspection at office of Beulah City Auditor located at Beulah City Hall .
10.	INERT	this	includes	carpet, furniture ,	and	other

material not fitting into other categories .

SECTION 7.	UNACCEPTABLE MATERIAL

The following materials are unacceptable and will not be accepted

by the Transfer Station.

1.	Industrial	waste	as	listed	with	the	North	Dakota

Department of Health

2 .	Hazardous	waste	of	any	type ,	whether	listed	or
)
characteristic	and	as	listed	with	the	North	Dakota Department of Health
3.	.	Asbestos containing materials

4.	.	Mercury

5.	Lead-acid or Ni-Cad batteries

6.	Medical or veterinarian waste

7.	.	Liquids or liquid sludge of any kind

8.	.	Radioactive waste

 
9 .	Slaughtering	or	rendering	waste ,

carcasses of any kind
 

dead	animals	or
 

10.	Junk cars, engines , chassis, transmissions , axles, etc .

11.	Unseparated trash



5
 


12.	Pesticides , herbicides , or any containers once having contained pesticides or herbicides
13.	.	Oils or greases of any kind

14.	Paint residues

15.	Manure

16.	Any material which in the opinion of the Transfer Station Attendant constitutes a serious hazard to the other users , to the property of the City of Beulah , to the operation of the property of the City of Beulah , or to the operation of the Transfer Station.
The decisions of the Attendant are final.	The City Council may , at their discretion , accept certain wastes identified in this Section
to support special circumstances or events.
)
SECTION 8. DISPOSAL FEE

All materials accepted by the Transfer Station will require the payment of a disposal fee with the exception of grass , trees or tree limbs , and any recycle materials . The fee schedul e will be generated by the City Council and reviewed and modified as required to support the best interests of the Transfer Station and the City of Beulah. The fees are to be assessed by the Attendant and paid to the Attendant or charged to a City of Beulah utility account in good standing prior to disposal . Receipts will be given to users of the Transfer Station. For special circumstances and events , the City Council may temporarily modify the fee schedule . A disposal fee schedule shall be maintained for public inspection during


6
 
...




regular office hours at the office of the Beulah City Audi tor
)
located at Beulah City Hall.

SECTION 9. - MATERIALS AVAILABLE FOR SALE

If available , the Transfer Station may have certain recyclable materials available for sale . A list of the available material and the fee schedule for the sale of the material shall be generated by the City Council. This list and fee schedule shall be updated periodically as is deemed necessary . For special circumstances and events , the City Council may temporarily modify the fee schedule. The list of available material and the fee schedule for the sale of such material shall be maintained and available for public inspection during regular office hours at the office of the Beulah City Auditor located at Beulah City Hall .
SECTION 10. - PENALTY SECTION

Raw ma terials requiring the payment of a disposal fee any person leaving such material at the gate , dumping such materials in any form without payment of fees, or dumping such materials when the facility is closed shall be guilty of an infraction with a maximum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Any and all subsequent violations in this regard shall be charged as a Class B Misdemeanor and carry a maximum fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and thirty (30) days incarceration .
Any person will fully concealing unacceptable waste in what

otherwise would be acceptable waste shall be guilty of an infraction with a maximum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Any and all subsequent violations in this regard shall be charged as a Class B


7
 
I ' •




)	Misdemeanor	and	carry	a maximum	fine of One	Thousand	Dollars ($1,000.00) and thirty (30) days incarceration .

Any person willfully vandalizing the Transfer Station facility or removing material therefrom without first obtaining permission to do so from the proper authority shall be guilty of an infraction carrying a maximum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Any and all subsequent violations in this regard shall be charged as a Class B Misdemeanor and carry a maximum fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and thirty (30) days incarceration.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any other provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction which shall carry a maximum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Any and all subsequent violations of the same nature shall be charged
as a Class B Misdemeanor and carry a maximum fine of One Thousand
)
Dollars ($1,000.00 ) and thirty (30) days incarceration .

SECTION 11.  SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any provision of this Ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid , the remainder of the Ordinance or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected .
DATED this	d-c?.)6	day of	AJcv e.-Mbe.r	,   2006 .




ARRELL  BJERKE
Mayor
ATTEST :

 



8
 
•,  '





)
Introduction and First Reading :

Second Reading and Final Passage :	 	
Publication  Date :	/J.../1'1 /c>

Effective Date :	/ J.//c-(/t7"




















)






























9
 
, '•	._,, ..
. '


ORDINANCE NO. 377

AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE COLLECTION, SEPARATION, AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE AND RECYCLABLE MATERIALS AT THE CITY OF BEULAH  TRANSFER STATION WITHlN THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

SECTION 10. - PENALTY SECTION

Raw material s requirin g the paym ent of a disposal fee any person leaving such material at the gate, dumping such materials in any form with out payment of fees, or dumping such materia ls when the faci lity is closed shall be guilty of an infraction with a maximum fine of Five Hundred Dol lars ($500.00). Any and all subsequent violations in this regard shall  be charged as a Class B Misdemeanor and  carry a ma x imum fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and thirty (30) days incarceration.
Any person willfully concealing unacceptable waste in what otherwise would be acceptabl e waste shall be guilty of an infraction w ith a maximum fine of Five Hundred  Dollars ($500.00). Any and all subsequent violations in thi s regard shall be charged as a Class B Misdemeanor and carry a maximum
fine of One Th ousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and thirty (30) days incarceration .
)
Any person wi llfully vand alizing the Transfer Station  facility or removing mater ial therefrom

without first obtaining permi ssion to do so from the proper authority shall be guilty of an infraction carrying a maximum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Any and all subsequent violation s in th is regard shall be charged as a Class B Misdemeanor and carry a maximum fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) and thirty (30) days incarceration .
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any other provision of thi s Ordinan ce shall be guilty of an infraction which shall carry a maximum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). Any and all subseq uent violations of the same nature shal l be charged as a  Class B Misdemeanor  and carry a maximum fine of One Thousand Dollars ($ 1 ,000.00) and thirty (30) days in carceration.
 
Dated this 20th day of November, 2006.
 



o.9r- LDA A . WIEDRICH, CITY AUDITOR CJTY OF BEULA H
 
ORDINANCE NO. 378

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING THE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 5 OF THE REVISED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, OF 1972, AND ALL SUBSEQUENT REVISIONS THERETO, SAID REVISED ORDINANCE RELATING TO ANIMALS AND FOWL.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

I.	That Chapter 5 of the Revised Ordinances of 1972 and all subsequent amendments thereto, including Ordinances No. 123, 127, 200, and 233 of the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota, and hereby amended and re-enacted as follows:


ARTICL E 1 - General Regulations

5.0101  Definitions
5.0102  Overworking, Mistreating, or Abandoning Animals 5.0103  Cruelty in Transportation
5.0104  Unattended Dog or Cat in Motor Vehicle 5.0105  Poisoning Animals
5.0106 Diseased Animals
5.0107  Housing
5.0108  Keeping of Certain Animals Prohibited
\		5.0109   Kennels  and  Other Breeding Establishments 5.0110   Strays

ARTICLE 2 - Dogs and Cats

5.0201  License Required
5.0202  Licensing Procedure and Terms 5.0203  License Fee
5.0204  License:  When Due and Payable 5.0205  Dogs Running at Large Prohibited 5.0206 Impounding
5.0207 Rabies Shots
5.0208  Return to Owner if Known 5.0209  Noisy Dog Prohibited 5.0210  Nuisance - When
5.0211   Dangerous Animals
5.0212  Keeping of Female Dogs in Season Prohibited, Exception. 5.0213  Limitation on Number of Dogs.
5.0214  Dog and Cat Feces Declared Nuisance. 5.0215  Setting of Dogs at Large Prohibited 5.0216  Breaking Into Pound - Hindering Officer
 
'  .





ARTf CLE 3 - Rabies Control

5.0301  Quarantine of Biting Animal.
5.0302  Duty of Owner to Surrender Animal; Redemption. 5.0303  Disposition of Dead Rabid Animal.
5.0304 Destruction, Isolation of Bitten Animals. 5.0305 Destruction, Removal of Rabid Animals. 5.0306 Surrender of Carcass.
5.0307 Report of Bite Cases.
5.0308 Failure to Obey Health Officer. 5.0309 Report of Suspected Cases.

ARTICLE 4 - Penalty

5.0401 Penalty for Violation of Chapter.












































2
 
ARTl LE 1 - GeneraJ Regulation 5.0101 Definitions
In this Chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires:

1.	"Animal" includes every living animal except the human race.
2.	"Cruelty" or "torture" includes every act, omission, or neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, or death is caused or permitted.

5.0102  Overworking, mistreating, or abandoning animal

1.	No person may overdrive, overload, torture, cruelly beat, neglect, or unjustifiably injury, maim, mutilate, or kill any animal, or cruelly work any animal when unfit for labor.
2.	No person may deprive any animal over which the person has charge or control of
necessary food, water, or shelter.
3.	No person may keep any animal in any enclosure without exercise and wholesome change of air.
4.	No person may abandon any animal.
5.	No person may allow any maimed, sick, infirm, or disabled animal of which the person  is the owner, or which the person has custody, to lie in any street, road, or other public place for more than 3 hours after notice.
6.	No person may willfully instigate, or in any way further, any act of cruelty to any animal or animals, or act tending to produce such cruelty.

Any person who shall violate this article  shall be deemed guilty of an offense for which the maximum penalty shall be a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), thirty (30) day imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment.

5.0103  Cruelty in Transportation

No person may carry, or cause to be carried, any live animals upon any vehicle or otherwise, without providing suitable racks, cars, crates, or cages, or other proper carrying container, nor may he carry an animal, or cause an animal to be carried, in any other cruel manner.

5.0104  U nattended  Dog    r Cat in Motor Vehicle

No person may leave a cat or a dog unattended in a stationary or parked motor vehicle in a manner that endangers the animals health or safety. Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction.

5.0105  Poisoning Animals

No person may unjustifiably administer or expose any known poisonous substance or noxious drug, whether mixed with meat or other food or not, which maybe eaten by any domestic animal.



3
 
5.0106   Diseased Animals

No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected; nor shall such diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner thereof, except under the supervision of the chief of police or the local health officer.

It is hereby made the duty of the local health officer to secure such disposition of any diseased animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication and spread of the contagion or infection, except in cases where the state department of health is empowered to act.

5.0107   Housing

No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to be unclean, or unwholesome. Any area in which animals are kept must be maintained in such a manner as to prevent offensive odors and/or attraction of insects.

5.0108   Keeping of Certain Animals Prohibited

It shall be unlawful to keep any sheep, horses, cattle, swine, goats, rabbits, chickens or other poultry, except for small house birds, dogs and cats, which may be kept pursuit to the regulations set out herein, within the city limits of the City of Beulah except as provided in areas zoned Agricultural (A) pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the City of Beulah. The areas zoned Agricultural (A) pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the City of Beulah, shall have the following limitations:

1.	There shall be no more than one (1) adult horse, sheep or cow and one (1) foal, lamb or calf per two (2) acres.
2.	No swine shall be allowed whatsoever.
3.	There shall be no feedlots allowed and the feedlots shall be defined as fenced-off or closed in areas where animals are fed rather than allowed to graze.

Murray Addition/Country Club Estates as well as the Beulah High School FFA projects are excluded from the above described animal limitations. Murray Addition/Country Club Estates shall be governed by the Restrictive Covenants filed and recorded at the Mercer County Recorder's Office as approved by the Beulah City Council. The Beulah High School FFA project, as administered by the Beulah High School Administration and Beulah High School FFA organization shall be excluded from the above requirements to the extent that the Beulah High School FFA projects are conducted in accordance with the guidelines as may be established by the Beulah City Council.

5.0109   Kennels and Other Breeding Estab li shments

No person or corporation shall be permitted to maintain or keep kennels or other establishments for the breeding for sale of dogs and cats within the city limits of the City of Beulah, provided however, that the keeping of dogs and cats as pets shall be permitted as provided in this Chapter.



4
 

5.0110   Strays

It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horses, sheep, swine, goats or poultry to run at large in the City; and any such animal running at large in any public place in the City shall be impounded. It shall further be unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the City for the purpose of grazing or feeding.

ARTICLE 2 - ogs and Cats 5.0201 License Required
No dog or cat shall be permitted to be or remain in the City without being licensed as herein after provided if over six months of age. It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of any dog or cat kept within the City to have the dog or cat inoculated against rabies and proof thereof is shown to the person issuing the license.

5.0202   Licensing Procedure and Terms

All dogs and cats shall be registered as to sex, breed, name and address of owner and name of said dog or cat. Licenses shall be issued by the chief of police on an annual basis as hereinafter more fully provided. The person paying the license fee shall receive a receipt therefore and a metal tag or badge with which to mark the animal. It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper to cause such license tag or badge to be securely attached around the animal's neck and kept there at all times during the license period.

5.0203   License Fee

Any person keeping, owning, or harboring any dog or cat in the City of Beulah shall pay annually to the city auditor of the City, a license fee shall be seven dollars ($7.00) for each male animal and for each spayed female animal; and ten dollars ($10.00) for each female dog or cat not spayed. The owner of any spayed female animal shall present to the city auditor a certificate executed by a licensed veterinarian to the effect that such animal has been spayed, or such other evidence as the auditor shall require.

5.0204 License: When Due and Payable

The annual license fee herein provided shall become due and payable on January 151 of each year and shall license an animal for the ensuing year; all animal licenses shall expire on December 31st of each year. Ifthe annual license fee is not paid before the first day of February a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) shall be added to the license or renewal fee. In case of failure of any owner or keeper of a dog and/or cat to pay such license fee upon any such animals, such animals shall be surrendered by the owner or keeper thereof for the purpose of being disposed of, as hereinafter provided, upon the demand of the city auditor or any police officer of the city.

Any animal required to be licensed and not wearing upon his collar the license tag herein provided for, found within the city after the 1st day of January in any year, shall be taken by the police officer of the city or any other person authorized by the city council of the City of Beulah to act.  It shall be the duty of the police officer or any other person authorized by the city council of the

5
 
City of Beulah to hold said animal in the city pound for a period of three (3) days. If during such period of three (3) days, the owner shall claim the same, and shall pay the city auditor the license fee and penalty fee, plus the costs of taking and caring for the animal while in custody, said animal shall be returned to him. Ifnot so redeemed within the three (3) days, the police officer or any other person authorized by the city council of the City of Beulah to so act, shall humanely destroy said animal. If the owner can reasonably be identified, the city official impounding the animal shall immediately notify the owner upon impoundment of the animal. Said notification may be by telephone or mail.

5.0205  Dogs Running Un leashed and at Large Prohibited

It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any dog to run unleashed and at large at any time, upon any public grounds, streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or school grounds or upon private premises of any person other than such owner or keeper of such dog, and such running at large is hereby declared to be a nuisance. While off owners premises, said dog must be controlled by a capable individual and restrained by a leash of adequate size and length. While upon the premises of its owner or keeper, said dog must be restrained in an appropriate manner so as to keep said dog from leaving its owners or keepers property, such as leashed and attended by the owner or keeper, restrained by rope, chain or cord attached to the dog's collar, or maintained in a kennel or behind an enclosed fenced-in area. The owner or keeper of such dog shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter provided for violation of this chapter, and for such purpose the head of the household of the premises on which such dog is kept shall be considered to be the owner.

The penalty for a violation of this article inthe case of a dog seized by the city police officer or by any other person authorized by the City Council to act and impound such animal, shall be determined as provided below in Section 5.0206. Otherwise, any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an infraction for which the maximum penalty is a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).

5.0206  Impounding

Unrestrained dogs or cats may be taken by the City police officer or any other person authorized by the City Council to act and impounded in an animal shelter or the City pound and there confined in a humane manner. Impounded animals shall be kept for not less than three (3) days unless reclaimed by their owners. If by a permit tag or other means the owner can be identified, the officer shall immediately upon impoundment notify the owner by telephone or mail of  the impoundment of the animal. Animals not claimed by their owners within three (3) days after such notification or within three (3) days after impoundment if no such owner can be identified, the animal may be adopted or humanely destroyed. Animals impounded pursuant to this section, may be claimed by their owners, upon payment of the owner of the following costs and penalties:

l.	For the first violation, within one (1) year, the owner shall pay a fine in the amount of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day kennel fee.

2.	For the second violation, within  one (1) year, the owner shall pay a fine in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day kennel fee.



)	6
 
..·





3.	For the third violation, within one (I) year, the owner shall pay a fine in the amount of Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day kennel fee.

4.	For the fourth violation, within one (I) year, the owner shall pay a fine in the amount of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day kennel fee.

5.	For the fifth violation, within one (I) year, or for any additional violation, within one (I) year, the owner shall be prosecuted for a general violation of this ordinance and shall be  subject to a maximum  fine of Five Hundred  Dollars  ($500.00) per occurrence .

The impounded animal must be currently licensed prior to release to owner or keeper if said animal is to be kept within the city limits.

For the purposes  of this ordinance, one (I) year shall be defined as 365 days prior to a violation, exclusive of the day in which the violation occurs.

5.0207 Rabies Shots

The owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall have such pet given rabies shot by a licensed veterinarian at such times as recommended by the veterinarian.  Such owner or keeper shall present a certificate or statement from such veterinarian showing that all rabies shots required have been given when he makes application for a pet license, and no license shall be issued until such proof of rabies shot is presented .  Said shots must be kept current and proof provided of same.
)
5.0208 Return to Owner if Known

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.0206, if a dog or cat is found at large and its owner can be identified and located, such animal need not be impounded but may, instead, be taken to the owner. In such case the policeman or other officer may proceed against the owner or keeper for violation of this article.

5.0209 Noi y Dog Prohibited

It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor within the City any dog that disturbs the peace by habitually howling, barking, whining, or making other disagreeable noise. Any person wishing to file a complaint shall be required to give his name and address and sign a complaint.

5.0210 Nuisance- When

Any licensed or unlicenced dog running unleashed and at large, or any dog molesting passers by, chasing vehicles or trespassing upon private property is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any dog which shall within the City of Beulah destroy any property, which is not the property of the owner or keeper, or which trespasses upon the property of someone other than the owner or keeper, and by any yelping, barking, or howling disturbs the peace, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.  The owner or keeper of such dog shall be guilty of an infraction.



7
 
5.0211 Dangerou s Anim al s

A.	Definitions.

I .	"Dangerous animal" as the term is used in this section means:
a.	Any animal having a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, bite, cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of or menace human beings or domestic animals; or
b.	Any  animal  which  attacks,  bites,  or injures a human  being  or  another
domestic animal one or more times without provocation; or
c.	Any unmuzzled animal which, when unprovoked, in a malicious, vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places; or any place where such person may lawfully be, public or private; or
d.	Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for purposes of fighting
or attacking or any animal trained for fighting or attacking; or
e.	Any animal which has been  determined  to  be  dangerous  by  the  city commission  or  municipal  court  pursuant  to  any  state  statute  or  the ordinance codified in this section; or
f.	Any animal which has been deemed dangerous  or vicious by any government agency or entity .

2.	Notwithstanding the foregoing, no animal may be found or declared dangerous if any injury or damage is sustained by a person  who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premise occupied by the  owner or  keeper  of the  animal,  or was  teasing,  abusing,  or assaulting the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime.

3.	No animal may be found or declared dangerous if any injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which at the time such injury or damage was sustained was taunting, abusing or assaulting the animal. No animal may be declared dangerous if the animal was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate  vicinity of the animal from an illegal or nonconsensual attack or assault. No animal  may be deemed dangerous if the animal was protecting or defending its young offspring .

B.	Prohibition and Control of Dangerous Animals.

Except as permitted hereinafter it shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor a dangerous animal within the city limits and no person shall own or harbor any animal for the purpose of attacking, fighting, or training, tormenting, badgering, baiting, or use any animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to engage in unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals except as hereinafter provided.

a.	The police department is empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section, and the chief of police or his designated agent is empowered to seize and impound any dangerous animal whose owner or keeper fails to comply with the provisions hereof.


8
 

2.	Upon such attack or assault, the police department is empowered to confiscate and destroy such dangerous animal if the conduct of such dangerous animal or its owner or keeper constitutes a violation of the provisions of this article, punishable by the confiscation and   destruction  of the  animal.   However , notwithstanding  the foregoing, no animal  shall be destroyed within five days of being impounded, exclusive of Sundays and holidays.

3.	If the owner or keeper of an animal impounded for an alleged violation of this section believes that there has not been a violation of this section, the owner or keeper may petition the municipal court that the impounded animal not be destroyed . The impounded animal shall not be destroyed pending resolution of such owner's or keeper's petition, if the petition shall have been filed within five days of impoundment of such animal.

4.	In the event that the police department has a reasonable and articulable suspicion to believe that an animal is dangerous, the chief of police or his designee, shall be empowered to issue a citation in order to appear before the municipal court for the purposes of determining whether or not the animal in question shall be declared dangerous.	The chief of police shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation and shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal that a hearing will be held, at which time he or she may have the opportunity to present evidence why the animal shall not be declared dangerous.

5.	In the event that the police department has probable cause to believe that the animal in question is dangerous and/or may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals, the police department may seize and impound the animal pending the aforesaid hearing . The owner or keeper of the animal shall be liable to the city for the costs and expenses of impounding such animal.

6.	It is unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous animal to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any animal found to be the subject of the violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and the impoundment as hereinbefore provided. In addition, failure to comply shall be an offense punishable with a fine as hereinafter provided.

7.	Inaddition to those persons specified herein, any person may file a petition with the police department to determine, declare, or find an animal dangerous as defined herein.

C.	Exemptions .

The provision of this section shall not apply to K-9 or other dogs owned by any police department or any law enforcement agency or officer which are used in the performance of police work.





9
 
D.	Violations

1.	Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be found guilty of an infraction and fined a sum of not  more  than  Five  Hundred  Dollars  ($500.00) .   In addition  to  the foregoing penalty,  any person who violates this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this article.

2.	. Ifany animal shall previously have been declared dangerous pursuant to any of the provisions above, and after having been ordered removed from city limits; if such animal  shall at any time be brought back into the city limits in violation of court order or the provisions of this section, such animal shall immediately be taken by the police department and humanely destroyed . A separate penalty including a fine shall be assessed as indicated in the paragraph above against the violator.

3.	At any time, if a dangerous animal cannot be taken up and caught by a police officer without exposing such officer to danger of personal injury from such animal, or without exposing other persons to danger of personal injury -from such animal, it shall be lawful for the animal control or police officer to forthwith destroy such animal.

4.	Ifany person is found to be in violation of this section three times, said person may be prevented from owning animals within the city limits for a reasonable amount of time as determined by a municipal judge.

5.0212  Keeping of .Femal e Dogs in Season Prohibited, Exception.

It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any female dog within the City of Beulah when in season unless such female dog is kept upon the premises of the owner, either tethered, kenneled or kept within a building or fence on said premises.

5.0213 Limi tation on Number of Do gs.

No more than two (2) dogs shall be kept at any personal place of residence or dwelling house (apartment, single-family home, mobile home, or other type ofresidence or dwelling house), nor shall any one individual or his immediate family own more than two (2) dogs located within the city limits of the City of Beulah. However, should a female dog deliver puppies, those puppies may be kept, along with the mother and one (1) other dog, in said residence or dwelling house for a period of not more than six (6) months after the birth of the puppies. At the expiration of six (6) months after the birth of any puppies being kept in a residence or dwelling house, the limits as set out herein, on the number of dogs shall be two (2) dogs as otherwise provided herein.

5.0214  Dog and Cat Fece. Declar ed Nuisan ce.

It is hereby declared a nuisance and a violation of this ordinance for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to allow dog or cat feces to be deposited on the private property of another or on public property if such feces is deposited by a dog or cat owned or kept by the person. The owner or keeper


10
 
of said  dog  or  cat  shall  remove  and  sanitarily  dispose  of  such  deposited  dog  and  cat  feces immediately.

5.0215	etting of Dogs at Large Prohibited .

It shall be unlawful for any person to open any door or gate of any private premises for the purpose of setting any dog or dogs at large, or otherwise enticing or enabling any dog to leave any private premises, within which the same may be, for the purpose of setting such dog at large.

5.0216  Breaking ·into Pound - Hindering Officer.

It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break into the city pound or any other enclosure in which the police department has impounded any animal or to attempt to do so, or to take or let out any animal therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from any police officer any animal taken up by him in compliance with this ordinance or in any manner to interfere with or hinder such police officer in the discharge of his duties under this ordinance.

ARTICLE 3 - Rabies Control

5.0301  Quarantine ofBiting Animal.

Any animal which bites or scratches a person shall be immediately reported to the city health officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the city health officer, for a period of ten (10) days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the city health officer or under his direction. At the discretion of the city health officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the city pound, or at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. In the case of stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as the city pound. In the alternative, the animal may be humanely euthanized at the discretion of the animal's owner or at the discretion of the chief of police if the owner of the animal cannot be determined and the animal's brain shall be sent in to the public health lab for rabies testing at the expense of the owner or the City of Beulah if ownership cannot be determined. At the discretion of the city council another agent of the city other than the city health officer, such as the mayor or chief of police, may be appointed to discharge the duties of the city health officer with respect to rabies control.

5.0302 Duty of Owner to Surrender Animal; Redemption.

The owner, upon demand by the city health officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner, in accordance with fees set from time to time by the city council. If said animal is adjudged to be free of rabies, it may be reclaimed by the owner at the end of the quarantine period upon payment of all expenses incurred by the city as a result of such quarantine and upon providing proof of licensure, unless it shall be ordered destroyed pursuant to Section 5.0211 of this chapter.






11
 

5.0303  Disposition of Dead Rabid Animal.

When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while under such observation, the city health officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall notify the property public health officer of the reports of human contacts and diagnosis.

5.0304 De truction, Isolation of Bitten Animal s.

Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed, or if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel, designated by the city health officer, for six (6) months shall be enforced. If the animal has been previously vaccinated, within time limits established by the Public Health Service based on the kind of vaccination used, re-vaccination and restraint (leashing and confinement) for thirty (30) days shall be carried out.

5.0305 Destruction , Removal of Rabid Animal s.

No person shall kill, or caused to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, nor remove such animal from the city limits without written permission from the city health officer.

5.0306 Surrender of Carcass.

)		The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies or which has bitten a person or another animal shall upon demand be surrendered to the city health officer.

5.0307 Rep or t of Bi te Case .

It shall be the duty of every physician, or other medical practitioner, to report to the city health officer, the names and addresses of persons treated for bites, inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.

5.0308  Failure to Obey Health Offi cer.

No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefore by the city health officer.

5.0309  Reporl of Su spe cted Ca ses.

It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the city health officer any animal considered by him to be a rabies suspect.








12
 
ARTICL    4 - Penalty

5.0401  Penalty for Violation of Chapter.

Any person who shall violate any provisions of this ordinance for which a specific penalty is not otherwise provided shall be guilty of an infraction for which the maximum penalty is a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) . The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article shall pay all costs and charges assessed for such impoundment before such animal shall be released to the owner.

Further, the municipal judge of the City of Beulah may, at his sole discretion, order any animal kept within the city limits of the City of Beulah, be removed from the jurisdictional limits of the City of Beulah and may also restrict any person residing within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Beulah from owning an animal for a specified period of time for violating any provision of this ordinance, in addition to any other specific penalty otherwise provided herein.

II	All Ordinances and parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed so far as the conflicting portions thereof are concerned.

ID.		Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said chapter shall not be affected thereby.

N		This Ordinance shall be infull force and effect from and after its final passage and approval, and publication of the title and penalty clause in the official newspaper of the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota.


 


 
ATTEST:
 

a.	SV- d	'
 
LIN  A A. WIEDRICH
City Auditor



First Reading: September 18, 2006

Second Reading: November 6, 2006

Publication Date: November 23, 2006

Effective Date: November 23, 2006



13
 
l'





ORDINANCE NO. 378



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING THE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTERS OF THE REVISED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, OF 1972, AND ALL SUBSEQUENT REVISIONS THERETO, SAID REVISED ORDINANCE RELATING TO ANIMALS AND FOWL.

ARTICLE ] -General Regulations

5.0102  Overworking, mistreating. or abandoning animals

Any person who shall violate this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense for which the maximum penalty shall be a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), thirty (30) day imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment.

5.0104  Unattended Dog or Cat in Motor Vehicle

Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction.

ARTICLE 2 -Dogs and Cats

5.0204  License: When Due and Payable

Ifthe annual license fee is not paid before the first day of February a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) shall be added to the license or renewal fee. In case of failure of any owner or keeper of a dog and/or cat to pay such license fee upon any such animals, such animals shall be surrendered by the owner or keeper thereof for the purpose of being disposed of, as hereinafter provided, upon the demand of the city auditor or any police officer of the city.

Any animal required to be licensed and not wearing upon his collar the license tag herein provided for, found within the city after the 1st day of January in any year, shall be taken by the police officer of the city or any other person authorized by the city council of the City of Beulah to act. It shall be the duty of the police officer or any other person authorized by the city council of the City of Beulah to hold said animal in the city pound for a period of three (3) days. Ifduring such period of three (3) days, the owner shall claim the same, and shall pay the city auditor the license fee and penalty fee, plus the costs 6f taking and caring for the animal while in custody, said animal shall be returned to him . lfnot so redeemed within the three (3) days, the police officer or any other person authorized by the city council of the City of Beulah to so act, shall humanely destroy said animal. Ifthe owner can reasonably be identified, the city official impounding the animal shall immediately notify the owner upon impoundment of the animal. Said notification may be by telephone or mail.

5.0205  Dogs Running Unlea shed and at Large Prohibited

The penalty for a violation of this article in the case of a dog seized by the city police officer or by any other person authorized by the City Council to act and impound such animal, shall be determined as provided below in Section 5.0206. Otherwise, any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an infraction for which the maximum penalty is a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
 
•
'





5.0206  lmpounding

Animals not claimed by their owners within three (3) days after such notification or within three (3) days after impoundment if no such owner can be identified, the animal may be adopted or humanely destroyed . Animal s impounded pursuant to this section may be claimed by their owner , upon payment of the owner of the following costs and penalties:

1.	For the first violation, within one (1) year, the owner shall pay a fine in the amount of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day kennel fee.

2.	For the second violation, within one (1) year, the owner shall pay a fine in the amount of Fifty Dollars ($50.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day kennel fee.

3.	For the third violation, within one (1) year, the owner shall pay a fine in the amount of Seventy-Five Dollars ($75.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day kennel fee.

4.	For the fourth violation, within one (l)year, the owner shall pay a fine in the amount of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00), plus Ten Dollars ($10.00) per day kennel fee.

5.	For the fifth violation, within one (1) year, or for any additional violation, within one (1) year, the owner shall be prosecuted for a general violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to a maximum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per occurrence.

5.0210 Nuisance- When

Any licensed or unlicenced dog running unleashed and at large, or any dog molesting passers by, chasing vehicles or trespassing upon private property is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Any dog which shall within the City of Beulah destroy any property, which is not the property of the owner or keeper, or which trespasses upon the property of someone other than the owner or keeper, and by any yelping, barking, or howling disturbs the peace, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The owner or keeper of such dog shall be guilty of an infraction.

5.0211 Dangerou s Animal s

B.	Violations

1.	Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be found guilty of an infraction and fined a sum of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). In addition to the foregoing penalty, any person who violates this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this article.

2.	If any animal shall previously have been declared dangerous pursuant to any of the provisions above, and after having been ordered removed from city limits; if such animal shall at any time be brought back into the city limits in violation of court order or the provisions of this section, such animal shall immediately be taken by the police department and humanely destroyed. A separate penalty including a fine shall be assessed as indicated in the paragraph above against the violator.

)
 
I·




3.	At any time, if a dangerous animal cannot be taken up and caught by a police officer without exposing such officer to danger of personal injury from such animal, or without exposing other persons to danger of personal injury from such animal, it shall be lawful for the animal control or police officer to forthwith destroy such animal.

4.	If any person is found to be in violation of this section three times, said person may be prevented from owning animals within the city limits for a reasonable amount of time as determined by a municipal judge.

ARTICL E 4 - Penalty

5.0401  Penalty for Violation of Chapter .

Any person who shall violate any provisions of this ordinance for which a specific penalty is not otherwise provided shall be guilty of an infraction for which the maximum penalty is a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article shall pay all costs and charges assessed for such impoundment before such animal shall be released to the owner.

Further, the municipal judge of the City of Beulah may, at his sole discretion, order any animal kept within the city limits of the City of Beulah, be removed from the jurisdictional limits of the City of Beulah and may also restrict any person residing within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Beulah from owning an animal for a specified period of time for violating any provision of this ordinance, in addition to any other specific penalty otherwise provided herein.


)		The title and penalty section of the above Ordinance is published in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota .

 
Dated this 6th day of November, 2006.
 


_,eJ X::.',;, a dY	1 	 LINDA  A.  WIEDlUCH      CITY  AUDITOR CITY   OF  BEULAH
 

ORDINANCE NO.  379

AN ORDINANCE REGULATlNG  THE lJSE OF' OFF-HIGHWAY   V HICLES  WITHIN THE CITY LI MITS OFTHE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA

BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE CITY  COUNCIL  OF Tiil CITY  OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS :

I.	DEFINITIONS.   As used  in  lhis Ordinance,  unless the context otherwise requires:

1.	"Off-Highway Vehicle" m eans any wheeled motorized vehi cle not designed for use on a highway and capable of cross-country travel on land, snow, i ce, marsh) swampland, or other natural terrain. An off-highway vehi cle must be classified into one of the following categories:

a.	Class IOff-Highway Vehicle is a vehicl e that does not qualify as road capable under NDCC Chapters 39-2 I and 39-27, has a seat or a saddle designed to be straddled by the operator, and has handle bars for steering con trol of two wheels.

b.	Class II Off-Highway Vehicle is less that 50 inches in width, travels on three
or more low-pressure tires, has a saddle designed to be straddled by the
)	operator, and has handle bars for steering control.

c.		ClassITI Off-Highway Vehicleweighs less than 8,000 pounds, travels on four or more tires, has a seat and a wheel for steering control, an d is designed for or capabl e of crossMcountry on or over land, water, sand, snow, ice, marsh, swan1pland, or other natural terrain, unl ess registered by the Department of Transportation under NDCC Chapter 39-04.

2.	"Operate" means to ride i.n or on and control the operation of an off-highway vehicle.

3.	"Operator"means an individual who operates or is in actual physica l control of an
off-high way vehicle.

4.	"Owner"mean s a person, other than a licnholder, having the property in or titled to an off-highway vehicle and entitled to its use or possession .

11. OFI•'-Hf GHWAV VEHICLE REGISTRAT ION. Except as provi ded in NDCC Chapter 39- 29, and individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle unless it has been registered under NDCC Chapter 39-29.
 

III.	OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES.

1.	An individual may not operate a off-highway vehicle on the roadway, shoulder, or
inside bank or slope or any road, sln.:el, or highway except as provided  in this
ord immce .

2.	Class I off-highway vehicles arc pc1mittcd to be operated within the cily l imits of the City of Beulah only from the location that said Class I off-highway veh icle is kcpl or stored to the city limits of the City of Beulah, taki ng the shortest route practicable.

3.     Class II off-highway vehicles are permitted to be operated within the city limits of the City of Beulah for commercial purpose s and may also be used for snow remov al as described below. Otherwi se, Class 1l off-highway vehicles may only be operated within the city limits of the City of Beulah from the location that said Class IJ off­ highway vehicle is kept or stored to the city limits of the City of Beulah, taking the shortest  route practicable.

4.	Class III off-highway vehicles may be operated on city streets in the City of Beulah provided that said Class HI off-highway vehicle is operated in full complian ce of NDCC Chapter 39-29 and this Ordinance.

5.	The operator o f an off-h ighway vehi cle may mak e a direct crossing of a street or
highway only if:

a.	The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90° to the direction of the street or highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;

b.	The off-highway vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or mai n traveled way of the road or h ighway;

c.	The  operator  yields  the  right-of-way  to  all  on-coming  traffi c  which constitutes an immediate hazard: and

d.	In crossing a divided street or highway , the crossing is made only at an
intersection of the street or highwny with another public street or highway.

6.	Unless an individual is operating a Class I off-highway vehicle, an individual may n ot operate an off-highway vehicle unl ess it is equipped with at least one head lamp, one tai l lamp, and brakes, all in working order, which confonn to standards prescribed by rule of the director, except when under the direct supervision of an off­ h ighway vehicle instructor teaching a certified off-highway vehicle safety training course, the requ irement for a head lamp and tail lamp may be waived.



2
 

7.	An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle in the following ways which
arc declared to be unsafe and a public nuisance:

a.	At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the surround ing circum stances.

b.	In a careless, reckless, or negligent maru1er so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage to another person or the property of another person.

c.	While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance.

<l. Without a lighted head lamp and tail lamp except when used by an off­ highway vehicle instructor during a certified off-highway vehicle safety training course.

e.	Tn any tree nursery or planting in a maimer that damages growing stock.

Without a manufacturer-installed  or equivalent  muffler  in good  working order and connected to the off-highway vehicle's ex11aust system.

g.	On any private land where the private land is posted proh ibiting trespassing.

h.	Except as provided in NDCC Section 39-29-10, an individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle without having in possession a valid drivers license or permit.

i.	When an off-highway vehicle is operated within the right-of-way of any road, street, or highway, during times or conditions that warrant the use of lights by other motor vehicles, the off-highway vehicle must be operated in the same direction as the direction of other motor vehicles traveling on the side of tJ1c roadway immediately adjacent to the side of the right-of-way traveled by the off-highway veh icle.

J .    An indivi.dual may not operated an off-highway vehicle within the right-of­ way of any street or highway while towing a sled, skid, or other vehicle, unless the object towed is connected to the off-highway vehicle by a hinged swivel and secure hitch.

k.	An individual under the age of 18 years may not operate, ride, or otherwise be propelled on an off-highway vehicle unless the person wears a safoty helmet meeting the United States Depru1ment of Transportation Standards.



)
3
 

I.	An operato r of an off-h ighway veh icle may not carry a passenger whi l e operating the vehicle unless the off-highway vehicl e is equipped and recommended by the manufac turer to carry a passeng er and the passenger is carried as recommended  by the rnanufactura.

m.	J\. person who is performing pest control or sw·vcy work for n political subdivision may operate an all-tenain veh icle on the bottom, back-slope , inside sl ope, and shoulder of a street or highwa y other than a controlled­ access highway.

n.	When using Class II and Class III off-highway vehicles for snow removal ,the off-highway vehicle must have a mounted blade on the off-highway vehicle. The off-highway vehicle may go from job site to job site on city streets provided that the operator obeys all other sections of this Ordinance and slate J aw.

JV. OPERATION BY PERSONS UNOER THE AGE OF 16. Except as otherwise provided herein,an individual under 16 years of age who is not in possession of a val id operator's li cense or permit to operate an off-highway vehicle may not, except upon the lands of the individual's parent or guardian or as a pruticipant in an organized sporting event that in volves the use of off-highway vehicles, operate ru1 off-highway vehicle. An individ ual at least 12years ofage may operate an off­ highway vcru cle if the ind ivid ual has completed  an off-highway vehicle safety trninin g course
prescribed  by NDCC Chapter 39-29 and has received the appropriate off-highway vehicle safety
)	ce1tificate issued by the Director of the Department of Transportation .

V.	EQUIPMENT . .To operate an off-highway vehicle on a paved road or highway or gravel, dirl, or loose surface roadway, the off-highway vehicle must be equipped witJ1 a mirror in compliance with NDCC Section 39-27-09, a horn in compliance with NDCC Section 39-27-15, a speedometer and odometer in compliance with NDCC Section 39-27- 16, a break light. a lighted head lamp in compliance with NDCC Section 39-27-17.1, and a motor of at least 350 cubic centimeters.

VI.	PENALTIES. Violation of subsection b, c, or g of section 7 of paragraph III above is a Class B misdemeanor. Violation of any other provision of said section 7 of paragraph III above of this Ordinance is an infraction for which a fee of not less than Twenty Dollars ($20.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) must be ac;sessed. Violation of paragraph l1 of this Ordinance is an infraction,which for a foe of not less that Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) must be assessed. If the individua l provides proof of registration since the viola tion, the fee may be reduced by one-half. Violation of any other provis ion of this Ordinance is an infraction, for which a fee of not Jess than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than five Hund red DoJJars ($500.00) must be assessed.

VII.	SEVERABILITY. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith, are hereby rescinded and repealed.

)	4
 

VIII.	EFFECTfVE DATE. The above rcrerenced  Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage and approval  and upon publication  of' its ti tle and penalty clause.

TX. SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any provision of this Ordinance or its application to person or circumstance is held inval id, U1e remainder of the Ordinance or the application ofthc provision to other persons  or circumstances   is not  affected.

DATED this 21st day of January , 2008.


 












LINDA A WIEDRJCH
City Auditor




Introduction and First Reading:

Second Reading: final Passage: Publication: Effoctive Date:














)
 
CITY OF BEULAH

 












January 7, 2008

.January 21, 2008

January 21, 2008 January a4' 2008 January 31, 2008















5
 

ORDINANCE NO. 379



AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE USE OF OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES \VITIDN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OFBEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA



YI. PENALTIES. Violation of subsection b, c, or g of section 7 of paragraph I1I above is a Class B misdemeanor. Violation of any other provision of said section 7 of paragraph III above of this Ordinance is an infraction for which a fee of not less than Twenty Dollars ($20.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) must be assessed. Violation of paragraph II of this Ordinance is an infraction , which for a fee of not less that Fifty Dollars ($50.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) must be assessed. Ifthe individual provides proof of registration since the violation. the fee may be reduced by one-half. Violation of any other provision of this Ordinance is an infraction, for which a fee ofnotless than Ten Dollars ($10.00) nor more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) must be assessed.

The title and penalty section of the above Ordinance ispublished inaccordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.
 

Dated tl1is 21• day of January, 2008.
 
.	Vlf'f0:yIf
 
)
_Is l
LINDA
 
&l;'1ac:Jt ;; /
A. WIEDRICH, CITY AUDITOR
 
ClTY OF BEULAH
























_)
 
1 1   I '




ORDINANCE NO. 381

AN   ORDINANCE   REGULATING	PARKING   ON    PUBLIC    STREETS ,    ALLEYS ,	AND HIGHWAYS  IN  THE  CITY  OF BEULAH,  MERCER  COUNTY,  NORTH  DAKOTA

BE   IT  ORDAINED   BY   THE   CITY   COUNCIL   OF   THE   CITY   OF   BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY,  NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS:
1.	That Ordinances No. 173 and No . 256 regarding forty- eight (48) hour parking are hereby repealed.
2.	That subject to paragraph 3 below , it shall be unlawful for any person to par k or leave standing on any public street , alley, highway, or right-of-way for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours, any vehicle, boat, snowmobile, bumper pull travel trailer , fifth wheel trailer, pull type camper, pickup camper, or motorhome ,
whether operable or inoperable, or trailer left parked
)
or standing on any public street, alley, highway or right-of-way for a consecutive period longer than forty- eight (48) hours . This forty-eight (48) hour parking restriction shall not include or apply to any area where a shorter time is provided for parking, nor shall this section be construed to permit parking for a longer time than is provided in such areas .
3.	It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any boat , bumper pull travel trailer , fifth wheel trailer, pull type camper , pickup camper , motorhome , or trailer on any public street , alley , highway , or right-of-way in the City of Beulah , from
 
I '


,'-'1


October 1st  through April 15th  of each year.

4.	It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public street , alley, highway, or right­ of-way in the City of Beulah any semi or full trailer unless attached to the tractor or tractor chassis used to pull it, be parked or left standing on any public street, alley , highway, or right-of-way in the City of Beulah except for   emergency or temporary stopping ,
parking or unloading , and then only for such period of time necessary to accomplish the task at hand . It should also be noted that Beulah City Ordinance No. 362 regulates the parking of heavy vehicles within the City
Limits of the City of Beulah and that nothing in this

)	Ordinance shall in any other manner affect said City
Ordinance No . 362.

5.		Every vehicle , boat, snowmobile, bumper travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, pull type camper, pickup camper, motorhome or trailer stopped or parked upon any public street, alley , highway, or right-of-way in the City of Beulah must be stopped or parked paralle l to the curb or edge of the roadway,	in the direction	of authorized traffic movement and in a manner so as not to obstruct other vehicles entering or exiting driveways and in such a manner as not present a site obstruction for people backing out of their driveways or for people entering

2
 
"



intersections.

6.	Vehicle shall be defined to include every devise in, upon,	or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a public road, alley , highway, or right-of-way , except devises moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationery rails or tracks.
7.	It is the policy of the Beulah City Police Department

that the Beulah City Police Department, it's officers

 
and	agents	shall	not referenced forty-eight
 
actively	enforce	the	above

(48)	hour parking provision as
 
specified in paragraph 2 above.	However, any and all

complaints	received	by	the	City	of	Beulah	Police

Department alleging a forty-eight  (48) hour parking

)	violation will be investigated, and if determined after
such investigation that a violation in this regard has occurred, a citation will be issued to the person violating this Ordinance.
8.	In any prosecution charging a violation of paragraphs 2,

3, 4, or 5 above, proof that the particular vehicle, boat , snowmobile , bumper pull travel trailer , fifth wheel trailer, pull type camper , pickup camper, motorhome or trailer described in the complaint was not moved a distance of at least 200 feet from its original position, shall be considered proof that the vehicle was not moved at all for the purposes of this Ordinance.

3

)
 
'  .
,,.
...

9.	It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a police officer, to alter , remove , or in any way interfere with the chalk or other marking placed on a vehic le, boat , snowmobile , bumper pull travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer , pull type camper, pickup camper , motorhome or trailer	by police officers in enforcing parking ordinances.
10.	Any above mentioned vehicles or trailers which shall

remain in violation of paragraphs 2, 3, 4 or 5 above for more than forty-eight (48) hours after a citation , charging a violation of said Ordinance , shall have been placed on such vehicle or trailer, may be removed to the
City Hall or other place within the City of Beulah

)	designated	for the purpose , and may be impounded and
retained until the expense of removal, storage, and impounding is paid , together with the amount of any fine, cost, or other claims of the City of Beulah against the owner, or any other person lawfully entitled to the possession thereof .
11.	Penalty for violating paragraphs 2, 3, 4 or 5 above of

this Ordinance shall be a fine in the amount of Twenty Dollars ($20.00). Penalty for violating paragraph 9 of this Ordinance shall be a fine in an amount not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) .



4
 
I • ..	' .



12.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded and repealed .
13.	This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its	final passage and publication of its title and penalty provision .
14.	If any provision of this ordinance or its application to any	person or circumstance  is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance or the application of the provision	to other persons or circumstances is not affected .


DATED this 2nd  day of June, 2008.



)



ATTEST:




LINDAX:  WIEDRICH
City Auditor


Introduction and First Reading:	May 19, 2008 Second Reading and Final Passage : June 2, 2008 Publication Date : June 12, 2008
Effective Date: June 12, 2008





5
 
ORDINANCE NO. 401

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE

354, REGULATING THE USE OF FIREWORKS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY

OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DA' KOTA.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, TB.AT BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE No. 354 BE AND IS HEREBY AMENDED AND RE-ENACTED TO READ AS FOLLOWS:
1.	FIREWORKS DEFINED. The term 'fireworks' shall mean and include any combustible
or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagrafion, or.de.tonation, a' nd·shall include blank ca.rtridges, toy pistols. , toy

)		cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives other than toy paper caps are used, the type  of  balloons  which  require  fire underneath  to  propel  the  saine,  firecrackers,

.	\
torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, -sparklers, or other fireworks of like

construction, any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as applying to toy paper  caps containing not more than twenty-five
 

...•	·-	. -···	··--·	l	••  -	-	·-	.  -	...•	.	·-·-···-· ...   ·-·- ·· ·- •• ····-  .... . ·._
2.	SALE AND USE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED, EXCEPTIONS.

a.	No  person  in  the  City  shall  offer  or  exhibit  for  sale  or  use  or  explode  any fireworks without the permission of the city governing body.
b.	The prohibition  of this section shall not apply to the use by and sale to persons twelve years of age or- more, from and including June 27th through and including


1
 
- ··"..	.•:.




\	-	July 5th each year.   Such sale ·shall be limited to those ·items permitted for retail
		
sale by  § 23-15-01  of the North  Dakota ·Century  Code, except that the use or
		
explosion of fireworks commonly known as bottle rockets is.prohibited.
	
c.	
The explosion of.fireworks permitted by this ordinance shall be prohibited except
		
on those days and between those hours listed below:

1.	For the year 2013 the explosion of fireworks is permitted on July 2nd and iuly 5th between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and July 3rd and 4t1i between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight;
n.   For the year 2014 the explosion of fireworks is permitted July 2nd and 5th

'between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and on July 3rd  ano 4th

between the hours of.9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight;

)	m.  For the year 2015 the explosion of fireworks -is permitted July 2nd and 5th between the hours of 9:00 .A.M  and 11:00 P.M., and on July 3rd and 4th

. between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight;  · · ···	··

1v. For the year 2016 the explosion of fireworks is permitted July 1st and 2nd between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and on July 3rd and July 4th between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight;
'.	v.  For the year 2017 the explosion of fireworks is permitted on July 1st and
 
··--·-..---........·-·-·--··-·-·····----·---... ·-..··--· ·-··----····-··-----·_""""·----·	.. 	
 
-··-··. ···-···----·----·---'-·-·---·-- --·- -------"- ---------- ..
 
,,    _          .....   ----··- -·--- ..-...--··--·---
 
_..    ·.. · ..--·- .... ·- nd  -	·· -···	- -· ·--··· _.. ··	·	-·	·	··-·	-  ··· ··-  - ...  ·	rd-·	· th--· .......  ·
2	between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and July 3	and 4 ·


between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:.00 Midnight;

vi. For the year 2018 the  explosion of fireworks  is permitted  on July  1st and 2nd between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and on July 3rd and 4th between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and  12:00 Midnight;


2
 

 




)	vii.   For the year 2019 the explosion  of frreworks  is permitted  on July 2nd  and 5th between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and on July 3rd and 4th

between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight;

v11i. For.the year 2020 the explosion of fireworks is permitted on July 2nd and 5th between the hours of9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and on July 3rd and 4th between the hours of9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight;
ix.	For the year 2021 the explosion of frreworks is permitted on July 1st and 2nd between the hours of9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and on July 3rd and 4th between the hours of9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight; and
x.	For the year 2022 the explosion of frreworks is permitted on July 1s't and  .

2nd between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., and on July 3rd and 4th


)	between the hours of 9:00 A.M. and 12:00 Midnight.

Following the year 2022, the City Council for the City of Beulah shall reconsider this Ordinance with respect to the dates and times that the explosion of frreworks may be permitted.
d.   Only persons, firms, or corporations having operated a retail business within the City of Beulah, wherein merchandise was assessed by the local taxing authority,
 
in. § 23-15-04 of the North Dakota Century Code, m'ay offer for sale or sell at retail within the city limits of the City of Beulah , to persons as provided herein.

3.	CITY  LICENSING  PROCEDURE.  Any  person  engaging  in the  sale  of  fireworks,

pursuant to this .ordinance, and located within the jurisdiction  of the ordinances of the

·	City of Beulah, shall first obtain a permit from the City of Beulah, which said. permit




3
 
....,_",




shall allow the sale of fireworks during the year of issue, and as specified in this . ordinance . .Said permit shall be issued for a fee of$ 10.00, and shall be obtained from the City Auditor of the City.
4.  PENALTY SECTION.  Violation of this Ordinance will be considered an infraction, for which a maximum penalty of a fme of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) may be imposed.
5. .ORDINANCES  IN  CONFLICT.	All  ordinances  or  parts  of  ordinances  in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
6. EFFECTIVE DATE.  This ordinance shall be ·in full force immediately upon its final passage and publication of its title and penalty clause.
DATED this ih day of January, 2013.




)


 
ATTEST:···
 



aJ;Jy ;,µ
 
WIEDRICH, City Auditor



Introduction and Fir t Reading: July 16, 2012
.	.
. ··----·-----· _    ---·--_§)  <?.  -	-ad!!1g:}   -.7J.JQ_!l_		_         ,..	··-·-- ··----·-··· _  ...   -· -·-··-·· .. ·----·-·-··..- ... _  ... ·-....·-·---··-··---·

 

Publication Date:   January   17 •  2013












4
 
I ...




ORDINANCE NO. 402

AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE REGULATION AND LICENSING OF EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS:

Section 1. Permit Required for Remote Alarm.
A.	Alarm systems installed in commercial 'buildings and residential property may be connected to the City Police Department with the approval of the Chief of Police. Any and all alarm systems connected to the City Police Department must have an approved remote alarm permit as provided for herein.
B.	The  installation ,  operation,  and  maintenance   thereof   shall  be   at  the
expense of the property owner.
C.	The application for a remote alarm permit shall be on forms provided by the Chief of Police, which shall require the applicant for the permit to provide the following information:
1)	The name and mailing address of the permittee;
2) The street address of the premises being served by the remote alarm;
)	3)  The home and business telephone number for the permittee and other persons who can act on behalf of the permittee to assist the
police in responding to alarms originating from the permittee' s
remote alarm;
4)	The name and model of the remote alarm for which the permit is sought, the name and business address of the person who will be installing the alarm and the name and address of the person and/or business maintaining the alarm, if different from the installer; and
5)	Such other information as the Chief of Police might reasonably require to further the purposes of ·this section, including, specifically, information which would permit the Chief of Police to determine whether it is likely that the permittee will be able to conform to the requirements imposes pursuant to subsection D below.
D.	The Chief of Police may grant a permit conditionally, that is, subject to requirements which must be met by the permittee in order for the permit to remain valid. Among the requirements which may be imposed are the following:
1)	Specifications as to the design and manufacture of the alarm, either
generically or by way of approved brand name;
2)	Specifications as to the testing and mechanical maintenance of alarms  subsequent  to  their  installation,  such  as,  for  example,
 
requirements that certain prescribed preventive maintenance be performed at certain prescribed intervals;
3)	Requirements that the applicant's employees be given appropriate
training and instruction to the operation of the alarm so as to lessen the incidence of false alarms attributable to human error as opposed to mechanical malfunction;
4)	Requirements that the permittee or some other person authorized to act on his behalf be available customarily and promptly to assist the police in responding to alarms, such as, for example, in order that the police may speedily gain access to locked premises without being required to accomplish a forcible entry thereof; and
5)	Such   other   reasonable	requirements	as   may	be	useful   in accomplishing the purposes of this division.
E.	Applications for connection to the Police Department shall provide for waiver and release of municipal liability by reason of said connection.
F.	A permit once granted shall be in effect from the date approved through
December  31st of the year  in which the permit  is granted; provided,
however, that the permit may be revoked by the Chief of Police if:
1)	The  alarm  is permanently  disconnected  or  abandoned , or  title
thereto is transferred;
2)	The permittee  does not meet the requirements  imposed ·by the
Chief of Police pursuant to subsedion D above;
3)	The permittee  fails to make timely payment  of permit  charges
imposed by subsection G below; or
4)	The alarm is a source of an excessive number of false alarms.
G.	There shall be imposed an initial fee of $25.00 for the issuance of a remote alarm permit.
H.	All alarm users shall annually renew their permit on the renewal form provided for by the Chief of Police and which form is approved by the Chief of Police by filing for the same by January 1 of each year. The fee for such renewal shall be $10.00.

Section 2. False Alarms.
A.	Purpose. Through carelessness , improper maintenance or other causes, large numbers of false alarms are received by the Police Department from emergency alarm systems. Each false alarm requires response by public safety personnel and in some instances, fire equipment and/or ambulance; this involves unnecessary expense to the City, increases the risk of injury to personnel or damage to property and dilutes the public safety protection to the overall City.
B.	The term "false alarm" as used in this subsection shall mean a signal from an alarm system resulting in a response by the Police Department or Fire Department when an emergency situation does not exist.
C.	Any false alarm resulting in a response by the Police Department or Fire
Department  shall subject the individual holding the permit to a fee in
 
accordance with the following schedule for the privilege of retaining the permit, unless the permit is being terminated pursuant to Section 1-F(4).
1)	For the first through the second false alarm during a period of one
(1)	year, no charge shall be imposed.
2)	For the third through the fifth false alarm during a period of one
(1)	year, there shall be imposed a charge of $25.00 per false alarm.
3)	For the sixth through the ninth false alarm during a period of one
(1)	Year there shall be imposed a charge of $50.00 per false alarm;
4)	For ten (10) or more false alarms during a period of (1) year there shall be imposed a charge of$100.00 per false alarm.
D.	The Chief of Police may waive the occurrence of a false alarm if it is
demonstrated to his satisfaction that the reason for the false alarm was mechanical in nature, and not operator  error;  however, no  such waiver may be given without written proof, such as an invoice for repair services and proof of payment , that the mechanical malfunction has been corrected.
E.	Any alarm system connected to the Police Department which actuates in excess of twelve (12) false alarms within any one calendar year may be disconnected from the Police Department by order of the Chief of Police upon thirty (30) days prior written notice. Newly installed alarm systems shall not be subject to this provision for the first sixty (60) days after
connection to the Police Department.

Section 3. Penalty for Activation without a Valid Permit.
)	No person shall, without a valid alarm permit, have an alarm that summons by activation, emergency personnel. The owner of an alarm that does not have a valid remote alarm permit will be responsible for a $50.00 fee and shall be
required to obtain a valid remote alarm permit as provided for herein.

Section 4. Appeals .
Any order of disconnection or order of revocation of permit issued by the Chief of Police as provided by this Ordinance may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Auditor. Said appeal  shall be filed within ten (10) days of the date of the order. Said appeal shall be heard by the City Council within thirty (30) days of the date of filing the appeal. The City Council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the Chief of Police. An appeal timely filed suspends an order of disconnection or order of revocation or permit until the City Council renders its decision. The City Auditor shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant. Such notice shall be given by registered or certified mail or personal delivery not less than seven (7) days before the hearing.

Section 5. Alarm Testing Notice.
An owner or lessee of an alarm system shall notify the owner's or lessee's central receiving station or answering service and the Police Department and Fire Department prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alteration, or installation of the owner's or lessee's alarm system which might
 
activate a false alarm and result in a Police or Fire Department response. Any alarm system activated when such prior notice has been given shall not constitute a false alarm.

Section 6. Exemptions.
Property  owned or leased by the City of Beulah, Beulah  School District , and
Beulah Park District shall not be subject to the fees as provided by this Ordinance.

Section 7.  Penalty Section.
Violation of this Ordinance  will be considered  an infraction, for which a maximum penalty of a fine in the amount of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) may be imposed.

Section 8. Savings Clause.
If any section, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent juri sdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.

Section 9. Severability.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded
and repealed.

Section 10. Date of Taking Effect.
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage
and publication of its title and penalty provision.

DATED this ;:J.1e;1,	 
ATTEST:

,ka.c:x/	,1
Llil<lA'.Wiedrich, City Auditor

Introduction and First Reading: October 1, 2012

Second Reading:  November  5, 2012

Final Passage: November 5, 2012

Publication Date: November 29, 2012
Effective Date:  November 29, 2012
 
. '




ORDINANCE NO.402



AN ORDINANCE RELATING TO THE REGULATION AND LICENSING  OF EMERGENCY ALARM SYSTEMS WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA

Section 7. Penalty Section.
Violation of this Ordinance will be considered an infraction, for which a maximum penalty of a fine in the amount of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) may be imposed.


The title and penalty section of the above Ordinance is published in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.

Dated this 5th day of November,  2012.



/s/	_	__ LINDA A. WIEDRICH, CITY AUDITOR CITY OF BEULAH

)
 
ORDINANCE NO. 403

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER X, ARTICLE 3 REGULATING GARBAGE DISPOSAL FOll THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

I.		Chapter X, Article 3 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota of 1972, and all subsequent amendments thereto are hereby amended and repealed as follows:

10--301  Declaration of Findings and Purpose

The maintenance of the public health and sanitation requires, and it is the intention hereof to make the collection, removal, and disposal of garbage and rubbish within the City of Beulah compulsory and universal and to fix charges therefore commensurate with the cost of collecting and disposing of the same. All materials collected under the provisions of this ordinance, shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of under the terms of this ordinance.

10-302	Exclusive Right to Serve
)
The City of Beulah is designated as the only entity authorized to collect, remove, and dispose of garbage and rubbish as defined in this ordinance within the City of Beulah. This does not prohibit the generator of garbage, rubbish, and/or  unacceptable  waste within the City of Beulah to collect, remove, and dispose of said garbage, rubbish, and unacceptable waste within the requirements of this ordinance. The City of Beulah will not collect, remove, and dispose of any unacceptable waste as defined in this  ordinance within the City of Beulah.

10-303	Waste Regulations and Air Pollution Control Regulations, Incorporated

There is hereby incorporated by reference herein, and made a part hereof, all solid waste management regulations and air pollution control regulations of the North Dakota State Department of Health, as the same now exist, or as they may be hereinafter enacted and amended, and a violation of such regulations shall constitute a violation of this ordinance. Additionally, all definitions contained in such regulations shall have the same meaning in this ordinance.

10-304	Definitions


(1)	Account, as the term is used in this ordinance, shall mean an entity that is receiving water and/or wastewater, and garbage service from the City of Beulah simultaneously at one location.
 
(2)	Garbage, as the term is used in this ordinance, shall include every accumulation of animal, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetable waste incidental to or resulting from the sale, storage, use, preparation, cooking, and/or consumption of food and food products; all accumulations of putrescible household or commercial waste matter; packages and containers used in the storage, preparation, consumption, and serving of food; any other matter of any nature whatsoever which is subject to decay, putrefaction, or the generation of noxious or offensive  gases or odors, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding materials for rodents, flies, or other germ-carrying animals  and insects.  Excluded from this definition is unacceptable waste as defined in this ordinance.

(3)	Rubbish, as the term is used in this ordinance, shall include tin cans, bottles, glass, rags, clothing, paper containers, rubber, cardboard, boxes, barrels, crates, sweepings, and similar accumulations. However, the term shall not include any garbage or combination of garbage and rubbish.

(4)	Unacceptable waste, as the term is used in this ordinance shall mean, but not necessarily be limited to, construction materials, construction debris, ashes, metal wastes, leaves,  grass,  trees  & tree  trimmings.	Hazardous, explosive and highly inflammable materials are absolutely prohibited from being placed in mobile containers for collection.

(5)	Mobile Container, as the term is used in this ordinance, shall mean a garbage or refuse container capable of being rolled up to equipment which will empty the containers. Such container will remain at the site of the account. Container size will vary with thC( type and amount of garbage and/or rubbish generated by each account.

(6)	Open burning, as the term is used in this ordinance, shall mean the burning of any matter in such a manner that the products of combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through an adequate stack, duct, or chimney.


10-305	Collection of Garbage

The City of Beulah shall collect all garbage and rubbish within the City of Beulah from an account as often as is necessary to maintain and preserve the health of the community, except that this ordinance shall not require the collection of such material where the streets make it impossible to do so, nor in case of non-payment of garbage collection fees provided for herein. Materials collected under this ordinance shall be bagged and placed in appropriate mobile containers as determined by the City Council.

10-306	Size and Type of Containers for Garbage Collection

The City Council shall have authority to determine for each account the type of mobile container required, the number of containers required, and the collection frequency for the containers. To maintain the sanitary conditions required for the amount of garbage and/or refuse  generated by any account, the City Council shall also have authority to revise the type, number,  and collection frequency of mobile containers for any account
 
and require the account to utilize the same. City issued small mobile containers of up to 96 gallon capacity will be provided by the City and maintained by the City. Larger mobile containers 3 cubic/yard capacity will be provided and maintained by any account required to utilize the same.

10-307	Location of Mobile Containers

Accounts using City issued small mobile containers of up to 96 gallon capacity shall be placed on the street in front of such premises on their prescribed garbage collection days. After collection, the mobile containers shall be moved off the street.  Accounts  using larger mobile containers of 3 cubic/yard capacity shall be placed in a location acceptable to the City of Beulah.

10-308	Right to Generate Additional Policies and Procedures

The City of Beulah has the authority to prepare and publish additional policies and procedures as are necessary in connection with the administration of this ordinance as long as such regulations are not in conflict with this ordinance.

10-309	Hauling of Garbage

Garbage or refuse hauled on the streets of the City of Beulah, will be contained in receptacles with tightly  fitted covers or hauled in wagons, trucks, trailers,  or other
)	vehicles which are covered in such manner as to prevent the scattering of such garbage
and refuse upon the streets.

10-310	Throwing in Streets, Etc., Prohibited

No person shall place any solid waste, garbage, or rubbish in any street, alley or other place, or upon any private property whether owned by such person or not, within the City, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. Any accumulation of any of_ the aforementioned materials on any premises except as otherwise provided by this ordinance is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.

No person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere within the City, any solid waste, garbage, or rubbish in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon a street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway or any other public place, or into any occupied premises or private lot within the City.

10-311	City May Refuse Collection

City employees and agents may refuse to collect garbage or rubbish if these are not placed in mobile containers which conform to the conditions and requirements of this ordinance.
 
10-312	Garbage Collection Services Outside City Limits

Requests for sanitation collection services outside of the city limits of the City of Beulah may be negotiated and accepted on a case by case basis at the sole discretion of the City.

10-313	Charges for Garbage Collection

The City of Beulah hereby reserves the right to make changes to the monthly garbage disposal charges by formal written resolution of the City Council of the City of Beulah. Said monthly charges for garbage collection and all subsequent amendments thereto shall become effective when notice thereof has been given by publication in the official newspaper of the City.

10-314	Surcharge

All garbage accounts will be assessed a monthly surcharge to provide for equipment replacement. Said monthly surcharge rate shall be established by formal written resolution as approved by the Beulah City Council. Said monthly surcharge rate and any and all subsequent amendments thereto shall become effective when notice thereof has been given by publication in the official newspaper of the City.

10-315	City Auditor to Add Garbage Charges

)		The Water and Wastewater Department of the City of Beulah, North Dakota, is hereby authorized to add the garbage disposal charges provided for herein to its charge for water and wastewater services and submit the same on a bill in connection with said water and wastewater service bills. The Water and Wastewater Department shall be authorized to discontinue services of all services provided by the Water and Wastewater Department if the entire bill shall not be paid, including the bill for garbage collection. Said sums shall become delinquent upon the same dates of the water and wastewater bill upon which the same is charged. If said service charge is not paid when due, the water service of said premises may be shut off in the same manner as provided for in the water ordinances of the City of Beulah, North Dakota.

10-316	Non-Payment of Service Charge

Ifthe service charge so established is not paid when due, said sum may be recovered by the City of Beulah in an action at law against the owner or occupants or both of the property, or the City of Beulah may assess the charges against the property in the same manner as other county and municipal taxes are assessed, certified, collected and returned. Penalties provided for under this section shall be in addition to those provided for in other sections of this article.

Upon the non-payment of said service charge, the City of Beulah may also discontinue the water and garbage service of said premises. The City of Beulah reserves the right to use all remedies allowed by state law to pursue the non-payment of said service charge.
 


10-317	Vacation Rates

Residents may apply for vacation garbage collection rates for periods of two (2) months, minimum, to six (6) months, maximum. The resident must notify the City Auditor for the City of Beulah two (2) weeks in advance with a date to stop service and a date to reinstitute service. Residents applying to the City for vacation garbage collection rates must also apply with the City for vacation water and sewer rates, and the requested vacation garbage collection rate period must run concurrent with the requested vacation water and sewer rates period.

Vacation garbage collection rates shall hereafter be established by formal written resolution as approved by the Beulah City Council. Said vacation rates and any and all subsequent amendments thereto shall become effective when notice thereof has been given by publication in the official newspaper of the City.

10-318	Garbage Collection Account Required

Any water and/or waste water services account shall also be required to have an account for garbage collection  services whether the account holder uses the garbage collection services or not. Non-use of garbage collection services shall not exempt the account from payment of charges hereinbefore set forth.

)	10-319  Initial Bill for Services

The initial bill for services rendered hereunder shall be sent to the occupant of the account, but in the event of non-payment, the City shall have the right to assess such charges against the account served as noted above. If the account of the premises served wishes to be billed directly, this may be provided for by agreement with the City Auditor.

10-320	Open Burning Prohibited

No person shall dispose of refuse and other combustible material by open burning or cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning of refuse or other combustible material, and no person shall conduct or cause or permit the conduct of a salvage operation by burning.

10-321	Intent of Governing Body

It is the intention of the City Council of the City of Beulah that the separate provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the City Council  that if any provisions of this ordinance be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall be valid and enforceable.
 
.. .	·,,




10-322 Penalty Section

Any violation of this ordinance will be considered an infraction, for which a maximum penalty of a fme of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) may be imposed and a separate infraction may be deemed committed for each day that a violation occurs.

IL	SEVERABILITY

All ordinances  or parts  of ordinances  in conflict herewith  are hereby rescinded and repealed.

III.	EFFECTIVE DATE

1bis ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage and upon the publication of its title and penalty provisions.


I(
Darrell R. Bjerke, Mayor





HeafherFerebee, City Auditor First Reading:	March 18, 2013
Second Reading:  August 19, 2013

Final Passage:   August 19, 2013

Publication Date:  September 5, 2013
 
•!(    •	•  · .,





ORDINANCE NO. 403



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CHAPTER X, ARTICLE 3 REGULATING GARBAGE DISPOSAL FOR THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

I 0-322 Penalty Section

Any violation of this ordinance will be considered an infraction, for which a maximum penalty of a fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) may be imposed and a separate infraction may be deemed committed for each day that a violation occurs.

The title and penalty section of the above Ordinance is published in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.

Dated this 19th day of August, 2013.

 
 
RESOLUTION NO. 2016-12
CITY OF BEULAH, NORTH DAKOTA

RESOLUTION ADJUSTING RATES FOR THE COLLECTION OF GARBAGE AS PROVIDED BY THE CITY OF BEULAH, NORTH DAKOTA


WHEREAS, the City of Beulah has an established enterprise for garbage collection provided to the residents and businesses in the City of Beulah.

WHEREAS , the City Council of the City of Beulah has reviewed the revenues and expenditures of the garbage collection enterprise and determined a rate increase is necessary to balance the aforementioned revenues and expenditures.

NOW, THEREFORE , BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of Beulah, North Dakota that the following monthly rates become effective on the 1st day of January, 2017. This Resolution shall be published in the City of Beulah's official newspaper, pursuant to Ordinance #403, Article 10-313, Article 10-314 and Article 10-317.



 
Sanitation  Reserve Account  (All accounts)
Outside City Limits Surcharge
Tipping Cart - Small mobile container of 96 gallon capacity or less
)	Each Additional Tipping Cart
Vacation Rate
 
$3.00
25%
$19.00
$19.00
$6.00
 


Commercial Rates - Large Mobile Containers: 3 cubic yard capacity
	
Dumpster pickup	$35.00
Additional dumpster	$30.00


PICKUPS PER WEEK
	1	2	3





Container
Count Per Account	
 
)	The above Resolution was introduced by Councilman Schulz and seconded by
Councilman Frey and was declared adopted upon the following vote:

AYES:	Keller, Frey, Kelsch, Morgan, Schulz, Lenzen , Hoffer, Timmer NAYS:		None
Absent:	None

 
Dated thi s 3rd day of October, 2016.
 


GCJwv.,J 2-	,'.%f,JL,
DARRELL R. BJERKE yor
 

ATTEST :
{ffeµt.1u4 1A-<
FEREB
City Auditor



Date Resolution Passed:	October 3, 2016
)

Date Resolution Published:	November 10, 2016


Effective Date:	January 1, 2017
 
ORDINANCE NO. 405



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE NO. 301 PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION OF THE SURFACING OF DRIVEWAYS, OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS AND BOULEVARDS WITIDN THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

THAT BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE NO. 301 BE AMENDED AND RE-ENACTED
TO READ AS FOLLOWS:

1.	DRIVEWAY AND OFF-STREET PARKING INSTALLATION.   Any person installing
or maintaining a driveway or off-street vehicle parking area, whether or not on private property, the surfacing placed shall be concrete, asphalt, recycled concrete, recycled asphalt, or aggregate. Any surface must be placed to properly drain, and any granular surface shall not be placed at grades exceeding 3%. The quality and quantity of any granular surface shall meet the requirements shown later in this section, and shall be compacted to form a tightly-bound, dust-free surface. Except inareas zoned Residential 6 (R6) or Agricultural (A), the use of scoria as a sub-base or surface material for roads, driveways, parking pads, parking lots, or for any other use shall be strictly prohibited
)	within the city limits of the City of Beulah.  Any roads, driveways, parking pads, parking lots  or  any  other  areas  located  in  areas  zoned  other  than  Residential  6  (R6)  or
Agricultural (A) which currently have scoria as a surface material may not be replenished with scoria following the passage of this Ordinance.
Granular Surfacing Requirements: Sieve Size
 %Passing	Recycled  Concrete		Recycled As.Qhalt	Aggregate
1 Yi"
1 W'	100	
100	
100
1"
o/.s"
318"	95-100

20-55	95-100

30-80	
70-90
No.4			38-75
No.8			22-62
No. 30			12-45
No.200			7-15
Plasticity Index	NIA	NIA	4 to 12
Thickness (Min.)	3"	4"	2"




1
 
2.		BOULEVARD IMPROVEMENT. All persons shall be responsible for maintaining the boulevard area adjacent to their private property. The boulevard area is that area between the curb of the street and the owner's property line. Acceptable surfaces for boulevard areas shall be grass of the type commonly used in North Dakota yards, concrete, gravel,
or landscaping stones. Trees and shrubs may also be located in the boulevard area so long as they do not obstruct vision or threaten safety of vehicles or pedestrians or obstruct effective snow removal. The use of scoria as either a sub-base material or a surface material for boulevards shall be absolutely prohibited within the city limits of the City of Beulah. Driveways and concrete sidewalks may be constructed in accordance with the regulations provided by the City of Beulah.

3.	BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED. Any person making improvements under Sections 1. and 2. above shall be required to obtain a building permit from the City prior to making said improvements .

4.	PENALTY SECTION. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any part of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction, and may be subject to a fine not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), and a separate infraction may be deemed committed for each day that a person is in violation of any part of this Ordinance.

5.	ORDINANCE IN CONFLICT. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby appealed.


)	6.		EFFECTIVE DATE.	The Ordinance shall be in full force and  effect after its final passage and approval and publication of its title and penalty clause.

DATED This 5th day of August, 2013.
A'! 	6
I'kfuLL1t(JE , Ma/or








HE'fHERFiREBEE, City Auditor



First Reading: July 15, 2013
Second Reading: August 5, 2013
Final Passage:  August 5, 2013
Publication Date: October 24, 2013



2
 
.'  .




ORDINANCE NO. 405



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE NO. 301 PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION OF THE SURFACING OF DRIVEWAYS, OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS AND BOULEVARDS WITHIN THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

4.		PENALTY SECTION. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any part ohhis Ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction, and may be subject to a fine not to exceed Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00), and a separate infraction may be deemed committed for each day that a person is in violation of any part of this Ordinance.

The title and penalty section of the above Ordinance is published in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.
Dated this _/_j;_ day of October, 2013.







)
 
ORDINANCE NO. 410

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING ARTICLE IX,  PENALTIES  OF BEULAH ORDINANCE NO. 151, "AN ORDINANCE SETTING FORTH  CERTAIN OFFENSES PROHIBITED WITHIN THE CITY OF BEULAH, WHICH ARE OFFENSES OF GENERAL APPLICABILITY; OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS; OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY; AND OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER, HEALTH , SAFETY AND SENSIBILITIES; AND REPEALING  ORDINANCES  AND  SECTIONS  OF  ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREWITH."

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

Article IX, "Penalties" shall be amended and re-enacted as follows:



IX.       Article IX - Penalties

Any person who is convicted of an offense under this ordinance may be punished by a fine of not more than One-Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00), thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both such fine and imprisonment.

Any person who is convicted of an infraction under this ordinance may be punished by a fine of
)	not more than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).

This section does not prohibit the use of the sentencing alternatives, other than a fine 6r imprisonment, provided by Section 5-2 for the violation of a city ordinance, nor does this section limit the use of deferred or suspended sentences.

This provision also acts to amend and re-enact all penalty provisions of any individual sections of Beulah Ordinance No. 151 and all previous amendments thereto as well as any and all other offense or infraction penalties provided in any other Beulah criminal, nuisance, traffic, or other city ordinance which refers to an "offense" or "infraction."

The title and perialty section of the above Ordinance is published in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.



ll R. Bjerke, Mayor


 
 
First Reading: March 3, 2014

Second Reading: March 17, 20 14

Publication Date:  April 24, 2014

Effective Date:  April 24, 2014
 
412 Property Maintenance
Tuesday, February 03, 2015
9:34 AM
 


ORDINANCE NO. 412


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING BEULAH CJTY ORDINANCE NO. 389 THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH  DAKOTA.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER
COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS:

THAT BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE NO. 389 BE AMENDED AND RE-ENACTED TO READ AS FOLLOWS:

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER   1    ADMINISTRATION

Section
101	General
l02	Applicability
I 03	Duties and Powers of the City Building Inspector
104	Approval
105	Violations
l 06	Notices and Orders
107	Unsafe Structures and Equipment
108	Emergency Measures
109	Demolition
110	Means of Appeal

CHAPTER 2  DEFINITIONS

Section
201	General
202	General Definitions

CHAPTER 3  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Section
301	General
302	Exterior Property Areas
303	Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
304	Exterior Structure
305	Interior Structure
306	Handrails and Guardrails
307	Extermination
 




CHAPTER4  LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY L1MITATIONS

Section
401	General
402	Light
403	Ventilation
404	Occupancy Limitations

CHAPTER 5  PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS

 
Section 501
502
 


General
Required Facilities
 
503
504
505
506
507
 
Toilet Rooms
Plumbing Systems and Fixtures Water System
Sanitary Drainage System
Storm Drainage
 

CHAPTER 6  MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS

 
Section 601
602
603
604
 


General
Heating Facilities Mechanical Equipment Electrical Facilities
 
605
606
607
 
Electrical Equipment
Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters Duct Systems
 

CHAPTER 7  FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

 
Section 701
702
 


General
Means of Egress
 
703
704
 
Fire-Resistance Ratings
Fire Protection Systems
 

CHAPTER 8  REFERENCED STANDARDS

INDEX
 



CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRA  TlON

SECTION  101 GENERAL

101.1	Title.   These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of
Beulah, hereinafter referred to as "this code".

101.2	Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements  and standards for premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating , sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.

101.3	Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare in so far as they are affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required herein.

101.4	Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.

SECTION 102 APPLICABILITY

102.1	General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures and premises , as set forth in Section 101. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify different requirements , the most restrictive shall govern.

102.2	Maintenance.   Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order.  No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary  interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress.   The requirements of this
code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety
systems and devices in existing structures.   Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings , structures and premises.
 



102.3	Application  of other codes.    Repairs, additions or alteration s to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures  and provisions of the City Building Code, City Electrical Code, City Plumbing Code, or City Fire Code.    Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision  of the City Zoning Ordinances.

102.4	Existing remedies.   The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary .

102.5	Workmanship.   Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance with the manufacturer 's installation instructions.

102.6	Historic buildings.   The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings which such buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the City Building Inspector to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.

102.7	Referenced codes and standards.   The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 8 and considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.   Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.

102.8	Requirements not covered by code.   Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or equipment , or for the public safety, health and general welfare , not specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the City Building Inspector

SECTION 103
DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CITY BUILDING INSPECTION

103.l General.   The City Building Inspector shall enforce the provisions of this code.

103.2	Inspections.   The City Building Inspector shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by agencies or individuals approved by the Beulah City Council.  All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual.   The City Building Inspector is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed necessary.

103.3	Right of entry.   The City Building Inspector is authorized to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures.   If entry is refused or not obtained, the City Building Inspector is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by law.






L
 



103.4	Notices and orders. The City Building Inspector and the City Attorney shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.

SECTION  104 APPROVAL

104.1	Modifications.
Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of this code, the
City Planning and Zoning Board shall have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided that the City Planning and Zoning Board shall first find that special individual reasons make the strict letter of this code impractical and the modifications are in compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification does not Jessen health, life and fire safety requirements.

Applications for modifications shall be submitted to the City Building Inspector.   Such application shall include:

a.	Name and address of applicant.
b.	Date of application.
c.	The special  conditions  or circumstances  which  are peculiar  to the  applicant's
individual case.

After review of the application for a modification , the City Planning and Zoning Board shall notify the City Auditor in writing of the Board's recommendation with respect to the applied for modification. Thereafter, the City Auditor shall provide such written recommendation to the Beulah City Council which shall thereafter consider said application for modification at its next regularly scheduled city council meeting or at a special meeting called for this purpose. The Beulah City Council shall thereafter consider the application for modification and have the authority to either approve or reject the application for modification. The applicant has the right to appeal the Beulah City Council's decision pursuant to Section 110 herein."

104.2	Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material or method of construction shall be approved where the City Building Inspector finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose  intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance , durability and safety.

104.3	Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods , the City Building Inspector shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.
 





104.3.1	Test methods.   Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by other recognized test standards.	In the absence of recognized  and  accepted  test  methods,  the City  Building Inspector shall be permitted to use appropriate testing procedures developed by an approved agency.

104.3.2	Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the City Building Inspector  for the
period required for retention of public records.

104.4 Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall not be reu sed unless such elements are in good repair or have been reconditioned and tested when necessary , placed in good and proper working condition and approved .

SECTION 105 VIOLATIONS

105.1	Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.

105.2	Notice of violation. The City Building Inspector and City Attorney shall serve a notice of
violation or order in accordance with Section 106.

105.3	Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section I 06 shall be deemed guilty of an infraction as determined by the local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the City Attorney shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto . Any action taken by the City of Beulah on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.

105.4	Violation penalties. Any person, who shall violate a provision of this code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of an infraction which has a maximum penalty of a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00).   Each day that a violation continues to occur after the compliance deadline may be deemed a separate offense for which the person may be prosecuted and penalized.

105.5	Costs to be assessed against property. The City may assess the cost of any demolition , repair , or removal of a building or structure against the prope1ty in question as a lien against the real property from which the cost was incurred and the lien may be  foreclosed in judicial proceedings in the manner provided by law for loans secured by liens on real property. If this amount is not adequate to cover the cost of demolition , repair, or removal , the City has a lien for the amount of the additional costs on real property owned, or later acquired, by the property owner in the City.   If the City provides the amount of the lien and the name of the owner, the County
 



Auditor shall enter on the tax list the amount of the additional cost as a tax lien. The tax lien is enforceable by the City in the same manner as a tax lien by a county. This subsection in no way limits or restricts any authority which is now or may hereafter be vested in the State Fire Marshall for the regul ation or control of such buildings or structures.

105.6 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the City of Beulah from instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a building , structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or premises.

SECTION 106
NOTICES AND ORDERS

106.1	Notice to person responsible. Whenever the City Building Inspector determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, appropriate notices shall be given in the manner prescribed in Sections 106.2 and 106.3 to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with Section 107.3.

106.2	Forms.

1.	NOTICE OF INSPECTION - A Notice of Inspection prescribed in Section 106.l shall be in accordance with all of the following for an alleged violation or violations:

a.	Be in writing.
b.	Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
c.	Include a statement of the alleged violation(s) and why the notice is being issued.
d.	Include a statement requesting the responsible person for the alleged violation(s) to contact the City Building Inspector to discuss the alleged violation(s) and to schedule an onsite inspection with the City Building Inspector.
e.	Include a statement that if an onsite inspection by the City Building Inspector is refused by the person responsible for the alleged violation(s) then such alleged violation(s) shall be deemed to exist and that a Notice of Violation(s) and Order to Abate as described below shall be immediately issued to the person responsible for the alleged violation(s).

2.	NOTICE OF VIOLA TION(S) AND ORDER TO ABATE - A Notice of Violation(s) and Order to Abate prescribed in Section 106.1 shall be in accordance with all of the following for a determined violation or violations:

a.	Be in writing.
b.	Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
c.	Include a statement of the violation(s) and why the notice is being issued.
d.	Include a statement requiring the person responsible for the violation(s) to either contact the City Building Inspector within ten (10) days of receipt of the Notice of Violations and Order to Abate to discuss terms of the ordered abatement or request a hearing on the Order to Abate in front of the City Council for the City of Beulah. Failure to request a hearing or schedule
 



a meeting with the City Building Inspector within ten (10) days of receipt of the Notice of Violations and Order to Abate will result in a hearing being set in front of the City Council for the City of Beulah. Written notice of said hearing will be given to the person responsible for the violation(s).
f.  Include a statement advising the person responsible for the violation(s) of his or her right to appeal any decision of the City Council for the City of Beulah as per section 110.5.
g.	Include a statement advising the person responsible for the violation(s) of his or her right to request a modification as per Section 104.1.
h.	. Include a statement advising the person responsible for the violation(s) that failure to bring the property into full compliance with this Ordinance may result in the City commencing legal action against the person in municipal court.
i.	Include a statement advising the person responsible for the violation(s) of the penalty provisions as provided in Section 105 and also advising that each day that a violation continues to occur after the compliance deadline may be deemed a separate offense for which the person may be prosecuted and penalized.
j. Include a statement advising the person responsible for the violation(s) of the restriction on sale of the property in question as per Section 106.5.

3.	ORDER FOR ABATEMENT. If the above referenced meeting is requested and if the person responsible for the violation(s) and the City Building Inspector reach an agreement on the necessary repairs, improvements , or demolition necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Ordinance, those agreed upon terms shall be recorded in a stipulation to be signed by the City Building Inspector and the person responsible for the violation(s). Said stipulation shall be presented to the City Council for approval and issuance of an Order for Abatement setting forth the necessary repairs, improvements, or demolition necessary to bring the property into compliance with this Ordinance and dates said repairs, improvements , or demolition must be completed by. The persons responsible for the violation(s) shall strictly comply with  the deadlines so ordered unless expressly extended by the City Council. Failure to comply with the Order for Abatement will result in immediate abatement of said violation(s) by the City and/or prosecution of the violation of the Order under Section 105.3.

106.3	Method of service. Such notices shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is:

l.	Delivered personally;
2.	Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known address; or
3.	If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice.

106.4	Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall be as set forth in Section 105.4.

106.5	Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until
 



such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the City Building Inspector and City Attorney and shall furnish to the City Building Inspector and City Attorney a signed and notari zed statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.   Lack of notice of a compliance  order or a Notice  of Violation  shall  not  be  a defense  by  grantee,  transferee, mortgagee,  or  lessee and  said  grantee, transferee,  mortgagee, or lessee shall  have the same responsibility and obligation to bring his or her property into full compliance with this Ordinance.

106.6	A Notice of Violation(s) to be recorded. A Notice of Violation(s) shall be recorded upon the property in question and shall thereafter be released upon abatement of said violation(s).

SECTION 107
UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT

107.1	General. When a structure or equipment is found by the City Building Inspector to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found  unlawful , such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of this code.

107.1.1	Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged , decayed, dilapidated , structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete collapse is possible.

107.1.2	Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler , heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premise s or structure.

107.1.3	Structure unfit for human occupancy. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the City Building Inspector finds that such structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary , vermin or rat infested , contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.

107.1.4	Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.

107.2	Closing of vacant structures. Ifthe structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the City Building  Inspector  and City Attorney are authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance.   Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises
 




within the time specified in the order, the City Building Inspector shall cause the premises to be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.

107.3	Notice. Whenever the City Building Inspector and City Attorney condemned a structure or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in accordance with Section 106.3.  Ifthe notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in Section 106.2.

107.4	Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, City Building Inspector and City Attorney shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.

107.4.1 Placard removal. The City Building Inspector and City Attorney shall remove the condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the City Building Inspector and City Attorney shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.

107.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the City Building Inspector and City Attorney shall be vacated as ordered by the City Building Inspector and City Attorney. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premise or shall operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone occupy placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code.

SECTION 108 EMERGENCY MEASURES

108.1	Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the City Building Inspector, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous equipment, the City Building Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith.   The City Building Inspector shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the City Building Inspector." It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
 




108.2	Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provision s of this code , whenever , in the opinion of the City Building Inspector , there is imminent danger due to an unsaJe condition , the City Building Inspector shall order the necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the City Building Inspector deems necessary to meet such emergency.

108.3	Closing streets. When necessary for public safety, the City Building Inspector shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.

108.4	Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the City Building Inspector shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible.

108.5	Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The City Attorney shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such costs.

108.6	Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon request directed to the City Council for the City of Beulah , be afforded a hearing as described in this code.

SECTION 109
DEMOLITION

109.1	General. In the Notice ofViolation(s) and Order to Abate, the City Building Inspector and City Attorney shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure , which in the City Building Inspector 's judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner 's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such structure.

109.2	Notices and orders.   All notices and orders shall comply with Section I 06.

109.3	Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises fails to comply with an Order to Abate or Order of the City Council , as provided for in Sections 106.2(3) and 110.4, within the time prescribed , the City Building Inspector shall cause the structure to be demolished and removed , either through an available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons , and the cost of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
 




109.4 Salvage materials . When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed , the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and remo va l, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or transaction , including the items of expense and the amounts deducted , for the per son who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court.   If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the rep011 shall so state.

SECTION llO
HEARING AND MEANS FOR APPEAL

110.l Hearing- General. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the City Council shall give written notice to the person responsible for the violation(s) to appear before it on the date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be in violation of this code should not be repaired, improved , or demolished in accordance with the Order to Abate provided for herein in Section 106.2(2).

110.2 Hearing- Format. The City Council shall hold a hearing and hear testimony and receive evidence from the City of Beulah regarding the existence of a violation of this code, and from the person responsible for the violation(s) as to why the building or structure repo1ted to be in violation of this code should not be repaired, improved, or demolished in accordance with the Order to Abate.

110.3	Findings of Fact. The City Council for the City of Beulah shall thereafter make written findings of fact based upon the testimon y and evidence provided as to whether or not the building in question is in violation of this code.

110.4	Order. The City Council for the City of Beulah shall thereafter issue an Order based upon the findings of fact made pursuant to Section 110.3 commanding the person responsible for the violation(s) to repair, vacate, or demolish the building or prope1ty found to be in violation of this code.

110.5	Request for appeal. Any person directly affected by an Order of the Beulah City Council issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the Mercer County District Court, provided that a written request for appeal is filed within 10 days after the day the decision , notice or order was served. A request for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted , the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means .

110.6	Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order until the appeal is heard by the Mercer County District Court.
 





















CHAPTER2 DEFINITIONS

SECTION 201 GENERAL

201.l Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.

201.2	Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future ; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.

201.3	Terms defined in other codes.  Where terms are not defined in this code and are defined in the City Building Code, City Electrical Code, City Plumbing Code, City Fire Code, or City Zoning Ordinances , such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated in those codes and ordinances.

201.4	Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.

201.5	Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit", "dwelling", "premises", "building", "rooming house'', "rooming unit", "housekeeping unit" or "story" are stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof'.

SECTION202
GENERAL DEFINITIONS

APPROVED.   Approved by the City Building Inspector.

BASEMENT.   That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
 



BATHROOM.   A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.

BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.

CITY BUILDING INSPECTOR. The city official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.

CLEAN.   Free from dirt , contamination, impurities, rubbish , etc.; unsoiled; unstained .

CONDEMN.   To adjudge unfit for occupancy.

DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons , including perman ent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.

EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or lots.

EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.

EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating their harborage places ; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.

GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling , preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.

HABIT ABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms , toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, private garages or shops, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.

HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which does not contain , within such unit a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or death at any time.

INFESTATlON. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
 




LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or material s to which has been affixed a label, seal symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.

LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET. To permit , provide or offer possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit , building, premise or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof , pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land .

OCCUPANCY.   The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.

OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.

OPENABLE AREA.   That part of a window, skylight or door which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.

OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care of control of a structure or premi ses which is let or offered for occupancy.

OWNER. Any person , agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property ; or recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrntor of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as a unit. PREMISES.   A lot, plot or parcel  of land, easement or public way , including any structures
thereon.

PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded , dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without meals , for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling .

ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking purposes.

RUBBISH.   Combustible and noncombustible waste materials , except garbage; the term shall
include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper,
 



rags, cartons, boxes , wood, excelsior, rubber , leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.

SANITARY.   Free from elements, such as filth or pathogens , that endanger health.

SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling unit are not sleeping units.

STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.

STRUCTURE.   That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.

TENANT.   A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the legal owner of record ,
occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.

TOILET ROOM.   A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower.

VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.

WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level , square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.

YARD.   An open space on the same lot with a structure.
 



CHAPTER3 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS


SECTION 301 GENERAL

301.l Scope. The provi sions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and the respon sibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property .

301.2	Responsibility. The owner of the premi ses shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premise s which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit , rooming unit or housekeeping unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, hou sekeeping unit or premises which they occupy and control.

301.3	Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.

SECTION 302
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS

302.l Sanitation. All exterior property and premise s shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.

302.2	Grading and drainage.  All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon , or within any structure located thereon.

Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.

302.3	Walkways and driveways. All walkways, driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from hazardous conditions.

302.4	Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent harborage and infestation . Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precaution s shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
 



302.5	Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private prope11y or that of another tenant.

302.6	Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.

302.7	Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of maintenanc e and repair.

SECTION 303
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS

303.1 Swimming pools. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and in good repair.


SECTION 304
EXTERIOR STRUCTURE

304.l General.   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair , structurally sound
and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.

304.2	Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors , door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim , balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resi stant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted.  All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the buildin g envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.

304.3	Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).

304.4	Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration ,
and shall be capable of safely supporting the design dead and live loads.
 



304.5	Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be  maintained  plumb  and  free from  open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.

304.6	Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks , and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent deteriorat ion.

304.7	Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. If installed, roof drains, gutters and downspout s shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.

304.8	Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.

304.9	Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including , but not limited to canopies, marquees , signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by application of weather-coating materials , such as paint or similar surface treatment.

304.10	Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the design loads.

304.11	Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or ru st by application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.

304.12	Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting design loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

304.13	Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.

304.13.l Glazing.   All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks and holes.

304.13.2 Openablc windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be  easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.

304.14 Insect screens.   During the period from May I st to November 1si, every door, window and
other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food
 




service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed , manufactured , packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (15 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.

Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means , such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.

304.15	Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and sleeping units shall tightly secure the door Locks on means of egress doors shall be in accordance with Section 702.3.

304.16	Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway  shall be maintained to  prevent the
entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.

304.17	Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the entry of rodents.

304.18	Building security. Doors , windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.

304.18.l Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a lock throw of not less than I inch (25 mm). Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to the manufacturer 's specifications and maintained in good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock.

304.18.2	Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6 feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.

304.18.3	Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit , rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.

SECTION 305
INTERIOR STRUCTURE

305.1 General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition. Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming house, housekeeping  units, a hotel , a dormitory, two or more
 


dwelling units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition , the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior property.

305.2	Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the design loads.

305.3	Interior surfaces.  All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained in good, clean  and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping, flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered if necessary to achieve a clean and sanitary condition. Cracked or loose plaster , decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be corrected if necessary to achieve a clean and sanitary condition..

305.4	Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch , deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.

305.5	Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of supporting design loads and shall be maintained in good condition.

305.6	Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the attachment hardware.

SECTION 306
HANDRAILS  AND  GUARDRAILS

306.1 General.   Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more than four risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface which is more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high or more than 42 inches (1067 mm) high measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than 30 inches (762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.

Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the City Building Code.

SECTION 307 EXTERMINATION

307.1	Infestation. All structures shall  be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated by approved process that will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.


307.2	Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
 




307.3	Single occupant. The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the premises.

307.4	Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units , a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be respon sible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied , the occupant shall be responsible for extermination.

307.5	Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued rodent and pest-free condition of the structure.

Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination.
 




CHAPTER4
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITA TlONS

SECTION 401 GENERAL

401.1	Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a structure.

401.2	Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner­ occupant, or permit another person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

401.3	Alternative devices.  In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed,
artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the City Building Code shall be permitted.

SECTION 402 LIGHT

402.1	Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8 percent of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other p011ions of a structure face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than 3 feet (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for the room.

Exception: Where natural  light for rooms or spaces without exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor area being served.

402.2	Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb for each 200 square feet (19 m2) of floor area or equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet (9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of 1 footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.
 



402.3 Other spaces.  All other spaces shall be provided with natural or artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances , equipment and fixtures.

SECTION 403 VENTILATION

403.1	Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one openable window . The total openable area of the window in every room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1 .

Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are  ventilated through an adjoining room , the unobstructed  opening to the adjoining room shall be at least 8 percent  of the floor area of the interior room or space, but not less than 25 square feet
(2.33 m2).   The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total floor area
being ventilated.

403.2	Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by Section 403. l, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the outdoors and shall not be recirculated.

403.3	Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.


Exceptions:

1.	Where specifically approved in writing by the City Building Inspector.

2.	Devices such as coffee pots and microwave ovens shall not be considered cooking appliances.

403.4	Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source.  Air shall be exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.

403.5	Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions .
 



SECTION  404
OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS

404.1	Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces.

404.2	Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen , shall not be less that 7 feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than 3 feet (914 mm) between counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.

404.3	Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not Jess than 7 feet (2134 mm).

Exceptions:

I.	In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than 6 inches (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.
2.	Basement  rooms  in  one-  and  two-family  dwellings  occupied  exclusively  for
laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than 6 feet 8 inches (2033 mm) with not less than 6 feet 4 inches (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions.
3.	Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7 feet (2134 mm) over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of 5 feet (1524 mm) or more shall be included.

404.4	Bedroom and living room requirements. Every bedroom and living room shall comply with the requirements of Section 404.4.1 through 404.4.5.

404.4.1	Room area. Every living room shall contain at least I 20 square feet (I1.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m2).

404.4.2	Access from bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.

Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.

404.4.3	Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an adjacent story.
 



404.4.4	Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes.

404.4.5	Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and water-heating facilities requirements of Chapter 5; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of Chapter 6; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of Chapter 7.

404.5	Overcrowding. The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall not create conditions that, in the opinion of the City Building Inspector , endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.

404.6	Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:

1.	A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m2). A unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet (29.7 m2) . These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2 and 3.

2.	The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front.   Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be provided.

3.	The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.

4.	The maximum number of occupants shall be three.



404.7	Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage.
 



CHAPTERS
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS

SECTION 501 GENERAL

501.1	Scope. The provisions of this  chapter shall govern  the minimum plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.

501.2	Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these requirements . A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any structure or premises which does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

SECTION 502 REQUIRED FACILITIES

502.1	Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall  contain  its own  bathtub  or  shower,  lavatory , water closet and kitchen  sink which  shall  be maintained  in a sanitary, safe working,  condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which such water closet is located.  A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.

502.2	Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub  or shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.

502.3	Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.

502.4	Employees' facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and one  drinking
facility shall be available to employees.

502.4.1 Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or bathrooms.

SECTION 503 TOILET ROOMS

503.1	Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
 



503.2	Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming units or dormitory units or housekeeping units, shall have access by traversing not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or passageway.

503.3	Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have access from within the employees' working area. The required toilet facilities shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees' working area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of 500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or combined employee and public facilities.

Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet (152 m) from the employees' regular working area to the facilities.

503.4	Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

SECTION 504
PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES

504.1	General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe, sanitary and functional condition.

504.2	Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances for usage and cleaning.

504.3	Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross connection, backsiphonage, improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the City Building Inspector shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.

SECTION505 WATER SYSTEM

505.1	General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain, water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the City Plumbing Code.

505.2	Contamination. The private portion of the water supply system shall be maintained free from contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located above the flood-
 




level rim of the fixture.  Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric-type vacuum breaker or an approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.

505.3	Supply. The private portion of the water supply system shall be installed and maintained to provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.

505.4	Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be properly installed , maintained and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required sink, lavatory , bathtub , shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than l 10°F (43°C). A gas­ burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom , toilet room, bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An approved combination temperature and pressure -relief valve and relief valve discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.

SECTION 506
SANlTARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM

506.1	General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.

506.2	Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall function properly and be kept free from obstructions , leaks and defects.

SECTION 507
STORM DRAINAGE

507.1 General.   Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the
premises shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance.
 




CHAPTER6
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS

SECTION601
GENERAL

601.1	Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.

601.2	Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises which  does not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

SECTION 602 HEATING FACILITIES

602.1	Facilities required.   Heating facilities shall be provided  in structures as required by this
section.

602.2	Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality indicated in the City Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the requirements of this section.

602.3	Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, the heating facilities shall supply sufficient heat to be capable of maintaining a temperature ofnot less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms , and toilet rooms.

Exceptions:

1.	When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in the City Plumbing Code.

602.4	Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable commercial work spaces shall be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during all times the spaces are occupied.

Exceptions:

I.         Processing , storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature
conditions.
 


2.	Areas in which persons are primarily  engaged  in vigorous physical  activities.

602.5	Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be measured 3 feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and 2 feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.

SECTION603
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT

603.l Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances,  fireplaces, solid fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be capable of performing the intended function.

603.2	Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.

Exception:  Fuel-burning  equipment  and  appliances  which  are  labeled  for  unvented operation.

603.3	Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be maintained.

603.4	Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall be maintained in effective operation.

603.5	Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel and for ventilation of the space containing the equipment shall be provided for the fuel-burning equipment.

603.6	Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel consumption  by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.

SECTION 604 ELECTRICAL  FACILITIES

604.l Facilities required.  Every occupied building shall be provided with an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and Section 605.

604.2	Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the City Electrical Code. Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.

604.3	Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or
 



damage, or for similar reasons, the City Building Inspector shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.

SECTION 605
ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT

605.1	Installation. All electrical equipment , wiring and appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.

605.2	Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at least two separate and remote receptacle outlets.  Every laundry area shall contain at least one grounded-type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit interrupter protection.

605.3	Luminaries. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at least one electric luminaire.

SECTION 606
ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS

606.1	General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained in compliance with ASME A 17.1. The most current certification of inspection shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the office of the building operator. The inspection and tests shall be performed at not less than the periodical intervals listed in ASME Al7.1, Appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction.

606.2	Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is occupied.

Exception:  Buildings  equipped  with  only one elevator shall be permitted  to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.

607.l  General.   Duct systems shall be maintained  free of obstructions and shall be capable of performing the required function.
 



CHAPTER 7
FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

701.1	Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior premises, including first safety facilities and equipment to be provided.

701.2	Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these requirement s. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter.

SECTION 702 MEANS OF EGRESS

702.1	General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the City Fire Code.

702.2	Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the City Fire Code shall  be unobstructed.

702.3	Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted by the City Building Code.

702.4	Emergency escape openings.  Required emergency escape openings shall be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape and rescue opening.

SECTION 703
FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS

703.1	Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating of fire-resistance­ rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and floors shall be maintained.

703.2	Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.

SECTION 704
 



FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS

704.l General.  All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the City Fire Code.

704.2	Smoke alarms.  Single or multiple- station smoke alarms shall be installed and maintained in all residentially zoned areas of the City as well as in all dwellings not otherwise located within areas with residential zoning designations, but otherwise located in the city limits and within the one-half mile extra territorial zon ing jurisdiction of the City, regardless of occupant load at all of the following locations:

1.	On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate
vicinity of bedrooms .
2.	Jn each room used for sleeping purposes.
3.	In each  story within  a dwelling unit , including basements  and cellars  but not
including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics.   In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level. Single or multiple-station  smoke  alarms  shall be  installed  in other groups  in accordance with the City Fire Code.

704.3	Power source. In all residentially zoned areas of the City as well as in all dwellings otherwise located within the city limits and located within the one-half mile extra-territorial zoning jurisdiction of the City, single-station smoke alarm shall receive their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery back-up. Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than is required for over current protection.

Exception: Any and all solely battery operated smoke alarms installed prior to the effective date of this Ordinance may continue to be maintained without violating this Section. However, at such time as the property in question is being remodeled then new fire alarms shall be installed in accordance with this section. Also, smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in buildings that are not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without the removal of interior finishes.

704.4	Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
 




Exceptions:

I.	Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not undergoing alterations,
repairs, or construction of any kind.
2.		Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
 



CHAPTERS REFERENCED STANDARDS

This chapter lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of this document. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title and the section or sections of this document that reference the standard. The application of the referenced standards shall be as specified in Section l02.7.

ASME	American Society of Mechanical Engineers Three Park Avenue
New York, New York 10016-5990

 
Standard
Reference number	Title
 
Referenced in code section number
 

 
Al 7.1 - 2000
 
Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators with A 17.I a 2002 Addenda
 


606. l
 





INDEX

A

 
ACCESS
Egress
From bedrooms
 


702
404.4.2
 
Authority Modifications APPROVED
 
103.1, 104.2
104.1
 
Plumbing fixtures, access for
cleaning
To public way
Toilet room as passageway Water closet
ADJACENT
 

504.2
702.l
503.l
404.4.3
 
Alternative materials, methods and
Equipment Definition
Energy conservation devices
Fireplaces Modifications
 

104.2
202
603.6
603.l
104.l
 
Privacy (hotel units, rooming units) 404.1
ADMINISTRATION	Used materials and equipment ARCHITECTURAL	104.4
Scope 	101.2
AGENT (See also OPERATOR)	202
(See OWNER)
AIR	Structural members
Trim ARTIFICIAL
Lighting of habitable rooms	304.4
304.8

401.3
Combustion air 	603.5
AISLES
Minimum width 	702.2	Lighting of other spaces
AWNING
Signs, marquees and awnings	402.3

304.9
ALTERATION		
Applicability of other codes 	102.3
Condemnation	107.1, 107.2
Inspection 	103.3	B

BALCONY	
Prosecution 	105.3
Unlawful acts	105.1, 106.1
ANCHOR	Handrails and guardrails
BASEMENT
Definition	306.1

202
Architectural trim 	304.8	Hatchways	304.16
Signs, marquees and awnings 	304.9	Windows	304.17
APPEAL
Application 	110.5	BATHROOM
Common bathrooms	
502.3, 503.1
Hearing, emergency orders 	108.6	Hotels	502.3
Notice of appeal 	110.5	Lighting	605.3
Right to appeal 	110.5	Locks	503.1
APPLIANCE	Outlets required	605.2
Cooking	403.3, 602.2	Privacy	503.1
Heating	602.2, 603. l	Ventilation	403.2
Mechanical
APPLICATION	603.1	BATHTUB
Required facilities		
502.I
Other codes	102.3	Rooming houses		502.2
APPROVAL		Sewage system		506.1
Alternatives	104.2	Water heating facilities		505.4

 



Water system
BEDROOM
Room area

BOILER
Unsafe equipment



CAPACITY
Heating facilities
CAR (Sec AUTOMOBILE)	COLDWATER
CEILING	Drinking	502.4







































Failure to comply with demolition	Toilet rooms, access	503.1
 




HOTEL, MOTEL)






















































 
DORMITORY (ROOMING HOUSE,
 
EMERGENCY
 




Emergency measures	108		Street numbers	304.3
Emergency orders		108.l	Weather tight	304.13
Escape		702.4	EXTERMINATE	
ENFORCEMENT			Definition	202
Duties and powers		103	Insect and rodent control	302.4
Scope		l01.2	Doors	304.14
EQUIPMENT			Responsibility	301.2
Alternative		104.2	Responsibility of tenant-occupant	307.5
Combustion air		603.5		
 
Condemnation
Electrical  Installation
Emergency order
 
107.1.2, 107.3
605.l	F
108.l
 
Energy conservation devices
Fire safety requirements, Responsibility
Flue
Installation Interior structure Placarding
Prohibited occupancy Responsibility
Safety controls Scope
 
603.6

701.2
603.2
603.1
305.1
107.3, 107.4
107.5
601.2
603.4
101.2
 
FAN
Exhaust vents	302.5
FEES, EXPENSES, COST
Closing vacant structures	107.2
Demolition	109.1, 109.3, 109.4
Extermination	307.2, 307.3, 307.4, 307.5 Responsibility, fire safety	701.2
FENCE
Accessory	302.6
Maintenance	304.2
FIRE
 
Scope, mechanical and electrical
Unsafe Used EXHAUST
Clothes dryer
 
601.1
107
104.4

403.5
 
Fire-resistance ratings	703.1
General, fire-protection systems	704.1
Responsibility, fire safety	701.2
Scope	101.2
Scope, fire safety	701.l
 
Exhaust ducts Process ventilation
 
304.9
 
403.4
 
Smoke alarms	704.2
FLAMMABLE LIQUID
 

EXISTING		Containers 	107.1.2
FLOOR, FLOORING
Remedies	102.4	Area for bedrooms & living rooms 404.4.1
Scope	101.2	Fire-resistance ratings	703.J
Structural members	304.4	Interior surfaces	305.1, 305.3
Structures	101.3	Space requirements	404.4.1, 404.6
EXTERIOR
Decorative features	
304.8	FOOD PREPARATION
Cooking equipment	403.3, 602.2
Egress
Exterior structure	702.l
304	Sanitary condition	305.1, 404.7
Ventilation 	403.4
Exterior walls	304.6	FOUNDATION
Painting	304.2, 304.6	Condemnation 	107.1.1
Rodent harborage	302.4	Foundation walls 	304.5
Sanitation	304.1	FRAME
Scope	301.1	Window and door frames 	304.13
Stair	304.10	

 




 
G	Water system
HEARINGS
 
505
 
GAS			Findings of Fact	I I 0.3
Energy conservation devices
Exhaust vents
Process ventilation	
302.5	603.6

403.4	Format
General Order	l10.2
110.1
I10.4

GLAZING
Materials	

304.13.l	HOUSEKEEPING UNIT
Definition	

202
GRADE		HEIGHT	
Drainage	302.2,	Minimum ceiling height	404.3
507		HOT (See HEAT, HEATING)
GUARD
Basement windows	
304.17	HOTELS, ROOMING HOUSES AND DORMITORY UNITS, MOTELS
Definition	202	Definition 	202
Anchorage and maintenance	304.12	Locked doors 	702.3
		Required facilities 	502
H		Toilet rooms 	503
 

HABITABLE
Definition
Light
Minimum ceiling height Minimum room width Required plumbing facilities Residential heating facilities Space requirements Ventilation
HANDRAIL
 


202
402
404.3
404.2
502
602.2, 602.3
404.4.1
403
 

I

INFESTATION
Condemnation	I07.1.3
Definition	202
Insect and rodent	302.4, 304.14, 307.l
INSECTS
Extermination	307
Infestation	307. I
Insect screens	304.14
 
Handrails
HARDWARE
Door hardware Openable windows
 
304.12, 305.5, 306.1

304.15, 702.3
304.13 .2
 
INSPECTIONS
General 	103.1
Right of entry 	103.3
INSPECTIONS
 
HA	HAZARDOUS
DANGEROUS,   HAZARDOUS) HEAT, HEATING
 
(See
 
Inspections	103.2
INTENT
Code	101.3
 
Cooking equipment
Energy conservation devices
Fireplaces
Heating
Mechanical equipment
Required capabilities
 
403.3, 602.2
603.6
603. l
603.1
603.1
602
 
INTERIOR
Interior structure	305
Interior surfaces	305.3
Means of egress	702
Sanitation	305.l
J
 


JURISDICTION		LIVING  ROOM	
Title	101.1	Room area	404.4.1
 

K

KITCHEN
 
LOAD, LOADING
Elevators, escalators and
dumbwaiters
Handrail s and guards
 


606.1
304.12, 305.5
 
Electrical outlets required	605.2	Live load	304.4, 305.2
Minimum width	404.2	Stairs and porches	304.10, 305.2
Prohibited use	404.4.4	Structural members	304.4, 305.2
Room lighti ng	605.3		
Water heating facilities	505.4	M	

MAINTENANCE
	L		Required
MATERIAL	102.2
LANDING			Alternative	104.2
Handrails and guards	304.12,  305.4,	Salvage	109.4
		305.5, 306. l	Used	104.4
Maintenance	304.10, 305.4	MEANS OF EGRESS (See EGRESS)
LAUNDRY
Room lighting	
605.3	MECHANICAL
Installation 	603.1
Water heating facilities	505.4	Responsibility 	601.2
LAVATORY
Hotels	
502.3	Scope 	601.1
Ventilation, general 	403
Required facilities	502	Ventilation, toilet rooms 	403.2
Rooming houses	502.2	MINIMUM
Sanitary drainage system	506	Ceiling height 	404.3
Water heating facilities	505.4	Room width 	404.2
Water system	505	Scope 	301.1
LEASE (SELL, RENT)
Heat supplied	
602.3	MODIFICATION
Approval	104.l
Salvage materials	109.4	MOTEL (See HOTELS)
Transfer of ownership	106.5	
LIEN		N
Closing of vacant structures	107.2	
Demolition	109.3	NATURAL
Failure to comply	109.3	Lighting	401.3, 402
LIGHT, LIGHTING		Ventilation	401.3, 403
Common halls and stairways 402.2,	605.3	NOTICE	
Luminaries	605.3	Appeal	110.5
General	402	Form	106.2
Habitable rooms	402.1	Method of service	106.3
Other spaces	402.3	Orders	106
Responsibility	401.2	Owner, responsible person	106.l
Scope	101.2	Penalties	106.4
Toilet rooms	605.3	Placarding of structure	107.4
 


 
Transfer of ownership Vacating structure NOXIOUS
 

106.5
107.2
 
p

PASSAGEWAY
 
Process ventilation
NUISANCE
Closing of vacant structures

0

OBSTRUCTION
Light
Right of entry OCCUPANCY (Sec USE) OPENABLE
Definition
Habitable rooms
 
403.4

107.2





402.1
103.3



202
403.1
 
Common hall and stairway
Interior surfaces
Toilet rooms, direct access PENALTY
Notices and orders
Placarding of structure Prohibited occupancy Removal of placard Scope
Violations
PEST (VERMIN)
Condemnation Extermination
 
402.2
305.3
503.l

106.4
107.4
107.5
l 07.4.1
101.2
105.4

107.1
307.l
 
Locked doors Windows OPERATOR
Definition
ORDER (See NOTICE) ORDINANCE, RULE
Applicability
Request for appeal OUTLET
Electrical
OWNER
Closing of vacant structures Definition
Demolition
Extermination Failure to comply
Insect and rodent control

Notice
 
702.3
304.13.2

202



102
110.5

605.2

107.2
202
109
307.2
109.3
302.4, 307.2,
307.4
106.1, 107.3
 
Insect and rat control PLACARD,  POST
Closing
Condemnation Demolition Emergency, notice Notice to owner
Placarding of structure Prohibited use Removal
PLUMBING
Access
Clean and sanitary Connections Contamination Employee's facilities Fixtures
Required facilities Responsibility
 
302.4	,304.14, 307.1

107.2
107.1, 108.1
109
108.1
106.1, 107.3
107.4
107.5
107.4.1

504.2
504.1
505.l
505.2
503.3
504.1
502
501.2
 
Placarding of structure Responsibility Responsibility , fire safety
Responsibility, light, ventilation Responsibility, mechanical and electrical
Responsibility , plumbing facilities Right of entry
Scope
Transfer of ownership
 
107.4
301.2
701.2
401.2

601.2
501.2
103.3
101.2
106.5
 
Sanitary drainage system
Scope
Storm drainage Supply
Water heating facilities
PORCH
Handrails Structurally sound
PORTABLE (TEMPORARY)
Cooking equipment PRESSURE
 
506
501.1
507
505.3
505.4

306.1
304.10

603.1
 






















		


REPORTS
Extermination, single		
occupancy	302.4, 307.3	Test reports 	104.3.2
Failure to comply	109.3	RESIDENTIAL
Grading and drainage	302.2	Extermination	307
Responsibility	301.2	Residential heating 	602.2
Scope	301.1	Scope 	101.2
Storm drainage	507	RESPONSIBILITY
Vacant structures and  land	301.3	Extermination	307
PROTECTION		Fire safety 	701.2
Basement windows	304.17	General 	301.2
Fire-protection systems	704	Mechanical and electrical 	601.2
Signs, marquees and awnings
PUBLIC
Cleanliness	304.9

304.1, 305.l	Persons 	301.1
Placarding of structure	I07.4
Plumbing facilities 	501.2
Egress	702.1	Scope	I 01.2, 301.1
Hallway	502.3	REVOKE, REMOVE
Sewage system	506.1	Demolition	109
Toilet rooms	503	Existing remedies 	102.4
Vacant structures and land	301.3	Process ventilation 	403.4
Water system	505	Removal of placard 	107.4.1
PUBLIC WAY		RIGHT OF ENTRY
Definition	202	Duties and power of City Building
		Inspector 	103.3
		Inspections 	103.2
		RODENTS
Basement hatchways	
304.16
R		Condemnation	107
		Exterior surfaces	304.6
 



Extermination	302.4, 307	Plumbing fixtures		504. 1
Guards for basement windows	304.17	Required plumbing facilities		502
Harborage	302.4	Scope		101.2
Insect and rodent control	307.l	SASH		
ROOF		Window		304.13
Exterior structure	304.1	SCREENS		
Roofs	304.7	Insect screens	304.14	
Storm drainage	507	SECUIUTY		
ROOM	Basement hatchways	304.18.3
Bedroom and living room 	404.4	Building	304.18
Cooking facilities	403.3	Doors	304. 18.1
Direct access	503.2	Vacant structures and land	301.3
Habitable	402.1	Windows	304.18.2
Heating facilities	602	SELF-CLOSING SCREEN	DOORS
Light	402	Insect screens	304.14
Minimum ceiling heights	404.3	SEPARATION	
Minimum  width	404.2	Fire-resistance ratings	703
Overcrowding	404.5	Privacy	404.l
Prohibited  use	404.4.4	Separation of units	404.1
Temperature	602.5	Water closet and lavatory	502.l
Toilet	503	SERVICE	
Ventilation	403	Electrical	604.2
ROOMING HOUSES (Sec		Method	106.3
DORMITORY)		Notices and orders	106.1, 107.3
		Service on occupant	107.3
s	SEWER
			General	506.1
SAFETY, SAFE			Maintenance	506.2
Chimney		304.11	SHOWER	
Condemnation		107.1	Bathtub or shower	502.1
Electrical installation	605.l		Rooming houses	502.2
Emergency measures	108		Water heating facilities	505.4
Fire safety requirements		701	Water system	505
Fireplaces		603.1	SIGN	
Intent		101.3	Signs, marquees and awnings	304.9
Safety controls		603.4	SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING	
Scope		101.2	Extermination	307
Unsafe structures and equipment	107	SINK		
SANITARY	Kitchen sink		502.1
Bathroom and kitchen floors	305.3	Sewage system		506
Cleanliness	304. l , 305. l	Water supply		505.3
Exterior property areas	302.J	SIZE		
Exterior structure	304.1	Habitable room ,light	402	
Food preparation	404.7	Habitable room , ventilation		403
Furnished by occupant	302.1	Room area		404.4.1
Interior surfaces	305.3	SMOKE		
 



Alarms	704.2	T	



602.4
Interconnection	704.4		
Power source	704.3	TEMPERATURE	
SPACE	Nonresidential structures	
General, light	402	Residential buildings		602.2
General, ventilation	403	Water heating facilities		505.4
Occupancy limitations
Privacy	404
404.l	TENANT
Scope		
101.2
Scope	404.2	TEST, TESTING		
STACK	Agency		104.3.2
Chimneys 	304.11	Methods		104.3.1
STAIRS	Reports		104.3.2
Common halls and stairways, light  402.2	Required		104.3
Exit facilities	305.4	TOXIC
Handrails	304.12, 305.5	Process ventilation		403.4
Luminaries	605.3			
Public areas	302.3	u		
Stairs and porches	304.10
STANDARD
Referenced		
102.7	UNOBSTRUCTED
Access to public way	
702.1	
STORAGE
Food  preparation
STRUCTURE		
404.7	General, egress
UNSAFE
Equipment		702.1

107.1.2
Accessory structures		302.6	Existing remedies		102.4
Closing of vacant structures		107.2	General, condemnation	10	7, 109
Definition		202	General, demolition		109
Emergency measures
General, exterior	108	
304.1	Notices and orders
107.3	106	,
General, condemnation		109	Structure		107.1.1
General, interior structure		305.1	USE		
Placarding of structure		107.4	Application of other codes		102.3
Scope		301.1	General, demolition		109
 
Structural members
Vacant structures and land
SUPPLY
 
304.4, 305.2
301.3	v
 











Swimming pools
 











303. I
 











Exhaust vents Process ventilation
 











302.5
 












403.4
 



VENT
Connectio ns		

504.3	WATER
Basement hatchways	

304.16
Exhaust vents	302.5		Connections	506.1
Flue		603.2	Contamination	505.2
VENTILATION			General, sewage	506
Clothes dryer exhaust		403.5	General, storm drainage	507
Combustion air		603.5	General, water system	505
Definition		202	Heating	505.4
General, ventilatio n		403	Hotels	502.3
Habitable rooms		403.1	Kitchen sink	502.1
Process ventilation		403.4	Required facilities	502
Recirculation	403.2, 403.4	Rooming houses	502.2
Toilet rooms	403.2	Supply	505.3
VERMIN		System	505
Condemnation	107	Toilet rooms	503
Insect and rat control
VIOLATION	302.4, 307	Water heating facilities
WEATHER, CLIMATE	505.4
Condemnation	107	Heating facilities	602
Costs	105.5	WEATHERSTRIP	
General	105	Window and door frames	304.13
Notice	106, 107.3	WIDTH	
Penalty	105.4	Minimum room width	404.2
Placarding of structure	107.4	WIND	
Prosecution	105.3	Weather tight	304.13
Strict liability offense	105.3	Window and door frames	304.13
Transfer of ownership	106.5	WINDOW	
Emergency escape	702.4
w	Glazing	304.13.1
Guards for basement windows	304.17
WALK	Habitable rooms	402.1
Walkways	302.3	Insect screens	304.14
WALL		Interior surface		305.3
Accessory structures	302.6	Light	402	
Exterior surfaces	304.2, 304.6	Openable windows		304.13.2
Exterior walls	304.6	Toilet rooms		403.2
Foundation walls	304.5	Ventilation		403
General, fire-resistance rating	703.1	Weather tight		304.13
Interior surfaces	305.3	Window and door frames		304.13
Outlets required	605.2	WORKER		
Temperature measurement
WASTE	602.5	Employee facilities
WORKMANSHIP	503.3, 602.4
Dwelling units	502.1	General	102.5
 



SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any provision of this Ordinance or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid , the remainder of the ordinance or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.


SEVERABILITY .	All  Ordinances  or  parts  of  Ordinances  m  conflict  herewith  are  hereby
repealed .

EFFECTIV E DATE .  The Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its final passage and approval and publication of its title and penalty clause.

DATEDthis     j!	dayof		, 2014.

 


ATTEST:

 

 
First Reading: Second Reading: Publication Date:
 
August 4, 2014
August 18, 2014
September 4, 2014
 

Effective Date:	September 4, 2014
 

 

SOLEM LAW OFFICE

 



Attorneys:
Scott T. Solem
A llyson M. Hicks

Retired:
Robert E. Alexander
Raymond M. Hagen
 
109 Central Avenue S, P.O. Box 249 Beulah , North Da kota 58523 Telephone: (701) 873-5555
Fax: (701) 873-4958
beulaw @westriv.com


September 2, 2014
 



Hebron  Office: 705 Main  St.
P.O. Box 33
Hebron , ND 58638 Tel: (70 1 ) 878-4560
Fax: (70 I) 878-4468
hebronlaw @westriv.com
 




Editor
Beulah Beacon
324 2°d Avenue NE
Beulah , North Dakota 58523
 




 


Re:	Ordinance #412
Title and Penalty Clause
 


Dear Editor:

Please find enclosed the title and penalty clause of the above Ordinance #412.  I would appreciate it if you would publish this once in the Beulah Beacon in the September 4, 2014 issue, and then return an Affidavit of Publication to this office and mail your billing statement to the Beulah City Auditor.

Ithank you for your cooperation and consideration .

Sincerely,


Isl

SCOTT T. SOLEM
Beulah City Attorney



STSllh Enclosure
pc:  Heather Ferebee , City Auditor
 



ORDINANCE NO. 412

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING BEULAH CITY ORDINANCE NO. 389 THE PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

105.4	Violation penalties. Any person , who shall violate a provision of this code, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of an infraction which has a maximum penalty of a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1 ,000.00). Each day that a violation continues to occur after the compliance  deadline may be deemed a separate offense for which the person may be prosecuted and penalized.

105.5	Costs to be assessed against property. The City may assess the cost of any demolition, repair, or removal of a building or structure against the property in question as a lien against the real property from which the cost was incurred and the lien may be foreclosed in judicial proceedings in the manner provided by law for loans secured by liens on real property. If this amount is not adequate to cover the cost of demolition, repair, or removal, the City has a lien for the amount of the additional costs on real property owned, or later acquired, by the property owner in the City. If the City provides the amount of the lien and the name of the owner, the County Auditor shall enter on the tax list the amount of the additional cost as a tax lien. The tax lien is enforceable by the City in the same manner as a tax lien by a county. This subsection in no way limits or restricts any authority which is now or may hereafter be vested in the State Fire Marshall for the regulation or control of such buildings or structures.

The title and penalty section of the above Ordinance is published in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.

Dated this   lSth day of	A_u_gu_s_t	, 2014.


 	_Isl	___ HEATHER FEREBEE, CITY AUDITOR CITY OF BEULAH
 


ORDINANCE NO. 414

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE JURISDICTION OF THE CITY OF BEULAH AS WELL AS THE EXTRA-TERRITORIAL ZONING JURISDICTION OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, COUNTY OF MERCER, STATE OF NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS:
1.	Jurisdiction - General.   Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the City has jurisdiction:

a)	Over any common or public grounds belonging to the City and with the consent of the majority of the owners thereof shall have power to regulate the banks, shores and wharves of that portion of any navigable stream within the corporate limits; and

b)	In and over all places within one-half (Yl) mile of the corporate limits for the purpose of enforcing health and quarantine ordinances, and police regulations and ordinances adopted to promote the peace, order, safety, and general welfare of the City.

(Reference :  N.D.C.C. § 40-06-01)

2.	Jurisdiction  - Police.	The police officers of the City shall perform  the duties and exercise the power s of peace officers as defined and prescribed by the laws of this State:

a)	Within the City limits and for a distance of one and one-half (1Yl) miles in all directions outside the City limits.

b)	A police officer in "hot pursuit" may continue beyond the one and one-half (1Yl) mile limit to make an arrest, in obedience to a warrant or without a warrant under the conditions of N.D.C.C. § 29-06-15, whenever obtaining the aid of police officers having jurisdiction beyond that limit would cause a delay  permitting escape.  As used  in this subsection, "hot pursuit" means the immediate pursuit of a person who is endeavoring to avoid arrest.

(Reference:    N.D.C.C.  §  40-20-05)
 


3.	Territorial Authority of Zoning Regulations. The Zoning Ordinances and Subdivision Regulations of the City of Beulah  shall apply to all unincorporated  territory within one
(1) mile of the corporate limits as authorized by the North Dakota Century Code.

(Reference: N.D.C.C. § 40-47-01.1)

4.	Severability .	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed and rescinded.

5.	Effective Date.   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage.

6.	Savings Clause.	If any portion of this Ordinance or its application to any persons or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the Ordinance or the applicat ion of the provisions to other persons or circumstances is not affected.



CITY OF BEULAH





Darrell Bjerke, Mayor



ATIEST:




Heather Ferebee, Auditor




Introduction and First Reading:	March 16, 2015

Second Reading and Final Passage:	April 6, 2015

Publication:	Not Required

 

Effective Date:
 
April 6, 2015
 
ORDINANCE NO. 415


AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS WITHIN THE JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS  OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

6.1	PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS

(1)	Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations on conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants or variances or conditional uses, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any ofits requirements shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding
$1,500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment for each such offense, and in addition shall pay costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

(2)	Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Beulah City Council from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

The title and penalty section of the above Ordinance is published in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.

Dated this 3rd day of August, 2015.




THER FEREBE ·, CITY AUDITOR CITY OF BEULAH
 
ORDINANCE NO. 415

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS WITHIN THE JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

SECTION 1.0

STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OFFACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES

1.1	STATUTORY  AUTHORIZATION

The Legislature of the State of North Dakota has in North Dakota Century Code, Chapters 40-47, 11-33 and 58-03, delegated responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizenry.

Therefore, the City Council of the City of Beulah, North Dakota does ordain as follows:
)
1.2	FINDINGS OF FACT

(1)	The flood hazard areas of the City of Beulah are subject to periodic inundation which can endanger life, result in loss of property, create health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, cause extraordinary public expenditures for.flood protection and relief, and impair the tax base, all of which adversely affect thepublic health, safety and general welfare.	'

(2)	Flood losses caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the special flood hazard areas cause increases in flood heights and velocities. Inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise unprotected structures also contribute to the flood loss.

1.3	STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed;



1
 
(1)	To protect human life and health;

(2)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;


(3)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding, and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions;


(5)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in special flood haz.ard areas;

(6)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(7)	To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a special flood haz.ard area; and,

(8)	To ensure that those who occupy the special flood haz.ard areas assume responsibility for their actions.

1.4	METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES

Inorder to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and provisions for:

(1)	Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(2)	Requiring that uses vulnerable to flood, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3)	Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

(4)	Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and,







2
 
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

SECTION2.0 DEFINITIONS
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.

''Appeal" means a request for a review of the City Coordinator interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.

"Base flood or 100-year flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

"Base Flood Elevation" CBFE) means the height of the base flood or 100-year flood usually in feet above mean sea level.

"Basement'' means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

"Best Available Date" (BAD) means water elevation information from any source used to estimate or determine a base flood elevation (i.e. high water mark).

"Conveyance or hydraulic conveyance" means a geometric characteristic of a river or watercourse at a given point that determines the flow-carrying capacity at that point.

"Developmenf' means any man-made change to improved  or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the special flood hazard area.

"Flood Insurance Rate Map" (FIRM) means the official map issued by  the Federal Emergency Management Agency where special flood hazard areas are designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH, Al-A30 or A-99.

"Flood Insurance Study" (FIS}means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.





3
 
"Flood" or flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or, from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

"F1oodproofing"· CDcy) means protection provided a structure, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, which is watertight two feet above the base flood elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water.

"Floodway or regulatory floodway" means he channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

"Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of a structure including the basement.


"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle", but does include "mobile home".

"Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

''New construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this ordinance.

"Reasonable safe from flooding" means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area, and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.

''Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is:


(a)	built on a single chassis;
(b)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(c)	designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
(d)	designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use; including, but not
limited to;
(e)	travel trailers, trailers on wheels, park-model trailers, and other similar vehicles.


"Special Flood Hazard Area" CSFHA) means an area of land that wold be inundated by a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.





4
 
"Start of construction; includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

"Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including manufactured homes and gas or liquid above-ground storage tanks.

"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the building to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

"Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

1)	Before the improvement or repair is started; or

2)	Ifthe structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.

The term does not, however, include either:


1)	Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

2)	Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

"Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance.




)
5
 
SECTION3.0 GENERAL PROVISIONS
3.1	LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES

This ordinance shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Beulah.

3.2	BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING  THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS

The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Beulah, dated October 16,2015," with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at Beulah City Hall located at 120 Central Avenue N., Beulah, North Dakota 58523.

3.3	COMPLIANCE

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.

3.4	GREATER  RESTRICTIONS

This ordinance is not intended to repeal, remedy, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

3.5	INTERPRETATION

In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:


(1)	Considered as minimum requirement;

(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,

(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.





6
 
3.6	WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY

The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Beulah, any office or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

SECTION 4.0 ADMINISTRATION
4.1	ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area established in Section 3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City Coordinator and may include, but not be limited to:  plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
)		nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill storage materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the
foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:


(1)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all structures;

(2)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(3)	Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing	methods for any non-residential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 5.2-2; and,

(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.









)
7
 
4.2	DESIGNATION OF THE CITY COORDINATOR

The City Coordinator is hereby appointed to administrator and implement this ordinance by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.

4.3	DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY COORDINATOR

Duties of the City Coordinator shall include, but not be limited to: 4.3-1	Permit Review
(1)	Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied.

(2)	Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local government agencies from which prior approval is required.

(3)	Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Section 5.3(1) are met.

4.3-2    Use of Other Base Flood Data


When base flood data has not been provided in accordance with Section 3.2, BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS, the City Coordinator
shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available (known as best available data) from a federal, state, or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in the floodplain are administered in accordance with Section 5.2, SPECIFIC STANDARDS.

4.3-3  Information to be Obtained and Maintained


(1)	Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(2)	For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:


(i)	obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed;




8
 
(ii)	maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section 4.1(3).

(3)	Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance.

4.3-4	Alteration of Watercourses The responsible person shall:
(1)	Notify nearby communities, water resource districts, and the North Dakota State Engineer, as necessary, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

(2)	Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished; and,

(3)	Notify the appropriate water resource district prior to removal or placement of fill within two hundred feet of the bank of a body of water during normal flow or stage.

4.3-5	Interpretation of Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Boundaries


Make interpretation where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 4.4.

4.4	VARIANCE  PROCEDURE


4.4-1	Appeals to the City Council


(1)	The Beulah City Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.

(2)	The Beulah City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the City Coordinator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.

(3)	Those aggrieved by the decision of the Beulah City Council or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the District Court, as provided in NDCC 40-47- 11, 11-33-12, or 58-03-14.

_)
9
 
(4)	In passing upon such applications, the Beulah City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this ordinances; and:

(i)	the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(ii)	the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(iii)	the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(iv)	the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(v)	the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(vi)	the availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(vii)	the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(viii)	the relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(ix)	the safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(x)	the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(xi)	the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges .

(5)	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half ace to less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base





10
 
flood level, providing items (I-xi) in Section 4.4-1(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(6)	Upon consideration of the factors of Section 4.4-1(4) and the purposes of this ordinance, the Beulah City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it seems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance.

(7)	The City Coordinator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management  Agency upon request.

4.4-2	Conditions for Variances


(I)       Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.

(2)    Variances shall not be issued within the identified floodplain if any increase in flood level during the base flood discharge would result.


)	(3)		Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.


(4)	Variances shall only be issued upon:


(I)	a showing of good and sufficient cause;


(ii)	a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,

(iii)	a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in Section 4.4-1(4), or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.

(5)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.




11
 
SECTION 5.0

PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION

5.1	GENERAL STANDARDS

In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required: 5.1-1	Anchoring
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements, including additions, shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.

(2)	All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

5.1-2	Construction Materials and Methods

(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with
)	materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

(2)	All new and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(3)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

5.1-3	Utilities

(1)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

(2)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,





12
 
(3)      On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

5.1-4	Subdivision Proposals

(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(2)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

(3)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(4)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less).

5.2	SPECIFIC  STANDARDS

In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have been provided
)		as set forth in Section 3.2 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS or Section 4.3-2, use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required:

5.2-1	Residential  Construction


New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated on fill to at least one foot above the base flood elevation.

5.2-2	Nomesidential Construction


Construction and substantial improvement of any nomesidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated on fill to at least one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:

(I) Be floodproofed to at least two feet above the base flood elevation, so that below this elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.





13
 
(2)	Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

(3)	Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the City Floodplain Manger as set forth in Section 4.3-3(2).

5.2-3	Manufactured Homes

(1)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Sections 5.1-1(2).

(2)	All manufactured homes or  those to be substantially improved shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on fill to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system.

5.3	FLOODWAYS

Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section 3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion
)	potential, the following provisions apply:

(1)	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional	engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(2)	If Section 5.3(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions	of Section 5.0 PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD . HAZARD REDUCTION.

SECTION6.0

6.1	PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS

(1)	Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations on conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants or variances or conditional uses, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with

)
14
 
any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment for each such offense, and in addition shall pay costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.

(2)	Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Beulah City Council from ta1dng such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

SECTION7.0

7.1	SEVERABILITY


All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed and rescinded.

SECTION8.0

8.1	EFFECTIVE DATE


This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage.


)	SECTION9.0

9.1	SAVINGS CLAUSE

Ifany portion of this ordinance or its application to any persons or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance or application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances is not affected.






















15
 
CITY OF BEULAH
<Ow,,,L/ g_	..
DARRELL R. BJERKE
Mayor



ATTEST:

(liijH?ERFEREBli A
Auditor



 
Introduction and First Reading: Second Reading and Final Passage: Publication:
Effective Date:
 
July 20, 2015
August 3, 2015
August 6, 2015
August 6, 2015



































16
 
ORDINANCE NO. 416

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING  COMPENSATION FOR THE MEMBERS OF THE CITY COUNCIL AND MAYOR.

BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE CITY COUNCIL  OF THE CITY  OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY , NORTH DAKOTA:
I.	Each member of the City Council shall be compensated by payment of Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) per month, which said amount represents full compensation for attendance at all regularly scheduled and specially called meetings as well as full compensation for all services rendered in their capacity as City Council members. Payments shall be made at the discretion of the City Council, but shall be made at least semi-annually.
II.	The Mayor of the City of Beulah shall be compensated by payment of Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00) per month, which said amount represents full compensation for attendance at all regularly scheduled and specially called meetings as well as full compensation for all services rendered in his/her capacity as Mayor. Payments shall be made at the discretion of the City Council, but shall be made at least semi­ annually.
III.	The above compensation amounts shall be effective commencing July 1, 2016. The City Council and Mayor shall continue to be paid at the current rates established by prior Ordinances until the new compensation amounts take effect July 1, 2016.
IV.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.

V.	This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage and approval.
VI.	Ifany provision of this ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance, or the application of the provisions of other persons or circumstances is not affected.
 


DATED this pt day of February, 2016.

 



ATTEST:






First Reading: January 18, 2016

Second Reading: February 1, 2016

Final Passage: February 1, 2016






)
 
)	ORDINANCE NO. 417


AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 383 REGARDING A CITY LODGING, RESTAURANT, AND MOTOR  VEHICLE RENTAL TAX WITHIN THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER  COUNTY, NORTH  DAKOTA.
BE  IT ORDAINED  BY  THE CITY  COUNCIL  OF THE  CITY  OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

I.	Beulah City Ordinance No. 383 and any and all City of Beu lah Resolutions regarding a city lodging, restaurant, and motor vehicle rental tax within the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota, are hereby rescinded, repealed, and re-enacted as follows:

1.	The City Lodging Tax Imposed.  There is hereby imposed a tax of 2% upon the gross receipts  of retailers on the leasing or renting of hotel, motel, or tourist  court accommodations within the City for periods of less than 30 consecutive calendar
)	days or one month. The tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to the state sales tax on rental accommodations as provided in N.D.C .C. Chapter 57-39.2. All

proceeds must be deposited in the City Visitors' Promot ion Fund and spent only as provided in Chapter 40-57.3 of the North Dakota Century Code.
2.	City Lodging and Restaurant Tax Imposed . There is hereby imposed an additional tax of 1% upon the gross receipts of retailers on the leasing or renting of hotel, motel, or tourist court   accommodations within the City  for  periods  of  less  than  30 consecutive calendar days or one month and upon the gross receipts of a restaurant from any sales of prepared  food or beverages, not including alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises where purchased , which are subject to state sales tax. For purpos es of this section  "restaurant" means any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portion service for consumption on or off the premises and "prepared" includes heating  prepackaged food. Accommodations, food and beverages may all, each, or in any  combination be subjected to the tax
 

under this section, if all items in any category which are taxable under state tax law are taxable, except as otherwise provided by Chapter 40-57.3 of the North Dakota Century Code. The tax imposed under this section is in addition to state sales taxes on rental accommodations and restaurant sales. All proceeds must be deposited in the City Visitors' Promotion Capital Construction Fund and spent only as provided in Chapter 40-57.3 of the North Dakota Century Code.
3.	City Motor Vehicle Rental Tax Imposed. There is hereby imposed a tax of 1% upon the gross receipts of a retailer on the rental of any motor vehicle for fewer than thirty days if that motor vehicle is either delivered to a renter at an airport or delivered to a renter who was picked up by the retailer at an airport. For the purposes of this section, "motor vehicle"  means a motorized  passenger  vehicle  designed  to be operated  on highways  and  "retailer"  means  a company  for  which  the  primary
business is the renting of motor vehicles for periods of fewer than 30 days.The tax
)		imposed under this section is in addition to state sales taxes on rental motor vehicles for fewer than 30 days. All proceeds must be deposited in the City Visitors' Promotion Fund and spent only as provided in Chapter 40-57.3 of the

North Dakota Century Code.

4.	Visitors Committee Established. There is hereby established a visitors committee . The visitors committee shall serve as an advisory committee to the City Council of the City of Beulah  in administering the proceeds from the taxes established herein. The City Council shall  annually set the budget, if any, under which the visitors committee shall operate.
a.	Visitors Committee Members. The visitors committee shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council of the City of Beulah. The visitors committee shall consist of the following:







2
 

i.	One representative of the Beulah City Council. This may be the Mayor, a City Council Member, or a City Official;
ii.	One board member from the Beulah Convention & Visitor Bureau;
111.	One board member from the Beulah Chamber of Commerce;

iv.		The remaining two positions shall be filled with two of the following: Board member of the Beulah Park Board; Board member of the Beulah Job Development Authority; Board member of the Mercer County Fair Board; or an at large City of Beu lah resident. Only one visitors committee member may be appointed from any one entity or at large.
b.	Compensation  of  Visitors  Committee  Members.	The  appointed   visitors

committee members shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement

for necessary expenses.

c.		Term.     Committee members shall service for a term of four years, except that two of those initially appointed must be appointed for an initial term of two years.
d.	Vacancie s.    Vacancies on the visitors committee must be filled in the same manner

as t e initial appointment.

e.	Officers.	The visitors committee shall elect a chairperson and vice chairperson

from among its members to serve for a term of two years.

5.	Proceeds from Tax.  The City Council of the City of Beu lah may contract with any person,

firm, association, corporation, or limited liability company to carry out the purposes of the City Visitors Promotion Fund or the City Visitors Promotion Capital Construction Fund. The City Council may irrevocably dedicate any portion of revenues from the tax authorized by Section 2 herein and may authorize and







3
 

\
issue  bonds  or  other  evidences  of  indebtedness  in  the  manner  prescribed  by

N.D.C.C. § 40-35-08 to be paid by those revenues for any purpose that moneys in the City Visitors Promotion Capital Construction Fund may be used. Such tax upon being pledged to payment of bonds or evidences of indebtedness  issued pursuant to this section may not be reduced or repealed by the City Council or by the electors of the City by any initiated amendment to or referendum of the ordinance referred to in Section 2 and N.D.C.C. § 40-57.3-01.1, so long as any of such bonds or evidences of indebtedness remain outstanding. The proceeds from the tax imposed under Section 1 may not be used for any type of capital construction or purchase of real property. The proceeds from the tax imposed in Section 2 may be used only for payment of bonds issued, and the costs of issuance related thereto, under this section or for tourism or capital construction, maintenance, and repair or acquisition of property consistent with the purposes of this ordinance.
6.	Severability.	All ordinances or parts of ordinances  in conflict herewith  are hereby rescinded and repealed.
6.	Effective Date.  This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage.

7.	Savings Clause. If any provision of this Ordinance or its application to any person or circumstance  is held  invalid,  the  remainder  of  the  Ordinance  or the  application  of the  provision  to  other  persons  or  circumstances  is not  affected.
DATED thisJLd:day of March, 2016.

 
Mayor










4
 
AITEST:




HEATHER FEREBEE
City Auditor

Introduction and First Reading: March 7, 2016

Second Reading: March 21, 2016

Final Passage: March 21, 2016
















)

































5
 
ORDINANCE NO. 420





AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1977 OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.



BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:



THAT ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1977 BE AMENDED AND RE-ENACTED TO READ AS FOLLOWS:













































I - 0
 












Adopted October 17, 2016
 

 
CHAPTER 1 HOW TO USE THIS DOCUMENT  	1
 
SECTION 1.1 ORGANIZATION OF ZONING ORDINANCE 	1
1.101	GENERAL INTENT 	1
1.102	GENERAL LAYOUT 	1
1.103	CHAPTER SUMMARIES 	2
SECTION 1.2 WHEN AM I REQUIRED TO GET A BUILDING PERMIT? 	3
SECTION 1.3 HOW DO I OBTAIN A BUILDING PERMIT? 	3
SECTION 1.4 DO I HAVE TO COMPLY WITH DEED RESTRICTIONS AND CITY ORDINANCES? 	3
SECTION 1.5 HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE TO GET A BUILDING PERMIT? 	3
SECTION 1.6 HOW DO I DETERMINE THE CURRENT ZONING OF MY SITE? 	4
SECTION 1.7 WHAT USES ARE PERMITTED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT? 	4
SECTION 1.8 WHAT IS THE APPROVAL PROCESS FOR MY PROJECT? 	4
SECTION 1.9 FORMAT OF ZONING ORDINANCE 	5
1.901 OUTLINE 	5
CHAPTER 2 ZONING DISTRICTS  	1
SECTION 2.0 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 	1
2.1	R-1 – SINGLE FAMILY, DETACHED 	1
2.2	R-2 – LOW DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY 	3
2.3	R-3 – HIGH DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY 	6
2.4	R-4 – MANUFACTURED HOME 	8
2.5	R-5 (RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE) 	10
2.6	R-6 – RURAL RESIDENTIAL 	11
2.7	R-7 – URBAN MULTI-FAMILY 	13
SECTION 2.1 COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 	15
2.11	C-1 – CENTRAL BUSINESS 	15
2.12	C-2 – HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL 	18
2.13	C-3 – GENERAL COMMERCIAL 	20
2.14	C-4 – NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL 	22
SECTION 2.2 INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 	24
2.21	I – LIGHT INDUSTRIAL 	24
2.22	HI – HEAVY INDUSTRIAL 	26
SECTION 2.3 OTHER ZONING DISTRICTS 	28
2.31	A – AGRICULTURAL 	28
2.32	POC – PUBLIC & OPEN SPACE CONSERVATION 	30
2.33	PUD – PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 	32
SECTION 2.4 OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 	40
2.41	FPO – FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY 	40
2.42	UGO – UNDERGROUND MINING OVERLAY 	49
SECTION 2.5 USE TABLE 	51
CHAPTER 3 SPECIAL AND CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS  	1
SECTION 3.0 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTERS 	1
SECTION 3.1 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 	2
SECTION 3.2 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS 	2
SECTION 3.3 CAR ENTHUSIASTS AND COLLECTORS 	3
SECTION 3.4 COMMERCIAL ABOVE-GROUND FUEL STORAGE 	3
SECTION 3.5 CREW CAMPS 	4
SECTION 3.6 DAYCARE FACILITIES 	9
SECTION 3.7 GUEST HOUSE 	9
SECTION 3.8 IN-HOME BUSINESSES 	9
SECTION 3.9 MINERAL EXTRACTION AND SAND, GRAVEL, SCORIA, AND OTHER AGGREGATE MATERIAL MINING AND
PROCESSING 	11
SECTION 3.10 RAILROAD SPUR (NOT RAILROAD OWNED) 	12
SECTION 3.11 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARKS 	13
SECTION 3.12 REFINERIES AND PETRO-CHEMICAL PLANTS 	16
SECTION 3.13 SALVAGE AND JUNK YARDS 	17
SECTION 3.14 SELF-SERVICE AND OUTDOOR STORAGE 	17
SECTION 3.15 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES & RESIDENCES 	18
SECTION 3.16 UTILITY CORRIDORS (SURFACE OR UNDERGROUND) 	19
SECTION 3.17 UTILITY-SCALE SOLAR FACILITIES 	19
 
CHAPTER 4 SITE DEVELOPMENT	1


SECTION 4.0 ACCESS MANAGEMENT	1
4.1	SITE ACCESS	1
4.2	SIGHT VISIBILITY TRIANGLE	3
SECTION 4.1 PARKING STANDARDS	5
SECTION 4.2 LIGHTING STANDARDS	11
4.21 OUTDOOR LIGHTING	11
SECTION 4.3 GENERAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS	11
4.31 GENERAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS	11
SECTION 4.4 SIGN STANDARDS	11
4.41	INTENT	11
4.42	GENERAL SIGN STANDARDS	12
4.43	ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS	13
4.44	ELECTRONIC MESSAGING & DIGITAL SIGNS	15
4.45	INCIDENTAL SIGNS & BULLETIN BOARDS	15
4.46	OFF-PREMISE ADVERTISING SIGNS	16
4.47	TEMPORARY SIGNS	17
4.48	EXEMPT SIGNS	18
4.49	PROHIBITED SIGNS	18
SECTION 4.5 SETBACKS	19
 
4.51	HOW TO MEASURE SETBACKS 	19
4.52	SETBACK AVERAGING 	19
4.53	SETBACK EXCEPTIONS 	21
SECTION 4.6 STRUCTURE HEIGHT 	21
4.61	HOW TO MEASURE STRUCTURE HEIGHT 	21
4.62	EXCEPTIONS 	22
SECTION 4.7 FENCES 	22
4.71 FENCE STANDARDS 	22
SECTION 4.8 PROPERTY PINS 	23
4.81	PROPERTY PINS REQUIRED 	23
4.82	REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT 	23
SECTION 4.9 FOUNDATIONS 	23
4.91 MINIMUM FOUNDATIONS 	23
CHAPTER 5 PERMIT REVIEW AND APPLICATION  	1
SECTION 5.0 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES 	1
5.1	COUNCIL 	1
5.2	PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 	2
SECTION 5.1 PROCESS 	4
SECTION 5.11 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED 	4
SECTION 5.12 BUILDING PERMIT 	5
SECTION 5.13 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY* 	7
SECTION 5.14 DEMOLITION PERMIT 	8
SECTION 5.15 TEMPORARY PERMIT 	10
SECTION 5.16 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT 	12
SECTION 5.17 VARIANCE 	15
SECTION 5.18 ZONING DISTRICT MAP AMENDMENT 	18
SECTION 5.19 ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT AMENDMENT 	22
SECTION 5.20 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN LAND USE MAP AMENDMENT 	22
SECTION 5.21 SUBDIVISION PLATS 	26
SECTION 5.22 ANNEXATION 	31
SECTION 5.23 APPEALS OF COUNCIL ACTIONS 	37
SECTION 5.24 ORGANIZATION CHART 	37
CHAPTER 6 LEGAL FRAMEWORK	1


SECTION 6.0 AUTHORITY	1
SECTION 6.1 TITLE	1
SECTION 6.2 JURISDICTION	1
SECTION 6.3 PURPOSE	1
SECTION 6.4 CONSISTENCY WITH COMPREHENSIVE PLAN	1
SECTION 6.5 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS	1
 
SECTION 6.6 INTERPRETATION 	2
SECTION 6.7 REPEAL AND RE-ENACTMENT 	2
SECTION 6.8 SEVERABILITY 	2
SECTION 6.9 BUILDING PERMITS 	2
SECTION 6.10 ENFORCEMENT 	3
SECTION 6.11 ZONING DISTRICT MAP 	3
SECTION 6.12 NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES, AND USES 	4
SECTION 6.13 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITY 	6
SECTION 6.14 EXISTING LOTS OF RECORD 	6
CHAPTER 7 WIRELESS FACILITIES  	1
SECTION 7.0 PURPOSE AND INTENT 	1
SECTION 7.1 DEFINITIONS 	1
SECTION 7.2 APPROVALS REQUIRED FOR WIRELESS FACILITIES AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES 	3
SECTION 7.3 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCESS 	4
SECTION 7.4 CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT PROCESS FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS 	7
SECTION 7.5 GENERAL STANDARDS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 	11
SECTION 7.6 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 	13
SECTION 7.7 WIRELESS FACILITIES AND SUPPORT STRUCTURES IN EXISTENCE ON THE DATE OF ADOPTION 	14
CHAPTER 8 EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONE (RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE)	1
CHAPTER 9 DEFINITIONS  	1
SECTION 9.0 TERMS 	1
 
Chapter 1 How To Use This Document 	



Section 1.1 Organization of Zoning Ordinance

1.101	General Intent

This document referred to as the Zoning Ordinance is intended to protect and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience and general welfare; and more particularly to:

(1)	Carry out the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, and to manage the future growth of the City in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan;

(2)	Manage land use in a manner that will assure the orderly development and beneficial use of the incorporated and extraterritorial areas of the City for residential, commercial, industrial, and other purposes;

(3)	Reduce hazards to the public resulting from the inappropriate location, use or design of buildings and land uses;

(4)	Attain the physical, social, and economic advantages resulting from comprehensive and orderly land use and resource planning; and

(5)	Conserve the value of land and buildings.

1.102	General Layout

The Zoning Ordinance is organized as a reference document. It is not intended to be read from cover to cover. Instead, it is organized so you may look up only the parts you need. The list of chapters in the table of contents is, therefore, very important, as are the section listings at the beginning of each chapter. Subsequent portions of this introduction explain three commonly asked questions when using this Zoning Ordinance. There are many other ways to use the Zoning Ordinance, depending on your need.

Topics that cover related information have been grouped together. There are a total of seven chapters. This chapter contains basic information on how to use this Zoning Ordinance. The six remaining chapters are summarized below.
 

1.103	Chapter Summaries

Chapter 2: Zoning Districts
This chapter states which uses are allowed in each zone. They also state which uses are allowed in limited situations, which are conditional uses, and which are prohibited. The general development standards for each base zone are also included. The development standards include requirements such as maximum heights and required setbacks.
Chapter 3: Special and Conditional Use Standards
This chapter outlines the development standards for a number of uses, whether permitted or conditional, that have been identified as unique and in need of special standards.
Chapter 4: Site Development
This chapter explains the site development standards including access, parking, lighting, landscaping, signage, fences, general setback guidance, general structure height guidance, and property pin guidance.
Chapter 5: Permit Review and Application
This chapter identifies review and decision making bodies in addition to the procedural process for building permits, Certificate of Occupancy, demolition permits, temporary permits, conditional use permits, variances, zoning map amendments, zoning ordinance text amendments, comprehensive plan  land use map amendments, subdivision plats, and administrative decisions.
Chapter 6: Legal Framework
This chapter will be used most often by attorneys, experienced contractors/developers, and city officials. The sections will provide nonconforming (“grandfathered”) use and structure requirements and limitations, an interpretation clause, enacting clause, severability clause, and other related language.
Chapter 7: Wireless Facilities
This chapter establishes regulations for wireless telecommunication infrastructure so that they are consistent with the standards outlined by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). Regulations are also provided to protect the city against potential safety and visual impacts.
Chapter 8—Reserved for Future Use
Chapter 9: Definitions
Since this is a legal document and includes terms with specific meaning, the Zoning Ordinance
also provides guidance on how specific terms are used. Chapter 7, Definitions, defines words that have a specific meaning within Chapter 7.
 
Section 1.2 When am I Required to Get a Building Permit?

□	Determine Construction and Maintenance Activities Included

A building permit is required prior to the construction and/or maintenance of structures listed in section 5.11. Consult with the Building Official if planning to construct or maintain any improvement not listed.



Section 1.3 How Do I Obtain a Building Permit?

□	Obtain Application and Consult with Building Official
To obtain a building permit, an application must be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee. Once the application and fee are received by the Building Official, the process outlined in section 5.12 for a building permit will follow.


Section 1.4 Do I have to comply with Deed Restrictions and City Ordinances?

□	Review Zoning Ordinance and Deed Restrictions

Yes, if you live in a subdivision with restrictive and/or protective covenants you are required to contact your homeowners association for their requirements; and you must also comply with city ordinance requirements as well. If the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by restrictive and/or protective covenants, which are a private agreement, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance will supersede. If the provisions of a valid, enforceable private agreement impose a greater restriction than this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of the private agreement will supersede. The City does not enforce private agreements or maintain a record of such agreements.


Section 1.5 How long does it take to get a Building Permit?

□	Consult with the Building Official
The timeframe for receiving a building permit is dependent on various factors. Accuracy and completeness of information have major effects on application review time, as well as the fluctuations in the seasonal work load. The type and extent of structural work can also impact the length of time needed to review and potentially approve a building permit application.
 
Section 1.6 How do I Determine the Current Zoning of my Site?

□	Check the Zoning District Map
Refer to the Adopted Zoning District Map available from the Building Official. The published zoning map is periodically updated, however, you may want to verify the zoning shown on the map with the City.


□	Check the City Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map
The Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map illustrates the land use pattern envisioned for the future. If current zoning does not match your development plans or future intent for  a  site, the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map might. Changes in zoning that are consistent with the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map are usually favored by the P&Z Commission and Council.



Section 1.7 What Uses are Permitted in Each Zoning District?

□	Check the Corresponding Regulations
This Zoning Ordinance provides descriptions for each zoning district including uses that are allowed by right, conditional uses, or prohibited uses. The regulations also outline the development standards necessary for each district.



Section 1.8 What is the Approval Process for my Project?

□	Determine Which Approvals are Needed
This may include rezoning, conditional use permit, variance, subdivision, etc. First look up your proposed use in the Use Table section 2.5 to see whether the use is permitted, conditional, or not allowed with the current zoning.


□	Application Forms
Obtain copies of the application forms from the Building Official.
 
□	Key Submission Dates
Check with the Building Official to determine key cut-off dates for being placed on an upcoming meeting agenda if P&Z Commission and/or Council hearings are required.


□	Submittal
Submit all required materials, application forms, and fees to the Building Official. Most applications require submittal several days before the meeting at which they will be discussed. This time period is used by the Council, P&Z Commission, and staff to review your application. In some cases, such as special land uses and rezonings, a longer lead time is needed to publish notice for public hearings and work sessions for the P&Z Commission and Council.



□	Review Procedures
A majority of the review procedures are conveniently located and outlined in Chapter 5. For a quick reference, refer to the flow charts supplemented throughout this chapter.


Section 1.9 Format of Zoning Ordinance


1.901 Outline

The format of this Zoning Ordinance follows the same layout throughout. The section numbers use an expanded decimal number system following the chapter number. Major divisions within the Zoning Ordinance are called chapters. Major divisions within chapters are called sections. The format of the divisions in this Zoning Ordinance are shown below.


Chapter # Chapter Title Section #.# Section Title Subsection #.### - Subsection Title
(A)	Paragraph Title

Paragraph Text
(1)	Subparagraph Title Subparagraph Text
(a)	Subsubparagraph Text
 

Chapter 2 Zoning Districts 	


Section 2.0 Residential Zoning Districts


2.1	R-1 – Single Family, Detached

(A)	Description

The R-1 Single Family, Detached district is intended to provide a low-density suburban environment with single family detached dwellings. Residences will be compatible with, and served by, parks, civic uses, institutional uses, public services.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
(a)	Maximum Density: 5.2 units/acre

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 8,400 sq ft
(b)	Minimum Width: 70 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 30%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 25 ft
i.	8 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 6 ft
i.	3 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 25 ft
i.	8 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 25 ft
i.	3 ft protrusion allowance into setback

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.





1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
(5)	Building Height
(a)	Maximum Building Height: 40 ft

(D)	Other Standards

Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.

(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.

 
 
2.2	R-2 – Low Density Multi-Family

(A)	Description

The R-2, Low Density Multi Family district is intended to allow for a mix of twin homes, duplexes, and single family detached dwellings in a suburban setting, including larger setbacks and easy vehicle access. Residences will be compatible with, and served by, parks, civic uses, institutional uses, public services, and utilities.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
Maximum Density: 10.4 units/acre

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 8,400 sq ft
(b)	Minimum Lot Area for Each Twin Home Dwelling Unit: 4,200 sq ft
(c)	Minimum Width: 70 ft
(d)	Minimum Width for Each Twin Home Dwelling Unit: 35 ft
(e)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 30%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 25 ft
i.	8 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 6 ft
i.	3 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(c)	Minimum Interior Side Setback for Each Twin Home Dwelling Unit: 6 ft / no setback if attached
i.	3 ft protrusion allowance into setback, if applicable
(d)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 25 ft
i.	8 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(e)	Minimum Rear Setback: 25 ft
i.	3 ft protrusion allowance into setback

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 40 ft



1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
(D)	Other Standards

Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.


(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.

 
 
 
 
2.3	R-3 – High Density Multi-Family

(A)	Description

The R-3, High Density Multi Family district is intended to provide higher density residential development in a suburban setting, including larger setbacks and easy vehicle access. Appropriate development can include apartment buildings, attached dwellings, modular homes, and small single family detached homes. Residences will be compatible with, and served by, parks, civic uses, institutional uses, public services, and utilities.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
Maximum Density: 16 units/acre

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area 6,000 sq ft
(b)	Minimum Lot Area for Attached Dwelling Units: 4,200 sq ft
(c)	Minimum Width: 60 ft
(d)	Minimum Width for Attached Dwelling Units: 35 ft
(e)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 40%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 25 ft
i.	8 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 6 ft
i.	3 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 25 ft
i.	8 ft protrusion allowance into setback
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 25 ft
i.	3 ft protrusion allowance into setback

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 50 ft





1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
(D)	Other Standards

Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.

(E)	Permit Process


Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.

 
 
2.4	R-4 – Manufactured Home

(A)	Intent

The R-4, Manufactured Home district is intended to allow for manufactured homes arranged together in a subdivision or park. However, single family detached dwellings are permitted. This development type is intended to be located in a suburban setting with parks, civic uses, institutional uses, public services, and utilities to serve residents.

A manufactured home park offers spaces for the placement of manufactured home units on a lease or rental basis. Manufactured home subdivisions include individually platted lots, for sale within the subdivision, for the placement of manufactured home units.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
Maximum Density: 6.1 units/acre

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 6,000 sq ft/lot
(b)	Minimum Width: 70 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 35%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 25 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 6 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 25 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 10 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 35 ft

(D)	Other Standards


Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.



1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 

(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.

 
 
2.5	R-5 (Reserved for Future Use)
 
2.6	R-6 – Rural Residential

(A)	Description

The R-6, Rural Residential, district is the lowest density residential district. It provides for a semirural environment of low-density, single family detached dwellings along with parks, civic uses, institutional uses, public services, and utilities to serve residents. The intent of the district is to allow for individual sewage treatment systems on large lots with room for sewage treatment.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
Maximum Density: 1 unit/acre

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 87,120 sq ft (2 acres)
(b)	Minimum Width: 150 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 25%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 15 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 30 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 25 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 40 ft

(D)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.









1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
 
 
2.7	R-7 – Urban Multi-Family


(A)	Intent

The R-7, Urban Multi Family Residential, district is intended to accommodate higher density residential development in a compact urban setting with a focus on pedestrian access to the street. The district should be situated adjacent to downtown commercial areas to maximize pedestrian access. Appropriate development will include apartment buildings and attached dwellings with parks, civic uses, institutional uses, public services, and utilities to serve residents.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
Maximum Density: 20 units/acre

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 5,000 sq ft
(b)	Minimum Width: 50 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 60%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 0 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 0 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 0 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 15 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 60 ft

(D)	Other Standards


(1)	Parking
 
Refer to Section 4.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.




1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.

 
 
Section 2.1 Commercial Zoning Districts



2.11	C-1 – Central Business

(A)	Description

The C-1, Central Business, district is intended to preserve and enhance the City’s main street and adjacent commercial area. The district allows for a variety of retail stores and related activities, as well as offices and service establishments which occupy the prime frontages in the central business district. The district is also designed to provide for the needs of the daytime work force and residents who may live above or behind commercial frontage. Development is intended to be pedestrian-oriented with a strong emphasis on a safe and attractive street.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
No requirement

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: No requirement
(b)	Minimum Width: 25 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 100%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 0 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 0 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 0 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 0 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 60 ft







1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
(D)	Other Standards

(1)	Residential

Multi-family dwellings are not permitted on the first floor lot frontage.

(2)	Parking

Refer to Section 4.1.

(3)	Site Access

Refer to Section 4.01.

(4)	Signs

Refer to Section 4.4.

(5)	Building

Be advised that Building Code requirements in the C-1 District may differ from other districts.

(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.
 
 
 
2.12	C-2 – Highway Commercial

(A)	Description

The C-2, Highway Commercial, district is intended to provide for a variety of office, retail, and service opportunities for the purpose of creating a high quality mixture of attractive land uses along main highways, such as ND Highway 49, ND Highway 200, and County Road 21.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
No requirement

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: No requirement
(b)	Minimum Width: 75 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 55%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 15 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 10 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 15 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 20 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 60 ft

(D)	Other Standards

Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.

(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.




1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
 
 
2.13	C-3 – General Commercial


(A)	Description

The C-3, General Commercial, district is intended to provide for a full range of commercial uses, including retail, service, and office. This district excludes warehousing and similar uses that may involve heavy truck traffic.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
No requirement

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: No requirement
(b)	Minimum Width: No requirement
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 85%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 20 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 10 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 20 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 15 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 60 ft

(D)	Other Standards

Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.

(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.




1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
 
 
2.14	C-4 – Neighborhood Commercial


(A)	Description

The C-4, Neighborhood Commercial, district is intended to allow those uses necessary to satisfy the basic convenience shopping or service needs of residents in adjacent neighborhoods.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
No requirement

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 12,500 sq ft
(b)	Minimum Width: 70 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 50%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 20 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 10 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 20 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 20 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 35 ft

(D)	Other Standards

Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.

(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.





1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov.
 
 
 
Section 2.2 Industrial Zoning Districts


2.21	I – Light Industrial


(A)	Description

The I, Light Industrial, district is intended to accommodate manufacturing, processing, packaging, assembly, or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. Common uses include outdoor storage, warehouses, wholesales, manufacturing, and industrial services.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
No requirement

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 8,400 sq ft
(b)	Minimum Width: 70 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 85%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 25 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 12 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 25 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 20 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 60 ft

(D)	Other Standards

(1)	Landscaping, Buffer Strip

Refer to Section 4.3 of the Zoning Ordinance. See definition of buffer strip in Section 9.0


1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.

 
 
2.22	HI – Heavy Industrial

(A)	Description

The HI, Heavy Industrial, District is intended to locate manufacturing and industrial operations as to not impact lower intensity, incompatible uses. District areas should be isolated to protect uses that may be objectionable or hazardous.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
No requirement

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 8,400 sq. ft.
(b)	Minimum Width: 70 ft.
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: 85%

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 40 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 20 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 40 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 40 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 100 ft

(D)	Other Standards

(1)	Landscaping, Buffer Strip

Refer to Section 4.3 of the Zoning Ordinance. See definition of buffer strip in Section 9.0.

(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.


1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 

 
 
Section 2.3 Other Zoning Districts


2.31	A – Agricultural


(A)	Description

The A, Agricultural, district is intended to provide a location for principally undeveloped or vacant land situated on the fringe of an urban area and used for agricultural purposes however, the land may be developed in the future. The types of uses allowed in this district encourage and protect agricultural uses until development is warranted.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
1 unit/10 acres

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: 10 acres
(b)	Minimum Width: 200 ft
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: No requirement

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 50 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 25 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 25 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 50 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 60 ft

(D)	Other Standards

Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.




1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 
(E)	Permit Process

Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.

 
 
2.32	POC – Public & Open Space Conservation


(A)	Description

The POC, Public and Open Space Conservation, district is intended to provide for public facilities and permanent open spaces. Public facilities include uses that are governmental, civic, public service or quasi-public in nature. Open space uses include those areas of the community which exhibit significant scenic qualities, wildlife potential, or recreational potential. Also included are high risk resource areas, such as floodplain or steep terrain.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(C)	Area Requirements

(1)	Density
No requirement

(2)	Lot Size
(a)	Minimum Lot Area: No requirement
(b)	Minimum Width: No requirement
(c)	Maximum Lot Coverage: No requirement

(3)	Setbacks
(a)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 ft
(b)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 6 ft
(c)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 30 ft
(d)	Minimum Rear Setback: 30 ft

(4)	Setbacks from Highways Outside of City Limits1
(a)	Minor Arterial: 200 ft
(b)	Major and Minor Collectors: 150 ft
(c)	Local Roads: 100 ft.

(5)	Building Height
Maximum Building Height: 50 ft

(D)	Other Standards

Refer to Chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance.







1 For highway designations, refer to the latest NDDOT Functional Classification Systems Map for the City of Beulah, available at www.dot.nd.gov
 

(E)	Permit Process


Refer to section 5.1 of the Zoning Ordinance.

 
 
2.33	PUD – Planned Unit Development

(A)	Description

The PUD, Planned Unit Development, district is a nonstandard district that permits greater flexibility of land planning and site design than conventional zoning districts. The district should only be provided in unique situations for the following purposes:

(1)	Provide flexibility in site design, placement, and clustering of buildings; use of open areas and outdoor living areas; provision of parking; and related site and design considerations;

(2)	Encourage the conservation of natural features;

(3)	Provide for efficient use of public services and improvements;

(4)	Permit higher density residential development in special circumstances to allow for affordable housing units.

(5)	Provide for a mix of compatible land uses not otherwise allowed in other zoning districts. The PUD designation shall not be used for the following purpose(s):
(1)	To obtain variances and waivers from existing development standards;

(2)	To secure agreements between an applicant and nearby property owners to receive zoning approval;

(3)	And/or to assign responsibility to the City of private restrictive or protective covenants.

(B)	Allowed Uses

Allowed uses are those specified in an ordinance adopted by the Council establishing a PUD district.

(C)	Area Requirements

As determined by the development plan.

(D)	Standards

(1)	Other City Requirements. Unless specified in an ordinance adopted by the Council establishing a PUD district, all buildings and uses shall comply with the special use standards specified in Chapter 3 and the site development standards specified in Chapter 4.

(2)	Compatibility. The planned development uses must be of a type and nature, as well as located as to not create a negative impact or influence upon surrounding properties. Within a mixed use planned development, the uses, despite their differences, should be complementary to one another.
 
(3)	Need. The planned development must be of a character, land use and type needed in the area.

(4)	Size. The planned development must contain at least two (2) acres.

(5)	Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map. The proposed use is in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map of the City of Beulah.

(6)	Services. Adequate utility, drainage, and other such necessary facilities and services have been or will be provided at the time of development.

(7)	Access. Adequate access roads or entrance and exit drives will be provided and be so designed to prevent traffic hazards and to minimize traffic congestion on public streets.

(E)	Standards to be set by Planned Development

The ordinance establishing the planned development shall specify the following items in detail, and must be in compliance with the PUD district standards (Section 2.33(D)).

(1)	Allowed Uses. The Council shall establish the list of uses allowed in a PUD zoning district during the PUD Conceptual Plan approval process (See Section 2.33(F)(2)).

(2)	Lot Size

(3)	Residential Density.

(4)	Setbacks.

(5)	Height.

(6)	Lot Coverage.
 

 
(F)	Application Process
 


PUD Conceptual Plan
(see red text, pages II-35 to II-37 for detail)
 


2.33.F.2.a	Pre-application Conference*






2.33.F.2.b	Submit Application*






2.33.F.2.d	Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*






2.33.F.2.e	P&Z Commission Review and Recommendation*








2.33.F.2.f	Council Review and Decision to Approve, Approve with Conditions, or Deny Application*
 
PUD Final Plan
(see red text, pages II-37 to II-39 for detail)


2.33.F.3.b Submit Application*






2.33.F.3.d	Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*






2.33.F.3.e	P&Z Commission Review and Recommendation*






2.33.F.3.f Council Review and Action to Approve, Approve with Conditions, or Deny Application *
(A First and Second Reading of the Ordinance is Required)




(1)	Process Overview
PUDs  shall  be  processed  in  two  stages:  Conceptual  Plan;  Final  Plan  and  Zoning  Map
Amendment. The Final Plan and Zoning Map Amendment are intended to be processed concurrently.

Stage 1: A PUD Conceptual Plan is reviewed based on the PUD Standards provided in section 2.33 (D). PUD Conceptual Plan approval establishes basic parameters for the development.

Stage 2: A PUD Final Plan is at the level of detail from which building permit approvals are issued. Detailed plans are required that are consistent with the approved PUD Conceptual Plan.

(2)	PUD Conceptual Plan
The purpose of the PUD Conceptual Plan is to allow early review of a proposal before
substantial commitment in technical planning from the applicant and city.
 


(a)	Pre-application Conference*
The application shall confer with the Building Official and other city officials as determined by the Mayor and Building Official. The purpose is to provide a common understanding of the proposed PUD and the PUD review process.

(b)	Submit Application*
(i.)      Complete application

PUD Conceptual Plan applications shall be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council. Additionally, Applicant shall  pay into  a City escrow account an amount representing the estimated legal and engineering fees and costs, and out of which the City will pay its legal and engineering fees and costs. Any legal and engineering fees and costs incurred by the City during the PUD process above and beyond the escrowed amount shall be the sole responsibility of the Applicant.

(ii.)     Processing Requirements

The Building Official will determine when an application for a PUD conceptual plan is considered complete. In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section 2.33.F.2.c for all other required items.

(c)	Application Checklist

(i)	Conceptual architectural drawings.
(ii)	Site Plan, with dimensions and drawn to scale.
(iii)	Project description, including detail on the daily or seasonal operations; number of employees, customers, visitors; number of shifts; activities; products and services; maximum living units proposed, as applicable.
(iv)	Other items and information requested by the Building Official, P&Z Commission, or Council to evaluate the proposal’s potential impacts on traffic, aesthetics, city utilities, noise, and other environmental impacts.

(d)	Building Official Review and Recommendation*
The Building Official shall prepare a written recommendation to the P&Z Commission that considers the PUD Conceptual Plan in light of the PUD standards provided in section 2.33 (D).

(e)	P&Z Commission Review and Recommendation*
The P&Z Commission shall hold a public hearing on the PUD Conceptual Plan. The P&Z Commission may make a recommendation to the Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The PUD Conceptual Plan application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The P&Z Commission will use the criteria located in section 2.33(D) as guidance to determine if the PUD Conceptual Plan should be approved.

(f)	Council Review and Action*
 
The Council shall hold a public hearing on the PUD Conceptual Plan application. The Council may act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The PUD Conceptual Plan application may also be tabled by the Council in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The Council will use the criteria located in section 2.33(D) as guidance to determine if a PUD Conceptual Plan application should be approved.


(g)	Notice of Public Hearings

(i)	Newspaper
Notice of the application and the dates of the P&Z Commission and Council hearings on the application is to be published in the official newspaper of the city at least once each week for 2 successive weeks and not less than 15 days preceding the date of the first scheduled public hearing (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application).

(ii)	Adjacent Properties
Written notice shall be provided by first class mail to all owners of the subject property and all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. The notice shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least 15 days before the first scheduled public hearing (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application) and prior to the P&Z Commission meeting.

(h)	Effect of Approval

(i)	Approval of the PUD Conceptual Plan is the Council’s acceptance of the general use, design, and other planning concepts for the proposed conceptual plan.
(ii)	Approval is required prior to filing for a PUD Final Plan and PUD Zoning Map Amendment.

(i)	Failure to Act
An approved PUD Conceptual Plan shall be declared null and void if a PUD Final Plan and
PUD Zoning Map Amendment are not filed for within one year of PUD Conceptual Plan approval. In the event this occurs, the existing zoning district requirements shall remain in effect.

*See process chart on page II-34.


(3)	PUD Final Plan
A PUD Zoning Map Amendment must be processed concurrently with the PUD Final Plan.

(a)	Criteria - To ensure compliance with the approved PUD Conceptual Plan, the PUD Final Plan shall not result in:

(i)	Increase in project density or intensity
(ii)	Change in the mix of housing types and land uses.
(iii)	A reduction in the amount of open space and recreational areas.
 
(iv)	Any substantial change to the circulation system, access, and parking areas.
(v)	Any substantial change to the architectural character, quality, or aesthetics of that shown in the conceptual plan.



(b)	Submit Application*

(i)	Complete application

PUD Final Plan applications shall be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council. Additionally, Applicant shall pay into a City escrow account an amount representing the estimated legal and engineering fees and costs, and out of which the City will pay its legal and engineering fees and costs. Any legal and engineering fees and costs incurred by the City during the PUD process above and beyond the escrowed amount shall be the sole responsibility of the Applicant.

(ii)	Processing Requirements

The Building Official will determine when an application for a PUD final plan is considered complete. In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section 2.33.F.3.c for all other required items.

(c)	Application Checklist

(i)	Detailed architectural drawings.
(ii)	Site Plan, with dimensions and drawn to scale.
(iii)	Project description, including detail on the daily or seasonal operations; number of
employees, customers, visitors; number of shifts; activities; products and services; maximum living units proposed, as applicable.
(iv)	Other items and information requested by the Building Official, P&Z Commission, or Council to evaluate the proposal’s potential impacts on traffic, aesthetics, city utilities, noise, and other environmental impacts.

(d)	Building Official Review and Recommendation*
The Building Official shall prepare a written recommendation to the P&Z Commission that considers the PUD Final Plan in light of the approved PUD Conceptual Plan and section 2.33(F)(3)(a).

(e)	P&Z Commission Review and Recommendation*
The P&Z Commission shall hold a public hearing on the PUD Final Plan. The P&Z Commission may make a recommendation to the Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The PUD Final Plan application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The P&Z Commission will use the criteria located in section 2.33(F)(3)(a) as guidance to determine if the PUD Final Plan should be approved.

(f)	Council Review and Action*
 
The Council shall hold a public hearing on the PUD Final Plan application. The Council may act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The PUD Final Plan application may also be tabled by the Council in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The Council will use the criteria located in section 2.33(F)(3)(a) as guidance to determine if a PUD Final Plan application should be approved.



(g)	Notice of Public Hearing

Notice of the application and the dates of the P&Z Commission and Council hearings on the application is to be published in the official newspaper of the city at least once each week for 2 successive weeks and not less than 15 days preceding the date of the first scheduled public hearing (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application)

(h)	Effect of Approval
Approval of the PUD Final Plan grants the applicant the right to develop the subject property, in compliance with the PUD Final Plan, this Zoning Ordinance, the North Dakota Century Code, and the Building Code.

(i)	Failure to Act
An approved PUD Final Plan shall be declared null and void if applications for development have not been filed within one year of approval. If Certificates of Occupancy are not obtained within two years of approval of the PUD Final Plan, the applicant must seek a time extension from the P&Z Commission.

(j)	Time Extension
A time extension must be submitted to the Building Official, on a form acceptable to the Building Official, along with the same fee as required for the PUD Final Plan.

*See process chart on page II-35.

(4)	City Zoning Map Amendment
A City Zoning District Map Amendment must be processed concurrently with a PUD Final Plan.
The City Zoning District Map Amendment must be processed as provided in section 5.18.
 
Section 2.4 Overlay Zoning Districts


2.41	FPO – Flood Plain Overlay

(A)	Description

The FPO, Flood Plain Overlay, district is intended to provide special standards for development in areas subject to flooding. These areas include those that are defined as zones A, AE, AH, AO, AR, and A99 as depicted on the most recent Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) produced by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). The purpose of the overlay district is to minimize potential loss of life, destruction of property, and the use of public funds for costly flood control projects.

(B)	Statutory Authorization

The Legislature of the State of North Dakota has in North Dakota Century Code, Chapters 40-47, 11-33 and 58-03, or as may be amended, delegated responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizenry.

Therefore, the City Council of the City of Beulah, North Dakota does ordain as follows:

(C)	Findings of Fact

(1)	The flood hazard areas of the City of Beulah are subject to periodic inundation which can endanger life, result in loss of property, create health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, cause extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief,  and impair the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.

(2)	Flood losses caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the special flood hazard areas cause increases in flood heights and velocities. Inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise unprotected structures also contribute to flood loss.

(D)	Statement of Purpose

It is the purpose of this subsection to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed;

(1)	To protect human life and health;

(2)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

(3)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding, and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(4)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(5)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in special flood hazard areas;
 
(6)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(7)	To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a special flood hazard area; and,

(8)	To ensure that those who occupy the special flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions.

(E)	Methods of Reducing Flood Losses

In order to accomplish its purposes, this Zoning Ordinance includes methods and provisions for:

(1)	Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;

(2)	Requiring that uses vulnerable to flood, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

(3)	Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;

(4)	Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and,

(5)	Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.


(F)	Lands to Which this Subsection Applies

This subsection shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Beulah.

(G)	Basis for Establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas

The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Beulah, dated October 16, 2015," with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this subsection. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at Beulah City Hall located at 120 Central Avenue N., Beulah, North Dakota 58523.



(H)	Compliance

No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered
 
without full compliance with the terms of this subsection and other applicable regulations.

(I)	Greater Restrictions

This subsection is not intended to repeal, remedy, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or restrictive or protective covenants. However, where this subsection and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or restrictive or protective covenants conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

(J)	Interpretation

In the interpretation and application of this subsection, all provisions shall be:

(1)	Considered as minimum requirement;

(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the City of Beulah; and,

(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

(K)	Warning and Disclaimer or Liability

The degree of flood protection required by this subsection is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This subsection does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This subsection shall not create liability on the part of the City of Beulah, its City Council members, officers, agents, or employees, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this this subsection or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

(L) Designation of the City Floodplain Manager

The City Floodplain Manager is hereby appointed to administrator and implement this subsection by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.

(M)Duties and Responsibilities of the City Floodplain Manager

Duties of the City Floodplain Manager shall include, but not be limited to:

(a)	Permit Review

(i.)	Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this subsection have been satisfied.
 
(ii.) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local government agencies from which prior approval is required.


(iii.) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of subsection 2.41(R)(1)(a) are met.


(b)	Use of Other Base Flood Data

When base flood data has not been provided in accordance with subsection 2.41(G), the City Floodplain Manager shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available (known as best available data) from a federal, state, or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in the floodplain are administered in accordance with subsection 2.41(Q).

(c)	Information to be Obtained and Maintained

(i.) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.

(ii.)	For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:

1.	Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed;

2.	Maintain  the  floodproofing  certifications  required  in  subsection 2.41(N)(1)(c).

(iii.)	Maintain  for  public  inspection  all  records pertaining  to  the  provisions  of  this subsection.


(d)	Alteration of Watercourses

The Floodplain Manager shall:

1.	Notify nearby communities, water resource districts, and the  North Dakota State Engineer, as necessary, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

2.	Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished; and,
 
3.	Notify the appropriate water resource district prior to removal or placement of fill within two hundred feet of the bank of a body of water during normal flow or stage.

(e)	Interpretation of Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Boundaries

Make interpretation where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection 2.41(O).

(N)	Establishment of Development Permit

A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area established in subsection 2.41(G). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the City Floodplain Manager and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill storage materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

(1)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all structures;

(2)	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;

(3)	Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any non-residential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection 2.41(Q); and,

(4)	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

(O)	Variance Procedure

(1)	Council  shall  hear  and  decide  requests  for  variances  from  the  requirements  of  this subsection.

(a)	In passing upon such applications, the Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other parts of this subsection; and:

(i.)	the danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; (ii.)	the danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(iii.)	the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

(iv.)	the importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
 

(v.)	the necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(vi.)  the availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(vii.)   the compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; (viii.)  the relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan and Floodplain
Management Program for that area;

(ix.) the safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(x.) the expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and

(xi.) the costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges.

(b)	Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre to less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items (i-xi) in subsection 2.41(O)(1) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(c)	Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 2.41(O)(1) and the purposes of this subsection, the Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this subsection.

(2)	Conditions for Variances

(a)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.

(b)	Variances shall not be issued within the identified floodplain if any increase in flood level during the base flood discharge would result.

(c)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(d)	Variances shall only be issued upon:

(i.)	a showing of good and sufficient cause;
 
(ii.) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,

(iii.) a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection 2.41(O)(1), or conflict with existing laws or ordinances.

(e)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.

(3)	Appeals to the Council

(a)	The Council shall hear and decide requests for variances in accordance with the requirements of this subsection.

(b)	The Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the City Floodplain Manager in the enforcement or administration of this subsection.

(c)	Those aggrieved by the decision of the Council or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the District Court, as provided in N.D.C.C. § 40-47- 11, 11-33-12, 58-03-14, or as amended.

(d)	The City Floodplain Manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.

(P)	General Standards

In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required:

(1)	Anchoring

(a)	All new construction and substantial improvements, including additions, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure.

(b)	All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over- the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.

(2)	Construction Materials and Methods

(a)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
 
(b)	All new and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

(c)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(3)	Utilities

(a)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;

(b)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,

(c)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

(4)	Subdivision Proposals

(a)	All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;

(b)	All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;

(c)	All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and

(d)	Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less).

(Q)	Specific Standards

In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in subsection 2.41(G) or subsection 2.41(M)(1)(b), the following provisions are required:

(1)	Residential Construction

New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation according to local, state, and federal regulations.


(2)	Nonresidential Construction
 
Construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation according to local, state, and federal regulations or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall:

(a)	Be flood proofed to at least two feet above the base flood elevation, so that below this elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water.

(b)	Have structural components capable  of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.

(c)	Be certified by are registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the City Floodplain Manger as set forth in subsection 2.41(N)(1)(c).

(3)	Manufactured Homes

(a)	Manufactured  homes  shall  be  anchored  in  accordance  with  subsection 2.41(P)(2)(b).

(b)	All manufactured homes or those to be substantially improved shall be elevated on  a permanent foundation  such  that the  lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on fill to at least one foot above the base flood elevation, and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system as referred to in the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Protecting Manufactured Homes from Floods and other Hazards, A Multi-Hazard Foundation and Installation Guide.

(R)	Floodways

Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection 2.41(G) are areas designated as floodways. Since a floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(1)	Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(2)	If subsection 2.41(R)(1) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsections 2.41 (P), (Q), and (R).
 
2.42	UGO – Underground Mining Overlay

(A)	Description

The UGO, Underground Mining Overlay, district is advisory and voluntary; however, compliance is strongly recommended for the protection of life and property.

This district is intended to advise property owners and developers of the potential development hazards and threats to life and property that may be created by underground mining as a result of historic mining activity in the area. Areas with proven underground mining and the potential for underground mining have been documented by the North Dakota Public Service P&Z Commission, Abandoned Mine Lands Division (AML). The overlay district corresponds to those areas within the City’s zoning jurisdiction that have been documented by AML.

This district applies to all forms of development, including roads, utilities, and any structures. All work in connection with development, including grading, paving, and other necessary activities is subject to this section.

(B)	Allowed Uses

As allowed in the base zone district(s)

(C)	Area Requirements

As allowed in the base zone district(s)

(D)	Standards

(1)	To  demonstrate  that  no  undermining  hazards  are  present  onsite,  the  following  should  be performed by the applicant:

(a)	Coordinate with AML for documentation regarding whether or not undermining hazards exist at the proposed development site. Evidence of coordination with AML should be submitted and kept on file with the Building Official.

(b)	If no documentation exists on  record with AML, then  the  applicant should  utilize an engineering or drilling firm to conduct a site evaluation.

(c)	The engineering or drilling firm should provide evidence in writing that they have coordinated with AML to account for known undermining activity at the proposed site.

(d)	A copy of the site evaluation results should be delivered to the Building Official.

(2)	If the proposed site has already been documented as having been undermined by the City and/or AML, then development of the site is not recommended.

(3)	If the site evaluation shows that undermining is present underneath the site, then development of the site is not recommended.
 
(E)	Responsibility

(1)	All development decisions made as a result of this section are the responsibility of the property owner.

(2)	The City of Beulah and AML cannot assume the risk of injury to persons or damage to persons or property resulting from work performed as advised in this section.

(3)	Pursuant to N.D.C.C. 32-12.1-03(3)(f)(1), the City of Beulah may not be held liable for any claim relating to injury directly or indirectly caused by the performance or nonperformance of a public duty, including inspecting, licensing, approving, mitigating, warning, abating, or failing to so act regarding compliance with or the violation of any law, rule, regulation, or any condition affecting health or safety.
 
Section 2.5 Use Table
P	
Permitted Use by Right	
AG - Agricultural	
R1 - Single Family, Detached	
R2 - Low Density Multi Family	
R3 - High Density Multi Family	
R4 - Manufactured Home Park	
R6 - Rural Residential	
R7 - Urban Multi Family	
C1 - Central Business District	
C2 - Highway Commercial	
C3 - General Commercial	
C4 - Neighborhood Commercial	
I - Light Industrial	
HI - Heavy Industrial

POC - Public and Open Space Conservation
C	
Conditional Use														
P[#]	
Permitted Use w/ Requirements														
C[#]	
Conditional Use w/ Requirements														

No Symbol	Not Permitted														






Use Category	







Use														
Residential


Group Living	Assisted Living Facility				C			C							
	Nursing Facilities				C			C							
	Group Home - Disabled		P	P	P	P	P	P							
	Group Home - Halfway House				C			C							
	Retirement Facilities			C	P			P							


Multi Family	Multi-family Residential				P			P	P[2.11
(D)(1)]
					
	Basement Apartment		C	P	P		C	P	P						
	Crew Camp	C[3.5]
										C[3.5]
C[3.5]

	Twin Homes			P	P				C						
	Duplex			P	P				C						
	Townhomes			P	P			P	C						


Single Family	Second Dwelling, Detached	C					C								
	Dwelling,   Single   Family   Detached   w/ Horses	P					P								
	Dwelling, Single Family Detached	P	P	P	P	P	P		C						P
	Manufactured Homes	P				P			C						
	Mobile Homes	P				P									
	Modular Homes	P		P		P	P								
	Guest House	P[3.7]
P[3.7]
P[3.7]
										
	Temporary Residence	P[3.15]
P[3.15]
P[3.15]
P[3.15]
P[3.15]
P[3.15]
P[3.15]
				P[3.15]
P[3.15]

	Recreational Vehicle Park	C[3.11]
				C[3.11]
		C[3.11]
				C[3.11]

 

P	
Permitted Use by Right	
AG - Agricultural	
R1 - Single Family, Detached	
R2 - Low Density Multi Family	
R3 - High Density Multi Family	
R4 - Manufactured Home Park	
R6 - Rural Residential	
R7 - Urban Multi Family	
C1 - Central Business District	
C2 - Highway Commercial	
C3 - General Commercial	
C4 - Neighborhood Commercial	
I - Light Industrial	
HI - Heavy Industrial	
POC - Public and Open Space Conservation
C	
Conditional Use														
P[#]	
Permitted Use w/ Requirements														
C[#]	
Conditional Use w/ Requirements														

No Symbol	Not Permitted														





Use Category	






Use														
Commercial


Food and Beverages	Bakeries								P		P	P			
	Delicatessen								P	P	P	P			
	Dine-In Restaurants								P	P	P	P			
	Drive-Thru Restaurants								C	P	P	P			
	Liquor Stores								P	P	P	P			
	Taverns/Bars								P	P	P	P			

Motor Vehicle Sales and	Car Wash									P	P	P	P		
	Motor Vehicle Sales									P	P		P		
	Motor  Vehicle  Repair,  Tire  Sales,  and
Services									P	P		P	P	
	Motor Vehicle Dealerships									P	P		P		


Other	Animal Hospitals/Veterinary									P	P	P			
	Animal Kennels									C	C		C		
	Barber Shop/Beauty Salon								P	P	P	P			
	Bed and Breakfast Establishment	C[3.2]
	C[3.2]
C[3.2]
		P[3.2]
P			P			
	Hotel/Motel								P	P	P				
	In-home Businesses	P[3.8]
P[3.8]
P[3.8]
P[3.8]
P[3.8]
P[3.8]
P[3.8]
P[3.8]
					
	Offices, Medical								P	P	P	P	P	P	
	Offices, Professional								P	P	P	P	P	P	
	Laundromats								P	P	P	P	P		
	Mortuaries									C	P		P		C
	Photography/Art Studios								P		P				
	Self-Service Storage Facilities										P[3.14]
	P		
	Tattoo Parlor								P	P	P				
 

P	
Permitted Use by Right	
AG - Agricultural	
R1 - Single Family, Detached	
R2 - Low Density Multi Family	
R3 - High Density Multi Family	
R4 - Manufactured Home Park	
R6 - Rural Residential	
R7 - Urban Multi Family	
C1 - Central Business District	
C2 - Highway Commercial	
C3 - General Commercial	
C4 - Neighborhood Commercial	
I - Light Industrial	
HI - Heavy Industrial	
POC - Public and Open Space Conservation
C	
Conditional Use														
P[#]	
Permitted Use w/ Requirements														
C[#]	
Conditional Use w/ Requirements														

No Symbol	Not Permitted														






Use Category	






Use														
Commercial


Other	Convenience Stores w/ Fuel									P	P	P	P		
	Convenience Stores w/o Fuel								P	P	P	P	P		
	Filling Station									P	P	P	P		
	Adult Entertainment Centers												P[3.0]
	
	Dry Cleaner								P	P	P	P	P		
	Paint Store and Service									P	P		P		
	Plumbing Service									P	P		P		
	Radio/TV Station								P	P	P		P		
	Shoemaker								P	P	P	P	P		
	Tailor								P	P	P	P	P		
	Butcher Shops								P	P	P	P	P		
	Retail Shops								P	P	P	P			


Recreation, Commercial	Amusement Parks									P	P	C			
	Bowling Alleys									P	P	P			
	Dance Studio									P	P	P			
	Health Club								P	P	P	P			
	Mini Golf									P	P	P			
	Private Clubs	C								P	P	P			
	Commercial Skating Rinks									P	P	P			
	Theaters, Drive-in									P	P	C			
	Theaters								P	P	P	C			
	Agricultural Public Events	C													C
 

P	
Permitted Use by Right	
AG - Agricultural	
R1 - Single Family, Detached	
R2 - Low Density Multi Family	
R3 - High Density Multi Family	
R4 - Manufactured Home Park	
R6 - Rural Residential	
R7 - Urban Multi Family	
C1 - Central Business District	
C2 - Highway Commercial

C3 - General Commercial	
C4 - Neighborhood Commercial	
I - Light Industrial	
HI - Heavy Industrial	
POC - Public and Open Space Conservation
C	
Conditional Use														
P[#]	
Permitted Use w/ Requirements														
C[#]	
Conditional Use w/ Requirements														

No Symbol	Not Permitted														






Use Category	







Use														
Industrial



Agriculture	Agriculture/Farming	P													P
	Dairy Processing Plants												C	P	
	Feedlots	C												P	
	Grain Mills/Elevators	C											P	P	
	Wholesale Nurseries & Greenhouses	P					C						P		P
	Agriculturally-Oriented Business	C								C			P	C	



Industrial Production	Chemical Fertilizer Plant													P	
	Lumber yard												P	P	
	Salvage & Junk yard													P[3.13]

	Pipeyards													P	
	Utility Corridors	C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]
C[3.16]

	Refineries & Petro-chemical Plant													C[3.12]




Resource Extraction	Mineral Extraction	C[3.9]
											C[3.9]

	Oil & Gas Drilling	C												C	
	Sand and Gravel Mining	C[3.9]
											P	
	Sand and Gravel Processing	C[3.9]
											P	
	Utility Scale Solar	C[3.17]
											P	
	Wind Energy Conversion														
 

P	
Permitted Use by Right	
AG - Agricultural	
R1 - Single Family, Detached	
R2 - Low Density Multi Family	
R3 - High Density Multi Family	
R4 - Manufactured Home Park	
R6 - Rural Residential	
R7 - Urban Multi Family	
C1 - Central Business District	
C2 - Highway Commercial	
C3 - General Commercial	
C4 - Neighborhood Commercial	
I - Light Industrial	
HI - Heavy Industrial	
POC - Public and Open Space Conservation
C	
Conditional Use														
P[#]	
Permitted Use w/ Requirements														
C[#]	
Conditional Use w/ Requirements														

No Symbol	Not Permitted														






Use Category	







Use														
 	Industrial 	



Other	Machine or Welding Shop												P	P	
	Aviation	C													C
	Concrete Mixing Plant	C												P	
	Car Enthusiasts & Collectors												P[3.3]
P	
	Machinery/Equipment Sales & Services												P	P	
	Outdoor Storage									C	C		P	P	
	Production Facility												P	P	
	Storage of Hazardous Materials												C	C	
	Temporary Structures	P[3.15]
										P[3.15]
P[3.15]

	Truck Stops									P	P		P	P	
	Commercial Above-ground Fuel Storage									C[3.4]
		P[3.4]
P[3.4]

	Railroad Spur (Not Railroad Owned)	C[3.10]
											C[3.10]

	Commercial Warehouses												P	P	
Institutional



Education	Colleges								C	C					P
	Preschools		C	C	C	C	C	C	C			C			P
	Primary Schools														P
	Secondary Schools														P
	Technical/Trade Schools								C	C	P				P
 

P	
Permitted Use by Right	
AG - Agricultural	
R1 - Single Family, Detached	
R2 - Low Density Multi Family	
R3 - High Density Multi Family	
R4 - Manufactured Home Park	
R6 - Rural Residential	
R7 - Urban Multi Family	
C1 - Central Business District	
C2 - Highway Commercial	
C3 - General Commercial	
C4 - Neighborhood Commercial	
I - Light Industrial	
HI - Heavy Industrial	
POC - Public and Open Space Conservation
C	
Conditional Use														
P[#]	
Permitted Use w/ Requirements														
C[#]	
Conditional Use w/ Requirements														

No Symbol	Not Permitted														






Use Category	







Use														
Institutional


Government and Services	Governmental Offices/Facility (Other)		C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P
	Drainage Facilities	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P
	Utility Building	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C
	Sewage Treatment Plants	C												C	C
	Solid Waste Landfills	C												C	C
	Water Storage Facility	C	C	C	C	C	C	C		C	C	C	C	C	P


Other	Cemeteries														P
	Emergency Response Facilities	C							C	C	C	C	C		C
	Health Care Facilities								C	P	P	P			P
	Community Centers		C	C	C	C	C	C	P	P	P	P	P		
	Conservation Areas	P													P
	Day Care Facilities		P[3.6]
P[3.6]
P[3.6]
P[3.6]
P[3.6]
P[3.6]
P[3.6]
P[3.6]
P[3.6]
P[3.6]
		
	Religious Institutions		C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C			
	Parking Lot, Commercial or Public				P			P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
	Parking Garage							P	P	P	P				


Recreation	Campground														P
	Indoor Recreation Center		C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C			P
	Community Swimming Pools		P	P	P	P	P	P				P			P
	Cultural Institutions								P	P		P			P
	Golf Courses/Country Clubs	C													P
	Libraries		C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C			P
	Parks		P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P			P
 

	Communications	





Use Category	
No Symbol	Not Permitted	C[#]	P[#]	C	P
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities	Off-premise Advertising Signs		







Use		
Conditional Use w/ Requirements	
Permitted Use w/ Requirements	
Conditional Use	
Permitted Use by Right
Go to [7.2]	C		
AG - Agricultural
			
R1 - Single Family, Detached
			
R2 - Low Density Multi Family
			
R3 - High Density Multi Family
			
R4 - Manufactured Home Park
			
R6 - Rural Residential
			
R7 - Urban Multi Family
			
C1 - Central Business District
	P[4.46]		
C2 - Highway Commercial
	P[4.46]		
C3 - General Commercial
			
C4 - Neighborhood Commercial
	P[4.46]		
I - Light Industrial
	P[4.46]		
HI - Heavy Industrial
			
POC - Public and Open Space Conservation
 

Chapter 3 Special and Conditional Use Standards 	


*Refer to the Use Table (Section 2.5) for other uses without special standards and not listed in this chapter.

Section 3.0 Adult Entertainment Centers


Standards


(1)	Separation Requirements
 
An adult entertainment center business shall not be located within 1,250 feet of the following:

(a)	Any religious institution

(b)	School (public or private)

(c)	Park or recreation facility (excluding paths)

(d)	Residential zoning district

(e)	Daycare facility

(f)	Planned unit development with dwelling units.

(g)	Any establishment that dispenses alcoholic beverages onsite

(h)	Another adult entertainment center business

(2)	The entrance of persons less than 18 years of age shall be prohibited

(3)	Signs and Displays

(a)	No signs shall be displayed on the outside of the building or free-standing onsite, except for signs identifying the business as an “adult entertainment center”, “adult bookstore”, “adult entertainment facility”, “adult cinema” or something similar thereto.

(b)	No  signs  or  other  materials  depicting  sexual  activities  or  anatomical  areas  shall be portrayed outside of the building or free-standing onsite.
 
Section 3.1 Accessory Structures


(A)	Area Requirements


(1)	Density
 
Lot coverage: accessory structures are included within the maximum lot coverage for each zoning district.

(2)	Setbacks
 
(a)	Setbacks to lot lines are the same as required in the applicable zoning district.

(b)	Minimum setbacks between structures: as Building and Fire Codes allow.

(3)	Building Height
 
Maximum height is provided in each zoning district section. Where not listed for accessory
structures, the maximum height shall be the same for all structures.

(B)	Other Standards

(1)	Accessory structures may not be utilized for permanent or temporary residential occupancy.

(2)	Each accessory structure may include up to one (1) kitchen and one (1) bathroom for private use.

Section 3.2 Bed and Breakfast Establishments


Standards

(1)	No more than four (4) guestrooms shall be offered for use at any one time.

(2)	Each bed and breakfast shall meet the off-street parking requirements in Section 4.1.

(3)	No long-term rental shall be permitted. The maximum length of stay shall be 30 days.

(4)	The residence of the host/operator of the bed and breakfast shall be within the bed and breakfast establishment.

(5)	Structures shall not be altered in a way that changes the general appearance as a residential structure.

(6)	Receptions,  private  parties,  or  similar  activities  shall  not  be  permitted  unless  expressly approved as part of a Conditional Use Permit.
 
(7)	Other than registered guests, no meals shall be served to the general public unless expressly approved as part of a Conditional Use Permit.

(8)	No cooking facilities shall be allowed in the guest rooms.

(9)	One sign shall be allowed, with a size limit of three square feet. Internally illuminated signs are not allowed.


Section 3.3 Car Enthusiasts and Collectors


Standards


(1)	Antique Vehicles, Special Interest Vehicles, and/or Parts Cars may be located, stored, and maintained only on the vehicle owner’s property.

(2)	Antique Motor Vehicles, Special Interest Vehicles, and/or parts cars may be dismantled on property owned by the car enthusiast or collector, for purposes of making necessary repairs or improvements to said vehicles.

(3)	The standards of this section shall not apply to any special interest vehicle which is operable and licensed to be operated on North Dakota highways and streets.


Section 3.4 Commercial Above-ground Fuel Storage


Standards


(1)	Exemption
 
(a)	Above-ground fuel storage tanks utilized for non-commercial, onsite building heating needs are allowed in any zone district and are subject to State requirements.

(b)	Below-ground  storage  does  not  apply  to  this  section  and  are  subject  to  State requirements.

(2)	Storage Restrictions


Individual and aggregate tank size limits are determined by the State Fire Marshal.


(3)	Code Compliance


(a)	Written evidence of approval by the State Fire Marshall and/or respective fire districts shall be submitted to the Building Official.

(b)	Where State and City regulations apply, the stricter regulation applies.
 
(4)	The applicant shall provide any other information the Building Official deems necessary.
 

Section 3.5 Crew Camps


(A)	Standards


(1)	Lots

The parcel upon which a crew camp is located will meet the lot area and width requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.

(2)	Access

(a)	The housing facility must be located along, or shall have direct access to, an improved section line roadway or other roadway classified as an arterial. If the arterial roadway is not improved, the developer/operator is responsible for construction and paving costs of said roadway to City standards, if required, based on site location, prior to occupancy of the housing facility.

(b)	A minimum of two access points are required for crew camps with occupancies of 25 or more residents. This is to allow for alternate emergency access.

(c)	A traffic study is required for facilities with more than 100 residents. Roadway improvements (i.e. turn lanes) recommended by the traffic study shall be installed at the owner’s expense.

(3)	Emergency Preparedness

(a)	The applicant/owner must provide Law Enforcement officers unrestricted access to any crew camp building and/or premises for the purposes of carrying out their duties as Law Enforcement officers.

(b)	To allow emergency service providers to pinpoint the location of a victim and to speed up their response time, each dwelling unit in the facility shall have a locator device deemed suitable by the local emergency service providers. Such device may be a colored flashing beacon or strobe light. Locations of the locator devices shall be near the doorways of individual sleeping quarters and at any other locations throughout the facility as deemed necessary by local emergency service responders.

(c)	Each structure in the facility shall have full 360-degree access around the structure for fire-fighting apparatus and emergency responders.

(d)	Each structure in the facility shall provide for adequate fire suppression.

(e)	A storm shelter must be provided onsite to provide adequate space for all residents and employees of the crew camp at maximum occupancy. Shelter design must be approved by the City Building Official.
 
(f)	Each unit within the development shall be numbered for emergency response purposes.
A map mounted on a sign shall be provided at the entrance that identifies the location and numbers of the units within the development. Additional directional signs shall be utilized within the development to help guide emergency responders.

(g)	The crew camp facility shall provide for adequate security for the premises. The owner/applicant shall be required to submit a security plan approved by the Beulah Chief of Police.



(4)	Onsite Improvements

(a)	Roads to be constructed within the facility shall meet City specifications.

(b)	Each crew camp is subject to compliance with the State Building Code, the State Electrical Code, and the State Plumbing Code.

(c)	One off-street parking space is required for each resident and for each employee of the facility. No on-street parking is allowed.

(d)	Spacing between individual units shall be in compliance with fire code and building code specifications. Zoning district setback requirements do not apply.

(e)	A minimum of ten (10) percent of the gross area of the site shall be utilized for outdoor recreational and leisure space.

(f)	A 6 foot fence shall be installed around the perimeter of the crew camp facility. The fence may be chain linked or slatted, and shall be constructed in such a way as to prevent any garbage or refuse from escaping the crew camp premises.

(5)	Required Facility Identification Signs

Up to sixty-four (64) square feet of sign area visible from external roadways and adjoining property is permitted onsite. No single sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Signs shall not obstruct views of drivers. Signs shall be illuminated at night.

(6)	Storm Water Management

Storm water runoff must be controlled to ensure no net increase in runoff as compared to the site prior to development.

(7)	Water and Wastewater

(a)	Onsite water and wastewater systems must meet compliance with North Dakota State Health Department requirements.

(b)	For connections to an existing water supply or wastewater systems, agreements with service providers are required.
 
(8)	Occupant Restrictions

(a)	If pets are allowed by the facility owner’s policy, the site must be fenced and gated to contain any animals on the site. Perimeter fencing must be provided as approved by the P&Z Commission.

(b)	Residents may not be permitted to move into or live in any previously used housing units unless the housing has a current limited certificate of inspection or has been found to meet all applicable codes and requirements by any code enforcement agency having jurisdiction.

(c)	Residents are prohibited from possessing any dangerous weapons or any firearm on the crew camp facility premises, as those terms are defined in N.D.C.C. § 62.1-01-01.

(d)	Alcohol use shall be permitted pursuant to the Council’s approval. The operator of the crew camp shall be responsible for establishing and enforcing any restrictions required related to possession and/or use of alcohol on the crew camp premises.

(e)	Recreational vehicles, campers, and mobile homes are prohibited within any crew camp facility within the City.



(9)	Enforcement

(a)	The City Building Official may conduct a nondestructive walkthrough inspection of previously used temporary work camp housing to ensure compliance with applicable codes, including the State Building Code, State Electrical Code, and State Plumbing Code. If the housing is found to be compliant with these codes, the Building Official may issue a limited certificate of inspection, which is effective for the term of the conditional use permit.

(b)	A third-party certificate of inspection is required for newly manufactured housing facilities.

(c)	The Council shall review any approved conditional use permit for a crew cramp on an annual basis to ensure compliance with the conditions as provided in the conditional use permit issued by the city.

(10)	Reclamation

(a)	An owner of a crew camp has the duty to remove that housing and all related above- grade and below-grade infrastructure within one hundred eighty days after the crew camp is vacated, and return the property to its original condition, or such condition as approved by the property owner and the City. .

(b)	The City may abate any public nuisance caused by vacated crew camps within its jurisdiction.
 
(c)	A crew camp owner shall provide the City with a surety bond, letter of credit, or other security instrument in the form and in an amount specified by the City. These funds must be used to cover actual expenses that may be incurred by the City in removal of the temporary work camp housing, including any above-grade or below-grade infrastructure. The owner is liable for any expenses that are reasonably incurred by the City which exceed the amount of the security.

(d)	The City may abate any public nuisance caused by vacated crew camps within its jurisdiction. The cost of such abatement shall be assessed against the property where the crew camp is located, or the reclamation surety bond, letter of credit, or other security instrument provided under this section.

(B)	Application Submittal Requirements

(1)	Site Plan, to include the following:

(a)	Existing Conditions

(i)	Vicinity map inset showing facility location in proximity to Beulah
(ii)	Property lines
(iii)	Public rights-of-way and public and private access easements
(iv)	Utility easements
(v)	Width and surfacing of existing roads serving the facility

(b)	Proposed Development

(i)	Location and use of structures
(ii)	Building setback distances from property lines
(iii)	Distances between structures
(iv)	Distance from structures to internal roads/streets
(v)	Widths and surfacing of roads/streets
(vi)	Off-street parking spaces
(vii)	Location and size of any signage
(viii)	Location, size, and type of onsite recreational amenities
(ix)	Onsite fencing location and detail
(x)	Infrastructure locations
(xi)	Snow storage areas
(xii)	Outdoor recreation and leisure area

(c)	Storm Water Management Plan

(i)	Existing contours with existing drainage patterns
(ii)	Existing culvert sizes and locations
(iii)	Proposed contours and directions of flows
(iv)	Proposed retention facilities
(v)	Calculations of proposed runoff and sufficient evidence to assure no net increase in offsite runoff.
 
(d)	Any other information required by the Building Official to allow the P&Z Commission to make an informed decision on the request.






(C)	Pre-Occupancy Approvals

Approvals of crew camps are contingent upon the following additional submittal items provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and use of the facility:

(1)	Letters   of   acknowledgement  from   local   service   providers,   including   fire   protection, emergency medical services, and law enforcement.

(2)	Agency Approvals

(a)	Copies of any permits required by other agencies such as the North Dakota Department of Health, the North Dakota State Water Board, South Central Regional Water District, and North Dakota Department of Transportation.

(3)	Traffic study (required for facilities of more than 100 residents)

(4)	Agreements with water and sewer providers

(5)	Proof of insurance

(6)	Fire and emergency operations plan

(7)	The name and contact information for the onsite manager

(8)	Policies & rules for residents of the facility

(9)	Infrastructure Compliance

Compliance letter from the City Engineer stating the interior roadways, infrastructure, storm water drainage improvements and  other features  of the  facility have been constructed properly and in accordance with sound engineering principles.
 
Section 3.6 Daycare Facilities


(A)	Standards


(1)	Adequate pick up and drop off areas shall be provided.

(2)	In-home Daycare Facilities.

(a)	Daycare facilities that are located in a residence must comply with the in-home business standards (Section 3.8).

(b)	In-home daycare facilities may accommodate as many customers as permitted by the North Dakota Century Code and State Department of Human Services, provided the facility complies with all State requirements.

Section 3.7 Guest House


(A)	Area Requirements


(1)	Size

A guest house cannot exceed 50% of the size of the single family detached house on the subject lot.

(2)	Setbacks

(a)	Setbacks to lot lines are the same as required in the applicable zoning district.

(b)	Minimum setbacks between structures: as Building and Fire Codes allow.

(3)	Building Height

(a)	Maximum height for a guest house with one (1) story: 15 ft.

(b)	Maximum height for a guest house above a garage or with two (2) or more stories: 35 ft.

(B)	Other Standards

A guest house may only be permitted when a primary residential dwelling exists on the subject lot.

Section 3.8 In-home Businesses


(A)	Standards
 
(1)	In-home businesses shall be a secondary use within a residence and shall not be the primary use of the residence.

(2)	No more than 25% of the floor area of the residence shall be utilized for the in-home business.

(3)	Physical changes to the residence that require a building permit for the purposes of the in- home business is prohibited.

(4)	Outside activities, storage, or displays (except signs) related to the in-home business shall be prohibited on the property.

(5)	Up to three (3) square feet of total sign area relating to the in-home business is allowed on the property.

(6)	In addition to those living at the place of business, up to two (2) employees are allowed at a time.

(7)	No additional off-street parking areas may be developed for the use of business-related parking.

(8)	The in-home business shall not be utilized as a staging area where employees meet and are dispatched to other work sites.

(9)	Up to one (1) commercial vehicle relating to the in-home business may be parked outside the place of business (off-street or on-street).

(B)	Federal and State Requirements

In-home businesses must comply with the standards provided in section 3.8(A), unless otherwise required by federal or state law.

(C)	Prohibited In-home Businesses

(1)	Any activity is prohibited which produces noise, litter, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, dust, or electrical hazards, fire hazards, or involves the storage of hazardous materials, or any other nuisance greater than that normally experienced in the zoning district where the business is taking place.

(2)	The following activities shall be prohibited as an in-home business:

(a)	Vehicle repair

(b)	Auto body work

(c)	Taxidermy

(d)	Boarding of pets
 
(e)	Other uses as determined by the Building Official to be detrimental to the integrity of the residential area.

(D)	Submittal Requirements


Each In-home business shall submit a standards checklist to the city that shall be completed and signed by the property owner. The submittal shall verify compliance with section 3.8(A).

Section  3.9  Mineral  Extraction  and  Sand,  Gravel,  Scoria,  and  Other  Aggregate Material Mining and Processing


(A)	Mineral Extraction
(1)	Applicability


The standards (as provided in Section 3.9(A)(2)) are limited to mineral extraction activities not regulated by the State of North Dakota.

(2)	Standards

(a)	The applicant shall submit mining activity plans to the Building Official that show how the proposal will effect City growth areas and plans. The proposal’s impact upon City growth areas and plans shall be minimized.

(b)	The applicant shall prepare for City review and approval a road improvement and maintenance plan to offset the impact of truck trips generated by mining activities. The plan shall be formalized by an agreement between the City and the mine operator that identifies road improvements and maintenance to be constructed and/or funded by the operator proportional to the impact.

(c)	Rock crushers shall be considered accessory to sand and gravel operations, provided that the material used and processed is limited to that found on the subject property.

(d)	Buffers
(i.)  No excavation shall take place within three hundred (300) feet of an adjacent property line.

(ii.) No excavation shall take place within five hundred (500) feet of an existing residence.

(e)	The applicant shall prepare a schedule for hours of work for City review and approval.

(B)	Sand, Gravel, Scoria, and Other Aggregate Material Mining and Processing Standards

(1)	The applicant shall submit documentation verifying compliance with State Health Department requirements and shall provide a copy of all documentation submitted to the State Soil Conservation Committee.
 
(2)	The application shall submit mining activity plans to the Building Official that show how the proposal will effect City growth areas and plans. The proposal’s impact upon City growth areas and plans shall be minimized.

(3)	The applicant shall prepare for City review and approval a road improvement and maintenance plan to offset the impact of truck trips generated by mining activities. The plan shall be formalized by an agreement between the City and the mine operator that identifies road improvements and maintenance to be constructed and/or funded by the operator proportional to the impact.

(4)	Rock crushers shall be considered accessory to sand and gravel operations, provided that the material used and processed is limited to that found on the subject property.

(5)	Buffers
(a)	No excavation shall take place within three hundred (300) feet of an adjacent property
line.

(b)	No excavation shall take place within five hundred (500) feet of an existing residence.

(c)	The applicant shall prepare a schedule for hours of work for City review and approval.

(C)	Reclamation

(1)	An owner of a mine has the duty to begin reclamation of the mine and all related above- grade and below-grade infrastructure to its former condition within one hundred eighty days after the operation of the facility has ceased. Reclamation must be completed 1 year after operation of the facility has ceased.

(2)	The City may abate any nuisance of the mine and all related above-grade and below-grade infrastructure if the owner fails to do so, and assess the cost thereof against the property in question as a lien against the real property from which the cost was incurred and the lien may be foreclosed in judicial proceedings in the manner provided by law for loans secured by liens on real property. If this amount is not adequate to cover the cost of reclamation, repair, or removal, the City has a lien for the amount of the additional costs on real property owned, or later acquired, by the property owner in the City. If the City provides the amount of the lien and the name of the owner, the County Auditor shall enter on the tax list the amount of the additional cost as a tax lien. The tax lien is enforceable by the City in the same manner as a tax lien by a county.

(3)	The mine owner shall provide the City with a surety bond, letter of credit, or other security instrument in the form and in an amount specified by the City. These funds must be used to cover actual expenses that may be incurred by the City in reclamation of the mine to the previous state, including any above-grade or below-grade infrastructure. The owner is liable for any expenses that are reasonably incurred by the City which exceed the amount of the security.


Section 3.10 Railroad Spur (Not Railroad Owned)


(A)	Standards
 
(1)	No trackage shall be placed within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of an area zoned for residential use, including, but not limited to R-1 through R-7 or PUD.

Section 3.11 Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks


(A)	Definitions
(1)	Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is:

(a)	built on a single chassis;
(b)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(c)	designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck;
(d)	designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use; including, but not limited to;
(e)	travel trailers, trailers on wheels, park-model trailers, and other similar vehicles.

(2)	Recreational Vehicle Parks: An identified area providing space and facilities for recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. Recreational vehicle parks are developed for the placement and occupancy of recreational vehicles for residential purposes on rented, leased, or owned spaces with necessary accessory uses and amenities.
(B)	Purpose


These standards are intended to provide for recreational vehicle parks which are suitably developed for the placement and occupancy of recreational vehicles for residential purposes on rented, leased, or owned spaces with necessary accessory uses and amenities. These standards will enable the development of unique, well-planned projects incorporating a variety of vehicle-based housing for permanent or seasonal occupancy. It is the intent of these standards to provide adequate regulations to preserve the residential character of the development and to prohibit inappropriate and incompatible land uses.

(C)	Allowed Uses

Uses are allowed as shown in the Use Table in Section 2.5.

(D)	Permit Process:
As part of following the Conditional Use Permit process detailed in Chapter 5, the proposal shall
involve the following:

Master Plan

(1)	A master plan shall be submitted to the Building Official and shall include items as deemed necessary by the Building Official, including, but not limited to:
(i.)	RV pad layout
(ii.)	Landscaping plan and layout (iii.)	Parking
(iv.)	Lights
(v.)	Bathroom and shower facilities (vi.)	Recreation plan
 
(vii.)	Garbage pick up

(2)	The master plan shall be reviewed by the P&Z Commission and is subject to approval by the Council as part of the permit process.


(E)	Standards


(1)	RV Pads

(a)	A pad for the placement of the RV shall be provided that is at least fifteen (15) feet wide and fifty (50) feet deep.

(b)	One (1) RV is allowed on each approved space or lot. No manufactured homes, mobile homes, storage structures or any other type of structure shall be permitted on a lot or space designated as an RV lot on an official site plan on file with the City.

(c)	The pad surface material shall be appropriate to the context or general location of the park (rural, urban, etc.), subject to approval by the P&Z Commission.

(2)	Area Requirements

(a)	Lot/Space Size

(i)	Minimum Lot Area: 1,500 sq ft
(ii)	Minimum Width: 30 ft

(b)	RV Pad Setbacks

(i)	Minimum Front Yard Setback: 15 ft
(ii)	Minimum Interior Side Setback: 5 ft
(iii)	Minimum Street Side Setback: 15 ft
(iv)	Minimum Rear Setback: 10 ft

(c)	RV Pad Setback Exceptions

(i)	Outdoor terraces or patios without roofs or walls may project three (3) feet into the setback.
(ii)	Outdoor steps or stairs may project three (3) feet into the setback.
(iii)	Window canopies may project into any setback space.

(3)	Parking

(a)	A minimum of one (1) paved parking stall shall be provided on each lot/space.

(b)	A minimum of one (1) paved parking stall shall be provided for visitors for every ten (10) RV spaces/lots.

(c)	Parking surface material shall be appropriate to the context or general location of the park (rural, urban, etc.), subject to approval by the P&Z Commission.
 

(4)	Site Access

Access to lots or spaces shall be from the interior of the development.

(5)	Dedicated Streets (City Right of Way)

If served by dedicated public streets, the development shall comply with City street standards.

(6)	Private Streets

(a)	Minimum curb-to-curb width for streets with parking on one (1) side: 32 ft

(b)	Minimum curb-to-curb with for street with parking on both sides: 40 ft

(7)	Street Surface

The street surface material shall be appropriate to the context or general location of the park (rural, urban, etc.), subject to approval by the P&Z Commission.

(8)	Pedestrian Circulation Plan

A plan shall be submitted with the Permit that defines all intended routes for pedestrian access within the Park and connections to existing paths adjacent to the park (if existing paths are present).

(9)	Lighting

All streets, walkways, and recreation areas must be adequately lit, with final approval by the P&Z Commission.

(10)	Drainage

A drainage plan must be prepared by a State of North Dakota registered professional engineer and is subject to any applicable City and State requirements.

(11)	Recreation

(a)	A recreational plan is required, subject to approval by the P&Z Commission.

(b)	Adjacent recreational facilities shall be considered to account for the needs of Park occupants.

(12)	Buffer Strip

(a)	A buffer strip composed of landscaping, as described herein, shall be placed along the perimeter of the development area abutting public right of way or any other residential zone district.

(b)	The minimum width of the buffer shall be twenty (20) feet.
 

(c)	The buffer area must include at least 1 tree and 10 shrubs per 50 lineal feet of buffer.

(13)	Water and Sewer

The entire development shall be connected to and served by City water and sewer systems.

(14)	Electrical Services

The entire development shall be served with underground electrical service facilities. No overhead distribution systems are allowed.

(15)	Park Layout Diagram

(a)	A diagram of the development layout must be provided at all entrances to the development.

(b)	The diagram must be externally lit for use during evening hours.

(16)	Landscaping

(a)	A landscaping plan for the entire development must be prepared.

(b)	All landscaping within the development shall be planted, seeded, or sodded within one year of occupancy of the first dwelling. Up to one (1) extension, not to exceed 6 months, may be granted by the Building Official.

(17)	Park Showers and Bathroom Facilities

(a)	A common shower and bathroom facility available for all residents and visitors must be provided in a central location within the development.

(b)	Two (2) bathrooms with wash basins and two (2) showers must be provided for every 30 lots/spaces within the development. Any RV park with less than 30 lots/spaces within the development is not required to have bathrooms with wash basins or showers.


Section 3.12 Refineries and Petro-Chemical Plants


(A)	Standards

The development shall comply with all state and federal regulations.

(B)	Permit Process

As part of following the Conditional Use Permit process detailed in Chapter 5, the proposal shall involve the following:

(1)	Preliminary Master Plan
 
a.	A preliminary master plan shall be submitted to the Building Official and shall include items as deemed necessary by the Building Official.

b.	The master plan shall be accompanied by a statement from the applicant detailing the needs of the plant, construction crews, employees, housing, community facilities, and county and community services.

c.	The preliminary master plan shall be reviewed by the P&Z Commission and is subject to approval by the Council.

(2)	Environmental Impact Statement

a.	The applicant shall provide twelve (12) copies of an environmental   impact statement to the Building Official for distribution to the  appropriate agencies.

b.	Provide written evidence of approval of the State Department of   Health on pollution controls.

c.	Provide written evidence of approval for a water permit from the State Water Board.

d.	Provide written evidence of approval for all other applicable state and federal agencies as determined by the Building Official.


e.	The  project  shall  conform  to  all  requirements  regarding  preservation, removal, or  relocation of historical or archeological artifacts.


Section 3.13 Salvage and Junk Yards


Standards

(1)	All salvage and/or junkyards shall be screened by evergreen plantings or solid fences, and are subject to review and approval by the P&Z Commission.

(2)	No burning of salvaged material and/or junk shall be permitted.

(3)	The applicant shall provide any additional information the Building Official deems necessary.


Section 3.14 Self-Service and Outdoor Storage


Standards

(1)	Outdoor storage areas must be fenced to affectively block views from adjacent properties and public right of way. Fence plans must be submitted for P&Z Commission review and approval.
 
(2)	Landscape Strip

Except for necessary walks, driveways, and parking areas, each yard on the street side of the development shall be planted with ground cover, shrubs, and trees.

(a)	Width. The minimum width of the landscape strip along the each street side of the development shall be ten (10) feet.

(b)	Trees & Shrubs. The landscape strip must include at least 1 tree and 20 shrubs per 50 lineal feet of buffer.

(c)	A landscaping plan for the entire development must be prepared and submitted to the P&Z Commission for approval.

(d)	All landscaping within the storage area shall be commenced within 180 days of approval, and completed within 1 year of approval by the P&Z Commission. Up to one (1) extension, not to exceed 6 months, may be granted by the Building Official.


Section 3.15 Temporary Structures & Residences


(A)	Exemptions

The following temporary uses are not subject to this Ordinance:

(1)	Periodic or one-time events

(2)	Christmas tree sales lots

(B)	Time Limit


(1)	Not Construction-related: Temporary structures not associated with a construction project are permitted for a maximum of one (1) year.

(2)	Construction-related: Temporary structures and residences associated with a construction project shall be removed within one (1) year of the date:

(a)	A Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the permanent building; or

(b)	The permit for the temporary structure or residence expires, whichever occurs first.
 
(3)	Temporary permit renewals must be reviewed and approved by the P&Z Commission.

(C)	Standards

Compliance with all local and State building codes is required.

(D)	Permit Process
 

Refer to section 5.1.

Section 3.16 Utility Corridors (Surface or Underground)

Standards


(1)	Utility corridor siting shall have minimal interference with farming operations.


(2)	The applicant shall submit corridor development plans to the Building Official that show how the proposal will effect City growth areas and plans. The proposal’s impact upon City growth areas and plans shall be minimized.

Section 3.17 Utility-scale Solar Facilities

Standards Where a Conditional Use Permit is Required

(1)	Zoning District Standards that do not Apply
 
(a)	The building area to lot area ratio shall not apply to utility-scale solar facilities.

(b)	Zone district height restrictions do not apply.


(2)	Site Reclamation
 
(a)	An owner of a solar facility has the duty to begin reclamation of the area and all related above-grade and below-grade infrastructure to its former condition within one hundred eighty days after the operation of the facility has ceased. Reclamation must be completed 1 year after operation of the facility has ceased.

(b)	The City may abate any nuisance of the solar facility and all related above-grade and below-grade infrastructure if the owner fails to do so, and assess the cost thereof against the property in question as a lien against the real property from which the cost was incurred and the lien may be foreclosed in judicial proceedings in the manner provided by law for loans secured by liens on real property. If this amount is not adequate to cover the cost of reclamation, repair, or removal, the City has a lien for the amount of the additional costs on real property owned, or later acquired, by the property owner in the City. If the City provides the amount of the lien and the name of the owner, the County Auditor shall enter on the tax list the amount of the additional cost as a tax lien. The tax lien is enforceable by the City in the same manner as a tax lien by a county.

(c)	The facility owner shall provide the City with a surety bond, letter of credit, or other security instrument in the form and in an amount specified by the City. These funds must be used to cover actual expenses that may be incurred by the City in reclamation of the facility to the previous state, including any above-grade or below-grade infrastructure. The owner is liable for any expenses that are reasonably incurred by the City which exceed the amount of the security.
 


Chapter 4 Site Development 	


Section 4.0 Access Management


4.1	Site Access


(A)	Access to Highways 49 and 200 within the extraterritorial area subject to city zoning jurisdiction



(1)	Access shall be limited to one (1) per quarter (1/4) mile.

(2)	The landowner shall provide a backage road at least three hundred (300) feet from the Highway. Backage roads allow adequate stacking distance for vehicles and allows businesses to have improved Highway visibility. This requirement does not apply where an existing frontage road exists.

(3)	Written evidence of approval by the North Dakota Department of Transportation (NDDOT) shall be provided to the Building Official.


(B)	Access to Highways 49 and 200 within the city limits 



(1)	Access shall be limited to one (1) per six hundred (600) feet.

(2)	The landowner shall provide a backage road at least three hundred (300) feet from the Highway. Backage roads allow adequate stacking distance for vehicles and allows businesses to have improved Highway visibility. This requirement does not apply where an existing frontage road exists.

(3)	Written evidence of approval by the North Dakota Department of Transportation (NDDOT) shall be provided to the Building Official.
 
 
 
4.2	Sight Visibility Triangle


(A)	Purpose


The sight visibility triangle is intended to prevent a motorist’s visibility from being obstructed while entering or exiting a driveway or public/private street right-of-way.

(B)	Standards

(1)	Unless otherwise noted, no building, sign, tree, shrub, parking spaces, fences, or any other object not mentioned in this section may be erected or constructed within the sight visibility triangle.

(2)	The sight visibility triangle does not apply to the Central Business district and Urban Multi Family district.

(3)	Sight Visibility Triangle Size:

(a)	The distance shall be measured along the intersecting property lines from where the two property lines meet.

(b)	For properties containing property lines that are the centerline of a right-of-way, the distance shall be measured from where the curb lines extend and intersect. The edge of pavement applies in the absence of a curb.

(c)	For properties containing one property line that is the centerline of a right-of-way, the distance shall be measured from where the curb line extends and intersects the property line. The edge of pavement applies in the absence of a curb.

(d)	For lots adjacent to or containing private drives, the distance shall be measured from where the curb lines extend and intersect. The edge of pavement applies in the absence of a curb.

(e)	The following table shall be used to determine the size of the sight visibility triangle:


*Road Functional Classification	Size of Sight Visibility Triangle
Principal Arterial	60 feet from property line
Minor Arterial	60 feet from property line
Major Collector	40 feet from property line
Local  Street  (all  other  streets  not classified by NDDOT)	
15 feet from property line
*Refer to the NDDOT Functional Classification Map for Beulah at www.dot.nd.gov
 
(f)	Where two streets with differing classifications intersect, the street with the higher volume classification applies (Principal arterial is highest, followed by Minor Arterial, Major Collector, and Local Street).

(g)	The size of the sight visibility triangle is subject to change when the Building Official finds that an increase is necessary for safety reasons.

Sight Visibility Triangle Diagram

 
 
Section 4.1 Parking Standards


(A)	Administration
 
(1)	No application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy that requires off-street parking shall be approved unless there is included within the plan for such improvement, or use, the required off-street parking spaces. The certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the required parking spaces are provided (see Section 4.1(C) for detail) in accordance with this Ordinance and the approved site plan.

(2)	Parking requirement calculations with fractions over one-half (1/2) shall require one (1) parking space.

(3)	In the case of uses not listed in the Off-street Parking Table (Section 4.1(B)), the Building Official shall determine the appropriate requirements based upon a similar use.

(4)	Requirements for off-street parking shall be a continuing obligation so long as the structure and/or use is in existence and is operational, requiring vehicle parking.

(5)	The off-street parking area shall not be encroached upon by buildings, storage, or any other use.

(6)	A reduction in the number of spaces can only be made by the P&Z Commission. An approved reduction must be consistent with the following criteria:

(a)	A reduction must be by reason of reduction of floor space, number of employees, or change in other factors controlling the regulation of the number of required parking spaces.

(b)	The reduction must be both reasonable and consistent with the intent of this section.
 
(B)  Off-Street Parking Table
Use Category	Use Examples	Minimum Parking Spaces Required
Residential
Group Living	Assisted Living	1 per every patient room
Multi Family	Twin Homes	1.25 per efficiency & 1-bedroom unit 2 per 2-bedroom or larger unit
.20 guest space per unit
Single Family	Dwelling, Single Family Detached	1 per each dwelling unit
Commercial
Food & Beverages	
Shops (Liquor Stores, Bakeries, Delicatessen)	1 per every 250 square feet of customer service space
	
Dine-In Restaurants	1  per  every  75  square  feet  of  customer service space
	
Dine-Thru Restaurants	1  per  every  75  square  feet  of  customer service space plus stacking spaces
	
Taverns/Bars	1 per every 150 square feet of customer service space
Motor	Vehicle
Sales & Services		1 per every 200 square feet of customer service space
Recreation,
Commercial	Amusement Parks	Parking Study Required
	
Bowling Alleys	4 per every bowling lane, plus 1 for each employee
	Health Club	1 per every 150 square feet of floor area
	Theater	1 per each 5 seats planned for patron use
Other Services	Office, Professional	1.5 per each office
	Office, Medical	1.5 per patient exam room
	Animal Hospitals/Vets	1.5 per each animal care room
	
Hotel/Motel/Bed & Breakfast	1 per guest room, plus required spaces for associated uses
	Community Centers	1 per every 300 square feet of floor area
	Bank & Financial Institutions	1 per 250 square feet of floor area, plus
stacking spaces
	All other retail establishments	1 per every 150 square feet of floor area
Industrial
Agriculturally- oriented
businesses	


Grain Mills/Elevators	
1 per each employee, 1 additional space for each 5 employees
Industrial Production	

Lumber Yard	1 per each employee, 1 additional space for each 10 employees
 

Resource Extraction	

Sand and Gravel Processing	1 per each employee, 1 additional space for each 10 employees
Other	Administrator or Office Area	1.5 per every office space
	
Adult Entertainment Centers	1 per every 200 square feet of customer service space
	
Machinery/equipment Sales & Services	1 per every 200 square feet of customer service space
	
Games of Chance	1 per every 250 square feet of customer service space
	
Production Facilities	1 per each 2 employees, 1 additional space for each 10 employees
	
Truck Stops	1 per every 100 feet of customer service space
	
Warehouses	1 per each 2 employees, 1 additional space for each 10 employees
Institutional
Education	College	Parking Study Required
	
Primary Schools and Preschools	

Parking Study Required
	
Secondary Schools	

Parking Study Required
	Technical/Trade Schools	Parking Study Required
Government
Facilities & Services		


Parking Study Required
Other Institutional
Uses	
Hospitals	

Parking Study Required
	Day Care Facilities	1 per each 500 square feet of floor area
	Religious Institutions	1 per each 3 seats
Recreation	
Campground	1 per each camp site, 10 visitor spaces, 1 per each employee
	
Community Swimming Pools	1  per  each  employee,  1  per  every  100 square feet
	Cultural Institutional	Parking Study Required
	
Golf Courses/Country Club	

Parking Study Required
	
Libraries	1  per  every  employee,  1  per  every  500 square feet
	Parks	Parking Study Required
 
(C)	Off-Street Circulation Area Detail


(1)	Location

(a)	Off-street parking shall be provided on the same lot as the subject building or use and within the same zoning district.

(b)	Based upon practical difficulties, the Building Official may allow off-street parking to be located within 400 feet of the premises to which the parking requirement applies. If the parking is on a separate lot, a cross access and parking easement(s) shall be recorded as necessary prior to the certificate of occupancy.

(2)	Right-of-Way Use Prohibition

Parking facilities shall be designed so that vehicles maneuvering out of parking spaces do not back into or across the road right-of-way. All parking facilities shall be designed so that every space is accessible without having to leave the facility and re-entering from the road right-of-way. Public alleys are exempt from this requirement. This does not apply to R-1- Single Family, Detached, R-2 – Low Density Multi family, R-4 – Manufactured Home, and R-6 – Rural Residential zone districts.


(3)	Striping and Pavement Marking
 
All parking facilities that are paved shall be striped in such a manner so that individual parking spaces and traffic patterns are clearly delineated.

(4)	Size
 
Each parking space must be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide by twenty (20) feet long. Parking lot dead-ends shall include an extension of the parking lot not less than five (5) feet to allow vehicles to back out of stalls.
 
(5)	Surfacing
 
Except in the HI-Heavy Industrial, A-Agricultural, R-6-Rural Residential, and POC-Public Open Space and Conservation zone districts, all off-street parking areas shall be surfaced with impervious asphalt, concrete, or similar material approved by the P&Z Commission. The surface must be intact and not composed of any loose material.
 
(6)	Wheel Stops and/or Bollards
 
If curbs are not provided, then parking spaces that face and are adjacent to a building, fence, or other structure shall utilize wheel stops and/or bollards.
 
(7)	Stacking Requirements
 
(a)	Stacking Space Definition: Stacking spaces provide the ability for vehicles to queue on site prior to receiving a service, such as a drive-through bank teller or restaurant.
 

(b)	Size: A stacking space shall be a minimum of 9 feet in width and 20 feet in length and shall not be located within or interfere with any other circulation driveway, parking space, fire lane, or maneuvering area.

(c)	Required Stacking Spaces


Use	Stacking Spaces Required
Financial Institution (Automated or Not)	4
Car Wash	4
Pharmacy or Other Retail with Drive-Through	3
Restaurant with Drive-Through	5 (from first window)
School	As determined by Building Official
Daycare Facility (except in-home)	As determined by Building Official



(8)	Loading and Unloading Requirements


(a)	Loading spaces shall be required in I-Light Industrial, HI-Heavy Industrial, C-2 – Highway Commercial, C-3 – General Commercial, and C-4 – Neighborhood Commercial  zone districts.

(b)	Ample space for vehicles to maneuver into and out of loading spaces shall be provided off-street.

(c)	Loading space requirements


Structure Size (Gross Square Feet)	Minimum Loading Spaces	Minimum   Loading   Space   Size (feet)
0 – 19,999	1	10 x 25
20,000 and greater	1 per 20,000 square feet	12 x 55
Shopping Center	As   determined  by  Building Official	As determined by Building Official


(9)	Parking Lot Layout Dimensions



Angle  of  Parking Space in Degrees	Driving Aisle (feet)	Total Width of 1 Tier of Spaces Plus Driving Aisle (feet)	Total Width of 2 Tiers of Spaces Plus Driving Aisle (feet)
90	24	44	64
60 one-way	16	34	52
60 two-way*	24	not allowed	60
45 one-way	14	29	44
45 two-way*	24	not allowed	54
Parallel one-way	14	23	32
Parallel two-way	24	33	42
*Spaces oriented to direction of traffic
 
(10)	Parking Lot Layout Diagram


 
 
Section 4.2 Lighting Standards

4.21	Outdoor Lighting

(A)	Purpose


These lighting standards are designed to ensure personal safety and prevent motor vehicle and pedestrian conflicts by reducing the negative effects of glare, light pollution and light trespass.

(B)	Applicability



This section applies to outdoor lighting in the following zoning districts: C1 (Central Business District), C2 (Highway Commercial), C3 (General Commercial), C4 (Neighborhood Commercial), I (Light Industrial), HI (Heavy Industrial), and POC (Public Open Space and Conservation).


(C)	Standards


Exterior lighting shall be hooded and designed as follows:

(1)	To prohibit glare on public right of way.

(2)	To prohibit glare on neighboring properties.

(3)	Directed downward.

(4)	To only produce glare upwards to accent architectural features, monuments, or flags.


Section 4.3 General Landscaping Standards

4.31	General Landscaping Standards


(A)	Installation



(1)	All landscaping and buffers (other than street trees) required by this Ordinance must be installed within one (1) year of the date that the building permit was approved.

(2)	Installed landscaping shall not create a safety hazard or negatively impact adjacent areas.

Section 4.4 Sign Standards


4.41	Intent
 
Sign standards are intended to regulate and coordinate the type, placement, height, dimensions, maintenance, and construction of signs in order to provide the citizens of Beulah a safe and aesthetically- pleasing environment. These standards will allow the dissemination of public and private information and advertising.


4.42	General Sign Standards


(A)	Location



(1)	All signs shall be located on the same lot as the business that the sign is advertising. Off- premise advertising signs as provided in this section are an exception.

(2)	Signs, regardless of type, shall not impede, obstruct, interfere or frustrate the following:

(a)	vehicular circulation

(b)	pedestrian walkways

(c)	public right-of-ways

(d)	sight visibility triangles

(B)	Maintenance

 

(1)	All types of signs shall be maintained in good repair at all time.

(2)	Cracked and peeling paint, missing or damaged sign panels, burned-out bulbs, or any other state of disrepair shall be attended to within 90 days from when notice of the damage is provided to the property owner by the City.

(3)	After a business ceases, the owner has thirty (30) days to remove signs identifying businesses, goods, or services that are no longer provided on the premise.

(4)	The P&Z Commission may order the repair or removal of any damaged, deteriorated, obsolete, or abandoned signs, or signs on vacant buildings.

(C)	Nonconformance



(1)	Signs lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this Zoning Ordinance shall be deemed legal non-conforming, and may continue regardless of its conformance pertaining to use, size or location with this Zoning Ordinance.

(2)	Signs that are nonconforming under this section shall be deemed nonconforming uses or structures, and therefore, fall under the standards of Section 6.12 (nonconforming lots, structure, and uses) of this Zoning Ordinance.
 

(D)	Variances



Variances from the Sign Area and Height Standards are unlawful unless an application for variance has been filed with a permit application. All variances are subject to review by the P&Z Commission. See Section 5.17 for Variance procedure.

4.43	Zoning District Standards

(A)	Residential Zoning Districts



(1)	One sign per dwelling, excluding temporary signs, not exceeding a total area of three (3) square feet.

(2)	One sign per lot or complex for apartment buildings and condominiums of four (4) or more units. The sign shall not exceed a total area of thirty-six (36) square feet and must serve to identify the apartment building or condominium.

(3)	One temporary sign per lot, not exceeding a total area of six (6) square feet.

(4)	Wall signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.

(5)	Free standing signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.

(6)	Illuminated and animated signs are prohibited.

(B)	Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District



(7)	One sign per structure, excluding temporary signs, not exceeding a total area of thirty-six (36) square feet.

(8)	One temporary sign per lot, not exceeding a total area of six (6) square feet.

(9)	Wall signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.  (10)Free standing signs shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. (11)Illuminated and animated signs are prohibited.
(C)	General Commercial & Highway Commercial Zoning Districts



(12)	Lots containing one business:
 
(a)	Wall, pedestal, awning, free standing, or projecting signs shall not exceed a total area of fifty (50) square feet.

(b)	Wall signs shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height.

(c)	Free-standing signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.

(13)	Lots containing multiple businesses:

(a)	Each lot may only contain one free standing sign, and the property owner is encouraged to construct a cooperative free standing sign identifying the multiple businesses located on the premises.

(b)	Each  business  is  permitted  one  sign–wall,  awning  or  projecting–in  addition  to  a cooperative free standing sign between multiple businesses.

(c)	Wall, pedestal, free standing, awning, or projecting signs shall not exceed a total area of fifty (50) square feet.

(d)	Wall signs shall not exceed forty (40) feet in height.

(e)	A cooperative free standing sign identifying each business may not exceed forty (40) feet in height, nor exceed a total area of fifty (50) square feet per business or two hundred
(200) square feet, whichever is greater.

(D)	Central Business District



(14)	Wall, pedestal, awning, free standing, or projecting signs shall not exceed a total area of forty
(40) square feet.

(15)	Signs shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height

(16)	Free-standing signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height.

(E)	Industrial Districts



(17)	Lots containing one business:

(a)	Wall, pedestal, awning, free standing, or projecting signs shall not exceed a total area of thirty (30) square feet.

(b)	Wall signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.

(c)	Free-standing signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.

(18)	Lots containing multiple businesses:
 
(a)	Each lot may only contain one free standing sign, and the property owner is encouraged to construct a cooperative free standing sign identifying the multiple businesses located on the premises.

(b)	Each business is permitted one sign–wall, awning or projecting–in addition to a cooperative free standing sign between multiple businesses.

(c)	Wall, pedestal, free standing, awning, or projecting signs shall not exceed a total area of sixty (60) square feet.

(d)	Wall signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.

(e)	A cooperative free standing sign identifying each business may not exceed forty (40) feet in height, nor exceed fifty (50) square feet per business or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is greater.


4.44	Electronic Messaging & Digital Signs


(A)	Standards



(1)	Digital signs are permitted in the following districts:, C-1 – Central Business District, C-2 – Highway Commercial, C-3 – General Commercial, I – Light Industrial, HI – Heavy Industrial.

(2)	Electronic messaging & digital signs shall not exceed a total area of fifty (50) square feet.

(3)	Electronic messaging & digital signs shall not exceed a height of twenty (20) feet.

(4)	Electronic messaging & digital signs shall hold a static message that cannot be change for a period of at least seven (7) seconds.

(5)	If applicable, if an electronic messaging/digital sign contains more than one message, the transition from each message shall happen instantaneously.

(6)	Electronic messaging and digital signs shall be equipped with automatic dimming technology, which allows the sign to automatically adjust the display’s brightness based on ambient light conditions.

(7)	The brightness level shall not increase by more than 0.3 foot-candles over ambient levels.

(8)	Compliance with this section must be verified by the city engineer.


4.45	Incidental Signs & Bulletin Boards

(A)	Standards
 
Signs & bulletin boards customarily incidental to religious institutions, public institutions, and other societal meeting establishments do not require a permit; however, shall meet the following standards:

(1)	One incidental sign or bulletin board per lot;

(2)	The incidental sign or bulletin board shall not exceed a total area of twenty (20) square feet;

(3)	The sign or bulletin board shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet;


4.46	Off-premise Advertising Signs

(A)	Dimensional Limitations



(1)	Off-premise advertising signs shall not exceed a total area of two hundred (200) square feet.

(2)	Off-premise advertising signs shall not exceed fifty (50) feet in height.

(B)	Location Limitations



(3)	Off-premise advertising signs are only permitted in the following districts: C2 – Highway Commercial, C3 – General Commercial, I – Light Industrial, HI – Heavy Industrial.

(4)	Non-digital off-premise advertising signs shall be set back seven-hundred fifty (750) feet from all Residential districts, Neighborhood Commercial districts, Central Business districts, and Public and Open space districts.

(5)	Digital off-premise advertising signs shall be set back one thousand (1,000) feet from all Residential districts, Neighborhood Commercial districts, Central Business districts, and Public and Open space districts.

(6)	Non-digital off-premise advertising signs shall be set back one thousand (1,000) feet from all other off-premise advertising signs.

(7)	Digital off-premise advertising signs shall be set back one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet from all other off-premise advertising signs.

(C)	Digital Off-premise Advertising Signs



(8)	Digital off-premise advertising signs shall hold a static message that cannot be changed for a period of seven (7) seconds.

(9)	If a digital off-premise advertising signs contains more than one message, the transition from each message shall happen instantaneously.
 
(10)	Electronic messaging and digital signs shall be equipped with automatic dimming technology, which allows the sign to automatically adjust the display’s brightness based on ambient light conditions.

The brightness level shall not increase by more than 0.3 foot-candles over ambient levels.


4.47	Temporary Signs

(A)	Applicability
The following signs are deemed temporary, and therefore, a permit is not required to place the sign on the corresponding lot:

(1)	Contractor Signs

(a)	Signs that denote the architect, engineer, or contractor on the premise where construction, repair, or renovation is in progress;
(b)	Signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in residential districts and thirty-two
(32) square feet in all of other district.

(2)	Signs advertising the development of a new subdivision development

(a)	Signs shall not exceed forty (40) square feet;
(b)	The number of signs may not exceed one (1) per entrance;
(c)	The signs may remain in place until owners of 75% of the lots within the subdivision have been issued certificates of occupancy.

(3)	Banner signs that are affixed to the façade of the building

(4)	Going-out-of-business signs

(5)	Grand opening signs

(6)	Garage sale signs

(7)	Portable Signs

 







(B)	Duration
 
(a)	One portable sign per lot
(b)	The portable sign must be placed within the confines of the property
(c)	The total area of the portable sign may not exceed thirty (30) square feet
(d)	Portable signs shall not be permanently affixed to the ground, but rather, securely anchored to the ground for the duration of their placement.
 


(1)	Unless otherwise provided, to qualify as a temporary sign, the sign may not remain in place for more than fourteen (14) days.

(2)	Upon completion of the duration period, a temporary sign may not be erected on the same premises until an additional thirty (30) days has elapsed.
 




4.48	Exempt Signs


(A)	Applicability
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance:

(1)	Signs required by law;

(2)	Signs authorized for a public purpose;

(3)	Political signs;

(4)	Holiday-related non-advertising signs;

(5)	Official traffic control, parking restrictions, or informational signs;

(6)	Danger or warning signs of a cautionary nature;

(7)	Cornerstones and historical markers;

(8)	Real estate for sale, rental, or lease signs;

(9)	Name plates and addresses; and

(10)	Window displays of actual merchandise


4.49	Prohibited Signs


(A)	Applicability
The following types of signs are prohibited:

(1)	No part of any sign shall be permitted to be located on or above public right of way, except for signs required by law.

(2)	Obscene or Indecent Signs – Signs that depict, in whole or in part, anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

(3)	Beacon, Flashing, or Strobing Signs – Signs that emit a flashing or steady light, except for signs connected with the operation of the airport or public facilities. Signs utilized for public and/or traffic safety purposes are exempt.

(4)	Rotating Signs – Signs that rotate or revolve

(5)	Signs affixed to natural features such as trees, rocks, or shrubs.
 
(6)	Signs affixed to utility poles.

(7)	Signs that resemble, imitate, or approximate the shape, size, form, or color of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices.

(8)	Signs that obstruct or interfere with the effectiveness of railroad or traffic signs, signals, or devices.

Section 4.5 Setbacks


4.51	How to Measure Setbacks

(A)	Description



The setback is measured from the edge of the road easement or the lot line, whichever is closest to the proposed structure.


(B)	Eaves



If the eave (roof overhang) extends more than three (3) feet from the structure wall, then the setback distance must be measured from the edge of the eave.


4.52	Setback Averaging

(A)	Description


Setback averaging is only allowed on a block where the average front setback of existing buildings within 200 feet of the subject lot is not more than 6 feet less than the front setback requirement. Where the subject block is all in a single zoning district, the front setback for the proposed building shall be set at such average depth. When a block is zoned in different zoning districts, the front setback requirements of the district that requires the greater front setback shall apply along the entire block.
 

 
 
4.53	Setback Exceptions

(A)	Description



Sight visibility triangle requirements supersede all setback requirements. Otherwise, every part of the required yard setback must be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except as set out in this subsection:

(1)	Trees, shrubbery or other landscape features may be located within any required setback;

(1)	Fences and walls may be located within any required setback.

(2)	Driveways and sidewalks may be located within any required setback;

(3)	Utility lines, wires and associated structures, such as power poles, may be located within any required setback;

(4)	Signs, where permitted, may be located within any required setback;

(5)	Uncovered decks, terraces, steps, earthworks and other similar landscaping or design elements placed directly on finished grade that do not exceed an average height of thirty (30) inches above the surrounding grade may project up to eight (8) feet into the required setback.

Section 4.6 Structure Height

4.61	How to Measure Structure Height

(A)	Description



Structure height shall be measured from the center point, or middle elevation of the structure pad to the peak of the roof.


 
 

4.62	Exceptions

(A)	Items Excepted from Height Requirements


(1)	Chimneys and flues

(2)	Agricultural buildings

(3)	Appurtenances usually required to be placed above roof level and not intended for human occupancy.

Section 4.7 Fences


4.71	Fence Standards


(A)	Height Standards


 
District	Maximum  Height  in
front  yard  or  where facing  right  of  way
(feet)
 
Max. Side Yard Height (feet) Not Along Right of Way
 
Max.	Rear
Yard	Height
(feet)	Not Along Right of
Way
 
Max. Height in Other Locations (feet) Not Along Right of Way
 
All Residential Districts (R1 – R7)	4	7	7	6
Neighborhood Commercial (C-4)	7	7	7	7
Central Business District (C-1)	4	7	7	7
 
Highway	Commercial	(C-2)	& General Commercial (C-3)
 
12	12	12	12
 

(B)	Other Standards


(1)	Fences shall be set back no less than twelve (12) inches from all lot lines and a minimum of three (3) feet from alleys.

(2)	No fences shall be constructed of barbed wire, chicken wire, snow fence, or any other material which is deemed unsightly or hazardous by the Building Official.

(3)	Fences shall have an entrance no less than three and one-half (3.5) feet wide to allow access for emergency purposes.

(4)	These standards do not apply to temporary fences used in conjunction with construction or public events.

(5)	The sight visibility triangle requirements must be met as described in section 4.02.
 
Section 4.8 Property Pins


4.81	Property Pins Required


(A)	It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to pin property lines for new construction of primary structures.

(B)	If there is an existing structure, it is the property owner’s responsibility to identify the property lines.
The City shall not be liable for incorrect property lines.



4.82	Removal and Replacement


No property pin or monument shall be removed, and if found to be removed, must be replaced by property owner.


Section 4.9 Foundations


4.91	Minimum Foundations


(A)	All buildings and structures of a size of 100 square feet or more, and not otherwise required to have a foundation, shall be anchored by a minimum foundation of an approved floating  concrete slab approved by the Building Official.

(B)	All buildings and structures, not otherwise required to have a foundation, and under 100 square feet in size, shall be anchored in a manner approved by the Building Official.
 

Chapter 5 Permit Review and Application 	


Section 5.0 Review and Decision-making Bodies


5.1	Council

(A)	Powers and Duties

The Council shall make the final decision on the following applications and appeals provided in the Zoning Ordinance:
 
(1)	Zoning Ordinance Text Amendments
The Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the text of this Zoning Ordinance on its own initiative or upon application for a text amendment.

(2)	Zoning Map Amendments
The Council shall be responsible for reviewing zoning map amendment (rezoning) applications and for taking the final action to approve or deny such applications.

(3)	Planned Unit Development (PUD) Amendments
 
(a)	PUD Conceptual Plan
The Council shall be responsible for reviewing PUD Conceptual Plans and for taking the
final action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications.

(b)	PUD Final Plan
The Council shall be responsible for reviewing PUD Final Plans and for taking the final action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications. The Council is also responsible for reviewing PUD zoning map amendment applications, which are required to be processed along with the PUD Final Plan.

(4)	Conditional Use Permits
The Council shall be responsible for reviewing and taking the final action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny Conditional Use Permit applications.

(5)	Subdivision Plats
The Council shall be responsible for reviewing and taking the final action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny final subdivision plat applications.

(B)	Council and the Board of Adjustment

(1)	The Council will perform all duties of a Board of Adjustment as defined by the NDCC.

(2)	Duties
 
(a)	Zoning Variances
 

The Council shall be responsible for reviewing and taking final action to approve, approve with conditions, or deny zoning variance applications.

(b)	Appeals of Administrative Decisions

The Council shall hear and decide appeals from affected parties regarding any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official charged with the enforcement of this Zoning Ordinance.

5.2	Planning and Zoning Commission

(A)	Authority

The P&Z Commission is created in accordance with North Dakota Century Code and includes the same powers and duties authorized for the Zoning P&Z Commission as provided in North Dakota Century Code section 40-47-06 (or as modified) and planning P&Z Commissions as provided in North Dakota Century Code Chapter 40-48 (or as modified).

(B)	Members

P&Z Commission membership includes the following:

(1)	Five members to be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the Council.

(2)	One member residing outside the corporate limits of the City of Beulah, whose residence is located within the territorial limits of the zoning regulation authority exercised by the City of Beulah. (Said member to be appointed by the Mercer County Board of County P&Z Commissioners.)

(C)	Terms of Office

The terms of office are determined by the North Dakota Century Code.

(D)	Powers and Duties

(1)	The P&Z Commission shall have such powers and shall perform such duties as provided for a Planning P&Z Commission as detailed in North Dakota Century Code.

(2)	The P&Z Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Council in any matter which may be assigned to the P&Z Commission for consideration and recommendation.

(3)	The P&Z Commission’s powers and duties under this Ordinance are set out in this subsection (below).

(a)	Zoning Ordinance Text Amendments
 
The P&Z Commission shall be responsible for reviewing Ordinance text amendment applications and for recommending that the Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications.

(b)	Zoning Map Amendments
The P&Z Commission shall be responsible for reviewing zoning map amendment (rezoning) applications and for recommending that the Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications.

(c)	Planned Unit Development (PUD) Overlay Amendments

(i)	PUD Conceptual Plan

The P&Z Commission shall be responsible for reviewing PUD Conceptual Plans and for recommending that the Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications.

(ii)	PUD Final Plan
The P&Z Commission shall be responsible for reviewing PUD Final Plan applications and for recommending that the Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications.

(d)	Conditional Use Permits
The P&Z Commission shall be responsible for reviewing Conditional Use Permit applications and for recommending that the Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications.

(e)	Subdivision Plats

(i)	The P&Z Commission shall be responsible for reviewing Preliminary Subdivision Plat applications and for recommending that the Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications.
(ii)	The P&Z Commission shall be responsible for recommending that the Council approve or deny Final Subdivision Plat applications.

(f)	Building Permit
Prior to building permit approval by the Building Official, the P&Z Commission may be
provided notification of current building permits under review and provide comment on building permits as necessary pertaining to planning and zoning matters. The P&Z Commission may act to accept building permits subject to its purview.

(g)	Bonding and Fees
The P&Z Commission may recommend that the Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny bonding and fee schedules pertaining to planning and zoning matters.

(h)	Variances
The P&Z Commission shall be responsible for reviewing Variance applications and for recommending that the Council approve, approve with conditions, or deny such applications.
 
(i)	Other Matters
The P&Z Commission shall have such other duties as determined from time-to-time by the Council and this Zoning Ordinance.

Section 5.1 Process



Section 5.11 Building Permit Required

The construction and/or maintenance of the following improvements requires a building permit. Consult with the Building Official if planning to construct or maintain any improvement not listed below.

 
 
Section 5.12 Building Permit

Building Permit Process
(see following pages red text for detail)




5.12.A.1	Submit Permit Application*






5.12.A.2	Determine Application Completeness*



 

5.12.B.1
Administrative Review by the Building Official*
 



No	Is P&Z Commission Review Needed?
 




Yes
 
5.12.B.2
Administrative Review by the Building Official and P&Z
 





Accepted by P&Z Commission




 


Construct Project/Inspections
 
5.13 End of Construction Certificate of Occupancy*
 


Construct Project/Inspections
 
(A)	Application


(1)	Submit Permit Application*
Building Permit applications shall be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form
along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council.

(2)	Determine Application Completeness*
(a)	Building Permits may be issued only for development on legal lots where the plat creating
the lot has been recorded by the County Recorder of Mercer County. This requirement may be waived by the P&Z Commission for development where the city has extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, if the P&Z Commission is satisfied that roadway access and the provision of utilities can be properly provided without the platting process.

(b)	The applicant has verified the  location  of the  lot lines for  the  subject lot.  Lot line verification is the responsibility of the applicant.

(c)	The Building Official will determine when an application for a building permit is considered complete. In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section 5.12.A.2.d for all other required items.

(d)	Application Checklist
(i)	Site plan, drawn to scale, with dimensions.
(ii)	Floor plan, drawn to scale, with dimensions.
(iii)	Elevations, drawn to scale, with dimensions.
(iv)	Foundation plans, drawn to scale, with dimensions.
(v)	Elevation of final lot grade, drawn to scale, with dimensions.

(B)	Review and Action

(1)	Administrative review by the Building Official*
 
(a)	The following types of improvements/maintenance require administrative review. Note that the below list is not all-inclusive. The Building Official must be contacted to determine whether a building permit is required.
(i)	Siding
(ii)	Windows
(iii)	Exterior Doors
(iv)	Water and Sewer Tie-ins
(v)	Drain Tile

(b)	The Building Official will review all building plans and site plans, working with  the applicant until all plans meet applicable Zoning Ordinance and building code requirements, as determined by the Building Official. The final lot grade shall be reviewed to ensure it does not pose a hazard to life or property on the subject lot or on adjacent lots.

(c)	When all required plans have been accepted and approved by the Building Official, the Building Permit is issued and the applicant is able to construct the project.
 
(d)	Inspections must be completed to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance, building code, and State Electrical and Plumbing Codes as determined applicable by the Building Official. Inspections are carried out by the Building Official or his designee.

(e)  When all required items on the Certificate of Occupancy checklist have been completed, a Certificate of Occupancy will be issued.

(2)	Administrative review by the Building Official and P&Z Commission*
 
(a)	Administrative review and action by the Building Official and P&Z Commission applies to all projects not listed in section 5.12(B)(1)(a).

(b)	The Building Official will review all building plans and site plans, working with  the applicant until all plans meet applicable Zoning Ordinance and building code requirements, as determined by the Building Official.

(c)	When all required plans have been accepted by the P&Z Commission, the Building Permit is issued and the applicant is able to construct the project.

(d)	The Building Official will notify the P&Z Commission of all permits in compliance with Zoning Ordinance requirements.

(e)	Inspections must be completed to ensure compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and building code. Inspections are carried out by the Building Official or his designee.

(f)	When all required items on the Certificate of Occupancy checklist have been completed, an Certificate of Occupancy will be issued, when applicable.

(C)	Expiration

In case construction has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of a Building Permit, said permit shall be cancelled, unless an extension is granted by the P&Z Commission.

(D)	Failure to Obtain Permit

All building permits must be obtained before any requested work is begun. Failure to obtain a building permit prior to the commencement of any work shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Ordinance.

*See process chart on page V-5.


Section 5.13 Certificate of Occupancy*

(A)	Permit Process

Where a building permit has been approved, a Certificate of Occupancy shall be obtained prior to habitation or use of the structure.
 


(B)	Permit Required

It is unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or premises or part, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, moved, altered or enlarged wholly, or partly in its use or structure, until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued by the Building Official. Such permit shall show that such building or premises or part and the proposed use are in conformity with the provisions of the building code, State Electrical and Plumbing Codes, and this Zoning Ordinance.

*See process chart on page V-5.


Section 5.14 Demolition Permit


(A)	Permit Required

A demolition permit is required to demolish any of the following improvements. Each improvement must be included in the permit. Each separate property must have a separate demolition permit. The Building Official shall be consulted regarding any item not listed below as to whether a demolition permit is required.

(1)	Garage
(2)	Shed
(3)	Sidewalk
(4)	Curb and Gutter
(5)	Driveway
(6)	Deck
(7)	Residence
(8)	Commercial Structure
(9)	Storage Unit
(10)	Communication Tower
(11)	Freestanding Sign
(12)	Swimming Pool that required a building permit for construction
 
Demolition Permit Process
(see following text in red for detail)

5.14.B.1 Submit Application*





5.14.C.1	Building Official Review*





5.14.C.2	Permit Approval, Approval with Conditions, or Denial by Building Official*





5.14.C.3	State Environmental Mitigation Complete Prior to Demolition*



(B)	Application


(1)	Submit Permit Application*

Demolition Permit applications shall be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council.

(2)	Determine Application Completeness

The Building Official will determine when an application for a demolition permit is considered complete. In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section
5.14.B.3 for all other required items.

(3)	Application Checklist

(a)	State Department of Health mitigation approval.

(b)	Ownership verification and approval.

(c)	Building Official approval.
 
(C)	Review and Action


(1)	The Building Official will review the application for completeness.*

(2)	The Demolition Permit application shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied by the Building Official. If approved, or approved with conditions, the Building Official shall issue the Demolition Permit. *

(3)	Any environmental mitigation activities required by the State of North Dakota Department of Health must be completed prior to Demolition.*

*See process chart on page V-9.

Section 5.15 Temporary Permit

(A)	Permit Required

All temporary structures and temporary residences as listed in this Ordinance require a Temporary Permit. See Chapter 7, Definitions regarding what constitutes a temporary structure or residence.

Temporary Permit Process
(see following text in red for detail)

5.15.B Submit Application*





5.15.C.1	Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*





5.15.C.2	P&Z Commission Approves, Approves with Conditions, or Denies Application *


(B)	Submit Application*


(1)	Application

Temporary Permit applications shall be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council.
 
(2)	Determine Application Completeness

The Building Official will determine when an application for a temporary permit is considered complete. In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section
5.15.B.3 for all other required items.*

(3)	Application Checklist

(a)	Site plan, drawn to scale, with dimensions.

(b)	Elevations and/or photos.

(c)	Written description of proposed use.




(C)	Review and Action


(1)	The   Building   Official   will   review   the   application   for   completeness   and   develop   a recommendation for the P&Z Commission.*

(2)	The P&Z Commission may act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
The action upon the temporary permit application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission
in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant.*

*See process chart on page V-10.
 
Section 5.16 Conditional Use Permit
Conditional Use Permit Process
(see following text in red for detail)


5.16.A Submit Application*





5.16.B.1 Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*




5.16.D Notice of P&Z Commission Hearing and Council Hearing Given in Newspaper and to Adjacent Property Owners*




5.16.B.3	P&Z Commission Hearing and Recommendation *




5.16.B.4	Council Hearing and Decision to Approve, Approve with Conditions, or Deny Application

(A)	Submit Application*

(1)	Application

Conditional Use Permit applications shall be submitted to the Building Official on an appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council.

(2)	Processing Requirements

The Building Official will determine when an application for a conditional use permit is considered complete. In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section 5.16.A.3 for all other required items.
 
(3)	Application Checklist

(a)	Site Plan, drawn to scale, with dimensions.

(b)	Elevation of proposed structure(s), if structures are included.

(c)	Project description, including detail on the daily or seasonal operations; number of employees, customers, visitors; number of shifts; activities; products and services; maximum living units proposed, as applicable.

(d)	Non-refundable fee

(e)	An amount to be determined by the City to cover estimated engineering and legal fees related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Engineer and City Attorney upon completion of the project. Any engineering fees and/or costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the sole responsibility of applicant.

(f)	Other items and information requested by the Building Official, P&Z Commission, or Council to evaluate the proposal’s potential impacts on traffic, aesthetics, city utilities, noise, and other environmental impacts.

(B)	Review and Action

(1)	The   Building   Official   will   review   the   application   for   completeness   and   develop   a recommendation based upon the review criteria in section 5.16(C).*

(2)	The P&Z Commission will be advised of the application and provided with the Building Official’s recommendation.

(3)	The P&Z Commission shall hold a public hearing for the conditional use permit request. The P&Z Commission will thereafter make a recommendation to the Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action upon the application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The P&Z Commission will use the criteria located in section 5.16(C) as guidance to determine if a Conditional Use Permit should be approved.*

(4)	The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed conditional use permit. The Council may act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action upon the application may also be tabled by the Council in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The Council will use the criteria located in section 5.16(C) as guidance to determine if a Conditional Use Permit should be approved.*

(C)	Criteria
A Conditional Use Permit may not be approved unless the Council finds that all of the following criteria,
as applicable, have been satisfied:

(1)	The proposed use is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Ordinance, applicable zoning district, and with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
 

(2)	If applicable, the proposed use will comply with all special standards established in Chapter 3.

(3)	Adequate utility, drainage, and other such necessary facilities and services have been or will be provided at the time of development.

(4)	Adequate access roads or entrance and exit drives will be provided and be so designed to prevent traffic hazards and to minimize traffic congestion in public streets.

(D)	Notice of Public Hearing

(1)	Newspaper
Notice is to be published in the official newspaper of the City at least once each week for 2 successive weeks and not less than 15 days preceding the date of each scheduled public hearing (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application).

(2)	Adjacent Properties
Written notice shall be provided by first class mail to all owners of the subject property and all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. The notice shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least 15 days before the scheduled public hearings (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application).

(E)	Appeal Process

An appeal of the Council decision may be made to the district court.

(F)	Amendments

The process for amendments to conditional use permits is the same as required for a new application.

*See process chart on page V-12.
 
Section 5.17 Variance


(A)	Variance Restrictions

A variance can only be considered in the following areas:

(1)	Height
(2)	Yard/setbacks
(3)	Lot area
(4)	Lot coverage
(5)	Off-street parking and loading requirements
(6)	Sight visibility triangle
(7)	Sign area
(8)	Sign height
Variance Process
(see following text in red for detail)
5.17.B Submit Application*




5.17.C.1 Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*




5.17.C.3	P&Z Commission Review and Recommendation*




5.17.C.4	Council Review and Decision to Approve, Approve with Conditions, or Deny Application*

(B)	Submit Application*


(1)	Application

Variance applications shall be submitted to the Building Official on the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council.
 
(2)	Processing Requirements
The Building Official will determine when an application for a variance is considered complete.
In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section 5.17.B.3 for all other required items.

(3)	Application Checklist

(a)	Site Plan, drawn to scale, with dimensions.

(b)	Elevation(s) of proposed structures (for height variances only).

(c)	Written statement of hardship.

(d)	Written notice provided by first class mail to all owners of the subject property and all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. The notice shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least 15 days before the scheduled meetings of P&Z Commission and Council (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application).

(C)	Review and Action

(1)	The   Building   Official   will   review   the   application   for   completeness   and   develop   a recommendation based upon the review criteria in section 5.17(D).*

(2)	The P&Z Commission will receive the application as well as the Building Official’s recommendation.

(3)	The P&Z Commission will thereafter make a recommendation to the Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action upon the application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The P&Z Commission will use the criteria located in section 5.17(D) as guidance to determine if a variance should be approved.*

(4)	The Council will act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action upon the application may also be tabled by the Council in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The Council will use the criteria located in section 5.17(D) as guidance to determine if a variance should be approved.*

(D)	Criteria

A Variance may not be approved unless the Council finds that all of the following criteria, as applicable, have been satisfied:

(1)	The requested variance arises from conditions that are unique to the subject property, that are not ordinarily found in the same zoning district.

(2)	The request is not made to satisfy the owner’s convenience.

(3)	The granting of the permit for the variance will not adversely affect the rights of adjacent property owners or residents.
 
(4)	The  strict application  of  the  applicable  zoning  standards will  constitute  an  unnecessary physical hardship (not economic hardship).

(5)	The variance desired will not adversely affect the public health, safety or general welfare.

(6)	The variance is the minimum variance that will overcome the hardship.

(E)	Appeal Process
 
An appeal of the Council decision may be made to the district court.

*See process chart on page V-15.
 
Section 5.18 Zoning District Map Amendment
Zoning District Map Amendment Process
(see following text in red for detail)


5.18.A Submit Application*





5.18.B.1 Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*





5.18.D Notice of P&Z Commission Hearing and Council Hearing Given in Newspaper and to Adjacent Property Owners*





5.18.B.4 P&Z Commission Hearing and Recommendation*





5.18.B.5	Council Hearing and Decision to Approve, Approve with Conditions, or Deny Application and First Reading of Ordinance*






5.18.B.6	Second Reading of Amending Ordinance*





5.18.B.7	Update Zoning District Map by Formal Resolution*
 
(A)	Prepare Zoning District Map Amendment/Submit Application*

(1)	Application:

Zoning District Map Amendment applications shall be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council.

(2)	Processing Requirements:

The Building Official will determine when an application for a zoning district map amendment is considered complete. In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section 5.18.A.3 for all other required items.

(3)	Application Checklist

(a)	Applicant name and contact information.

(b)	Legal Description of the property.

(c)	The existing zoning of the area and adjoining lots.

(d)	The proposed zoning of the area and adjoining lots.

(e)	Reason applicant is seeking zoning change.



(B)	Review and Action

(1)	The   Building   Official   will   review   the   application   for   completeness   and   develop   a recommendation based upon the review criteria in section 5.18(C).*

(2)	The P&Z Commission will be advised of the application and provided with the Building Official’s recommendation.

(3)	For any Zoning Map Amendment in the Extraterritorial Area, see N.D.C.C. § 40-47-01.1.

(4)	The P&Z Commission shall hold a hearing on the Zoning Ordinance amendment request. The P&Z Commission will thereafter make a recommendation to the Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action upon the zoning district map amendment application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The P&Z Commission will use the criteria located in section 5.18(C) as guidance to determine if a zoning map amendment should be approved.*

(5)	The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed zoning district map amendment. The Council will thereafter act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action upon the zoning district map amendment application may also be tabled by the Council in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The Council will use the criteria located in section 5.18(C) as guidance to determine if a zoning district map
 
amendment should be approved.* At said hearing, the Council shall have a first reading of the Amending Ordinance

(6)	The Council shall have a second reading of the Amending Ordinance, at which time it will be adopted. *

(7)	The Council shall amend the Zoning District Map by formal resolution. *


(C)	Criteria

The Council will use the following as guidance to determine if a Zoning District Map Amendment should be approved:

(1)	The requested zoning change is justified by a change in conditions since the area was initially zoned or by an error in the zoning district map.

(2)	The City and other agencies will be able to provide necessary public services, facilities, and programs to serve the development allowed by the new zoning classification.

(3)	The approval will not adversely affect the condition or value of property in the vicinity.

(4)	The proposed amendment is consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance, in harmony with the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map, and other adopted policies of the City.

(D)	Notice of Public Hearing*
 
(1)	Newspaper
Notice is to be published in the official newspaper of the city, or in the official newspaper of
the City and the official newspaper of Mercer County if the proposed site is within the City’s extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction, at least once each week for 2 successive weeks and not less than 15 days preceding the date of the scheduled public hearings. (Not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application)

(2)	Adjacent Properties
Written notice shall be provided by first class mail to all owners of the subject property and
all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. The notice shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least 15 days before the scheduled public hearings. (Not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application)

(E)	Notice of Amendment Adoption

Within 30 days after the Council approves a zoning district map amendment, the City Auditor shall ensure that notice of the approved amendment is published in the official newspaper of the city.

(F)	Protest Petitions

(1)	Protest Provision Required
 
Any person aggrieved by a proposed change to the zoning district map may file a protest petition prior to consideration by the Council. The protest shall be submitted to the City Auditor. A protest petition against a change, supplement, modification, amendment, or repeal is signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more:

(a)	Of the area of the lots included in such proposed change; or

(b)	Of the area adjacent, extending one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the area to be changed, excluding the width of streets.

“Valid” protest petitions must be in writing, contain a clear and concise statement describing and setting forth the protest, and contain the signature and address of each protesting property owner, and the location of property owned by each protestor shall be shown on a map attached to the protest petition.


(2)	Vote Required
The amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of a three-fourths
majority of all members of the Council. The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance relating to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments considered under this section provided that protest petitions must be filed with the City Auditor prior to the time set for the Council hearing on the protest.

*See process chart on page V-18.
 
Section 5.19 Zoning Ordinance Text Amendment


See N.D.C.C. § 40-12.



Section 5.20 Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment

Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment Process
(see following text in red for detail)


5.20.A Submit Application*




5.20.B.1 Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*



5.20.D Notice of P&Z Commission Hearing and Council Hearing Given in Newspaper and to Adjacent Property Owners *



5.20.B.3	P&Z Commission Hearing and Recommendation*



5.20.B.4	Council Hearing and Decision to Approve, Approve with Conditions, or Deny Application and First Reading of Amending Ordinance




5.20.B.5	Second Reading of Amending Ordinance





5.20.B.6	Comprehensive Land Use Plan Updated
 


(1)	Submit Application*

(1)	Application

Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map  Amendment applications shall  be  submitted to  the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council.

(2)	Processing Requirements:

The Building Official will determine when an application for a Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment is considered complete. In addition to the required fee, see the submittal checklist provided in section 5.20.A.3 for all other required items.

(3)	Application Checklist

(a)	Written justification outlining the need for  the Comprehensive Plan Land  Use Map Amendment.

(b)	Map of proposed amendment showing entire land area, existing and proposed subdivision(s), and proposed modification of land use classifications, drawn to scale, with dimensions.


(4)	Review and Action

(1)	The   Building   Official   will   review   the   application   for   completeness   and   develop   a recommendation based upon the review criteria in section 5.20(C).*

(2)	The P&Z Commission will receive the application and be provided with the Building Official’s recommendation.

(3)	The P&Z Commission shall hold a hearing on the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment request. The P&Z Commission will thereafter make a recommendation to the Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action upon the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The P&Z Commission will use the criteria located in section 5.20(C) as guidance to determine if a Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment should be approved.*

(4) The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment. The Council may act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action upon the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment application may also be tabled by the Council in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The Council will use the criteria located in section 5.20(C) as guidance to determine if a Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment should be approved.*
 
(5)	Upon approval of the application, a first reading of the amending ordinance will be performed at the time of the public hearing. Thereafter, a second reading of the amending ordinance shall occur to formally adopt the ordinance. *

(6)	Upon passing of the Amending Ordinance, the Comprehensive Land Use Plan shall be updated. *

(C)	Criteria

The Council will use the following as guidance to determine if a Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment should be approved:

(1)	Consistency
The criterion is “whether the proposed change would be consistent with the intent of the
Comprehensive Plan.”

(2)	Compatibility
The criterion is “whether the proposed change would be compatible with the existing land
use pattern or the designated future land uses.”

(3)	Substantial Adverse Impact
The criterion is “whether the proposed change would create substantial adverse impact in the
adjacent area or in the City or County in general.”

(4)	Adequate Shape and Size
The criterion is “whether the subject site is of adequate shape and size to accommodate the
proposed change.”

(D)	Notice of Public Hearing

(1)	Newspaper
Notice is to be published in the official newspaper of the city at least once each week for 2
successive weeks and not less than 15 days preceding the date of the scheduled public hearings (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application).

(2)	Adjacent Properties
Written notice shall be provided by first class mail to all owners of the subject property and
all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. The notice shall be deposited in the U.S. mail at least 15 days before the scheduled public hearings (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application).

(E)	Protest Petitions

(1)	Protest Provision Required
Any person aggrieved by a proposed change to the Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map may
file a protest petition prior to consideration by the Council. The protest petition shall be submitted to the City Auditor. A protest petition against a change, supplement, modification, amendment, or repeal must be signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more:
 
(a)	Of the area of the lots included in such proposed change; or

(b)	Of the area adjacent, extending one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the area to be changed, excluding the width of streets.

“Valid” protest petitions must be in writing, contain a clear and concise statement describing and setting forth the protest, and contain the signature and address of each protesting property owner, and the location of property owned by each protestor shall be shown on a map attached to the petition.


(2)	Vote Required
The amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of a three-fourths
majority of all members of the Council. The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance relating to public hearings and official notice shall apply equally to all changes or amendments considered under this section provided that protest petition is filed with the City Auditor prior to the time set for the hearing.

(F)	Notice of Amendment Adoption

Within 30 days after the Council approves a Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment, the City Auditor shall ensure that notice of the approved amendment is published in the official newspaper of the City.


*See process chart on page V-22.
 
Section 5.21 Subdivision Plats
 


Preliminary Plat Process
 
(see red text, pages V-28-V-29 for detail)



5.21.B Preapplication Review*







5.21.C.1	Submit Application*






5.21.C.2	Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*





5.21.E Notice of Hearings





5.21.C.3	P&Z Commission Hearing
and Recommendation*





5.21.C.4	Council Hearing and Decision to Approve, Approve with Conditions, or Deny Application*
 
Final Plat Process
(see red text, pages V-29-V-30 for detail)



5.21.D.1	Submit Application*






5.21.D.2	Building Official Review for Completeness and Recommendation*




5.21.E	Notice of P&Z Commission Hearing and Council Hearing Given in Newspaper and to Adjacent Property Owners*




5.21.D.3	P&Z Commission Hearing and
Recommendation*




5.21.D.4 Council Hearing and Decision to Approve, Approve with Conditions, or Deny Application





5.21.F	Record Plat with County Recorder*




(A)	Minor Subdivisions

(1)	Minor subdivisions meet the following criteria:

(a)	Does not require the dedication of public rights-of-way or the construction of new streets;

(b)	The resulting subdivision is three (3) lots or less;
 

(c)	Does not create any public improvements;

(d)	Does not land-lock the subject tract or any adjacent property;

(e)	Does not violate any local, state or federally-adopted law, this Ordinance, City plan or policy;

(f)	Is prepared in accordance with and is subject to all requirements of the County Recorder or the procedures for Final Plats as established by this Subdivision Regulation;

(g)	The lot and block arrangement of the plat of record along with its original name shall be indicted by dotted or dashed lines. Also any revision or vacated roadway on the original plat of record shall be so indicated.

(2)	Any subdivision application that meets the criteria under 5.21(A)(1) does not need to comply with the requirements of part 5.21(C) – Preliminary Plat Review. All other parts of section
5.21 must be complied with.

(3)	Any subdivision application that does not meet the criteria under 5.21(A)(1) must comply with section 5.21, parts (B), (C), (D), (E), and (F).

(B)	Preapplication Review

Before submitting a plat for a proposed subdivision, the applicant shall confer with the Building Official to discuss the proposal and applicable regulations. The purpose of the Preapplication Meeting is for the applicant to become familiar with applicable subdivision procedures and standards. The Building Official may waive the preapplication meeting requirement in writing.

(C)	Preliminary Plat Review

(1)	Submit Application*

(a)	Submission
Preliminary plat applications shall be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council and an amount to be determined by the City to cover estimated engineering and legal fees related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Engineer and City Attorney upon completion of the project. Any engineering fees and/or costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the sole responsibility of applicant.

(b)	Processing Requirement
The Building Official will determine when an application for a preliminary plat is considered complete. In addition to the required fee and escrow amount, see the submittal checklist provided in section 5.21.C.1.c for all other required items.

(c)	Submittal Checklist
(i)	Plat map.
 
(ii)	Preliminary storm water management plan.
(iii)	Identification of undeveloped land, if any.
(iv)	Roadway profiles.
(v)	Written justification for use of private roadways, if applicable.
(vi)	Other items and information requested by the Building Official, P&Z Commission, or Council to evaluate the proposal’s potential impacts on traffic, aesthetics, city utilities, noise, and other environmental impacts.

(2)	Building Official Review and Recommendation*
The Building Official shall prepare a recommendation in writing to the P&Z Commission. The
recommendation will include discussion of compliance with the Comprehensive Plan, City Ordinances, and North Dakota Century Code.


(3)	Review and Recommendation – P&Z Commission*
The P&Z Commission shall hold a public hearing on the Preliminary Subdivision Plat. The P&Z
Commission will thereafter make a recommendation to the Council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action on the preliminary subdivision plat application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The recommendation made by the P&Z Commission on the Preliminary Plat shall be based on compliance with the North Dakota Century Code and City Ordinances, with consideration given to the Comprehensive Plan.

(4)	Review and Action – Council*
The Council shall hold a public hearing on the Preliminary Subdivision Plat. The Council may
act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. The action on the preliminary subdivision plat application may also be tabled by the Council in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The action taken by the Council on the Preliminary Plat shall be based on compliance with the North Dakota Century code and City Ordinances, with consideration given to the Comprehensive Plan. After the preliminary review and action, the applicant may proceed with the preparation of Construction Plans and submit the required final plat documents for review and approval.


*See process chart on page V-26.

(D)	Final Plat Review and Action

(a)	Submit Application

(a)	Submission
Final plat applications shall be submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form along with a non-refundable fee that has been established by a resolution of the Council.

(b)	Processing Requirements
The application for a Final Subdivision Plat shall not be processed until all of the following documents and information have been submitted to the Building Official in the appropriate form:

(i)	A copy of a title insurance policy or an attorney’s opinion of title, running to the benefit of the City of Beulah, stating the name of the owner of record.
 
(ii)	A Plat Review Checklist.
(iii)	Three (3) Mylar Plat Surveys signed by the applicant, property owner(s) of record
(i.e. consistent with all information provided in the Title Opinion), P&Z Commission
Chairman, and Mayor of the City of Beulah, and land surveyor.
(iv)	Infrastructure improvement plans.

(2)	Building Official Review and Recommendation*
The Building Official shall prepare a recommendation in writing to the P&Z Commission that
reviews the application in light of the approved Preliminary Plat (and any conditions required
by the Council), Comprehensive Plan, City Ordinances, and the North Dakota Century Code.

(3)	Review and Recommendation – P&Z Commission*
The P&Z Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Final Subdivision Plat and
may recommend approval or denial of the proposed Final Subdivision Plat to the Council. The
action on the proposed Final Subdivision Plat application may also be tabled by the P&Z Commission in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The recommendation made by the P&Z Commission on the proposed Final Subdivision Plat shall be based on compliance with the North Dakota Century code and City Ordinances, with consideration given to the Comprehensive Plan.

(4)	Review and Action – Council*
The Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed Final Subdivision Plat and may act to
approve or deny the application. The action on the proposed Final Subdivision Plat application may also be tabled by the Council in order to allow for additional information requested of the applicant. The action taken by the Council on the Final Subdivision Plat shall be based on compliance with the North Dakota Century code and City Ordinances, with consideration given to the Comprehensive Plan.

 


(E)	Notices
 
*See process chart on page V-27.
 

(1)	Newspaper
Notice is to be published in the official newspaper of the City at least once each week for 2
successive weeks and not less than 15 days preceding the date of each scheduled public hearing for both the preliminary plat and the final plat (not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application).

(2)	Adjacent Properties
Written notice shall be provided by first class mail to all owners of the subject property and
all property owners within 300 feet of the subject property. The notice shall be deposited in
the U.S. mail at least 15 days before each scheduled public hearing for both the preliminary plat and the final plat. (Not necessary for hearings after a continuation of the application)

(F)	Recordation of Final Plat

After approval of a Final Plat, the applicant shall be responsible for recording the Final Plat with the Mercer County Recorder.
 
Section 5.22 Annexation

(A)	Description


(1)	The annexation of land into the City of Beulah can be accomplished by any one of two methods. These methods are:

(a)	Annexation by application of owners and electors;

(b)	Annexation by resolution of the City of Beulah.

(2)	The first method is initiated by the landowners of the property and the electors residing on the property within the area proposed for annexation. The second method is for annexation at the Council’s initiative.

(3)	Refer to NDCC 40-51.2 for further detail regarding this section.

(B)	Annexation by Application


(1)	Description

A written application signed by not less than three-fourths of the qualified electors or by the owners of not less than three-fourths in assessed value of the property in an area proposed for annexation is presented to the City Auditor along with an amount to be determined by the City Auditor to cover estimated engineering and legal fees related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Engineer and City Attorney upon completion of the project. Any engineering fees and/or costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the sole responsibility of applicant.

(2)	Process

Refer to Section 5.22.D for a flow chart.  The process is as follows:

(a)	The annexation application is submitted in a form set by the City Auditor. The application is accompanied by the annexation plat and legal description, both prepared by the applicant.

(b)	The City Auditor verifies that the applicants of the petition are qualified electors and/or owners of the property represented in the application. The annexation area will need to be configured such that it is both contiguous to the existing municipal boundary and does not exceed the area represented by three-fourths of the qualified electors or three- fourths in assessed value. In the case of both the number of qualified electors and the assessed value, a calculation will need to be made to determine the percentage represented by the petition. The City Attorney prepares a  draft ordinance for the proposed annexation.
 
(c)	Notice is published in the official newspaper of the City once each week for two consecutive weeks and not less than 15 days before the P&Z Commission hearing. Notice is also mailed by the City Auditor to any property owner included in the proposed annexation who did not already sign the petition, as well as to any political subdivision affected by the annexation, such as another city, county, or township that is directly affected by annexation of the land area included in the application. This notice is mailed at least 15 days before the P&Z Commission hearing.

(d)	The P&Z Commission shall hold a hearing and provide a recommendation to the Council regarding the annexation application.

(e)	The Council shall hold a hearing regarding the proposed annexation followed by the first reading of the proposed annexation ordinance.

(f)	The Council holds the second reading and final approval of the proposed annexation ordinance.

(g)	After completion of the first and second reading, the annexation plat and ordinance is filed with the City Auditor and recorded at the Mercer County Recorder’s office.

(C)	Annexation by Resolution


(1)	Description

The Council adopts a resolution describing the property to be annexed.

(2)	Process

Refer to Section 5.22.E for a flow chart. The Council may adopt a resolution to annex contiguous or adjacent territory as follows:

(a)	The City prepares an annexation plat for the property to be annexed. The annexation area will need to be configured such that it is contiguous to the existing municipal boundary.

(b)	The City Attorney prepares the resolution of annexation based on the annexation plat and legal description.

(c)	The Council adopts the resolution of annexation.

(d)	The City Auditor shall publish the resolution and a notice of the time and place the Council will meet to hear and determine the sufficiency of any written protests against the proposed annexation in the official newspaper of the City once each week for two consecutive weeks. The City Auditor shall mail at least 7 days before the hearing, by certified mail, a notice to the owner of each parcel of real property within the area to be annexed at the person’s last known mailing address. The notice must inform land owners of the resolution, the time and place of hearing, and the requirement that protests must be filed in writing. The owners of any real property within the territory proposed to be annexed within 30 days of the first publication of the resolution may file written protests with the City Auditor protesting against the proposed annexation.  The City Auditor shall
 
also mail at least 7 days before the hearing, by certified mail, the notice of the time and place of the hearing to the governing body of each city, county, or township directly affected by the land area proposed to be annexed. No state owned property may be annexed without the written consent of the State agency or department having control of the property. The Council, at its next meeting after the expiration of the time for filing protests, shall hear and determine the sufficiency of the protests.

(e)	In the absence of protests filed by the owners of more than one-fourth of the territory proposed to be annexed as of the date of the adoption of the resolution, the territory described in the resolution becomes a part of the City. When a copy of the resolution and the annexation plat for the annexed area, certified by the executive officer of the City are filed with the City Auditor and recorded with the Mercer County Recorder’s office, the annexation becomes effective.

(f)	If the owners of one-fourth or more of the territory proposed to be annexed protest, or if a city that has extraterritorial zoning or subdivision regulation authority over the area petitioned to be annexed protests, the Council may either stop its pursuit of the annexation or submit the matter to a committee for mediation as provided in NDCC §40- 51.2-07.1.
 
(D) Annexation by Application Process


5.22.B.2.a	Submit Application*




5.22.B.2.b	City Review for Completeness and Recommendation*





5.22.B.2.c	Noticed is Published of P&Z
Commission Hearing




5.22.B.2.d	P&Z Commission Hearing and Recommendation*




5.22.B.2.e	Council Hearing and First Reading of Annexation Ordinance




5.22.B.2.f	City Council Second Reading of Annexation Ordinance




5.22.B.2.g	File Annexation Plat and Ordinance with City Auditor and record with the County Recorder
 
(E)	Annexation by Resolution Process


5.22.C.2.a	City Prepares Annexation Plat




5.22.C.2.b	City Prepares Resolution of Annexation





5.22.C.2.c	Council Adopts Resolution of Annexation





5.22.C.2.d	Resolution Published with Protest Information




5.22.C.2.d Notice Provided to Property Owners and Government Agencies of Protest Information




5.22.C.2.d Written Protests Filed within 30 Days





5.22.C.2.d	Council Meets to Consider Protests





5.22.C.2.e	File Annexation Plat and Ordinance with City Auditor and record with the County Recorder
 
(F)	Appeals of Administrative Actions

Admininistrative Action Appeal Process
(see following text in red for detail)

5.23.C Submit Appeal*



5.23.G.1 Auditor Review for Completeness*




5.23.G.3 Council Hearing*


(1)	Applicability

The Council shall hear and decided appeals where there is an alleged error in a decision or determination made by the Building Official or P&Z Commission in administering or enforcing the Zoning Ordinance and subsequent amendments thereto.

(2)	Right to Appeal

An appeal of an administrative action may be filed by anyone affected by the decision of the Building Official or P&Z Commission.

(3)	Submit Appeal*

Appeals of administrative actions shall be submitted to the City Auditor in writing and contain a clear statement of the nature of the appeal.

(4)	Processing Requirements

The appeal must be determined complete by the City Auditor

(5)	Effect of Appeal

The acceptance of an appeal by the City Auditor stays all proceedings of the administrative action that is the subject of the appeal.

(6)	Record Given

The City Auditor shall provide the Council with all written documentation constituting the record upon which the administrative action is appealed.
 
(7)	Review and Action

(a)	The City Auditor will review the appeal for completeness*
(b)	The Council will be advised of the appeal.
(c)	The Council shall hold a public hearing on the appeal. The action taken by the Council
must be based upon the criteria found in section 5.23(I).*
(d)	Every decision of the Council shall be accompanied by written findings of fact specifying the reason for the decision.
(e)	The Council decision findings shall be filed at City Hall within 30 days after the date of the final action.

(H)	Notices

The Applicant shall be provided a Notice of Hearing and a copy of the written findings of fact.

(I)	Review Criteria

An appeal shall be sustained only if the Council finds that the administrative official acted imprudently. Every decision of the Council regarding an appeal of an administrative action shall be accompanied by written findings of fact specifying the reason for the decision, contained within the official meeting minutes of the public hearing.
*See process chart on page V-34.

Section 5.23 Appeals of Council Actions

An appeal of the Council decision may be made to the district court pursuant to the procedure outlined in N.D.C.C. § 28-34-01.

Section 5.24 Organization Chart


Procedure	Review (R) and Decision-Making (DM)
	Building Official	P&Z Commission	
Council
Building Permit	R/DM*	DM	-
Demolition Permit	R/DM	-	-
Temporary Permit	R	DM	-
Zoning Ordinance Text Amendments	R	R	DM
Zoning Map Amendments (Rezones)	R	R	DM
Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map Amendment	R	R	DM
Subdivision (Preliminary and Final Plats)	R	R	DM
Conditional Use Permits	R	R	DM
Planned Unit Development (Conceptual and Final Plans)	R	R	DM
Initial ETA Zoning	R	R	DM
Variances	R	R	DM
Appeals of Administrative Decisions	-	-	DM
Appeals of Council Actions	District Court
*Building Official is the decision maker only for Building Permits that are specified in the Zoning Ordinance.
 


Chapter 6 Legal Framework 	


Mandatory and Discretionary Terms

The words "shall," "will," and "must" are always mandatory. The words "may" and "should" are discretionary terms.

Section 6.0 Authority


This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapters 40-47, 40-48, and 40-50.1 of the North Dakota Century Code.


Section 6.1 Title


This Zoning Ordinance and the District Zoning Map shall constitute and be known as the City of Beulah Zoning Ordinance and hereinafter referred to as the “Zoning Ordinance”.


Section 6.2 Jurisdiction


This Zoning Ordinance applies to all land within the corporate limits of the City of Beulah and to the land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City.


Section 6.3 Purpose


The Zoning Ordinance is intended to implement the Comprehensive Plan and related policies in a manner that promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Beulah.


Section 6.4 Consistency with Comprehensive Plan


The Zoning Ordinance shall be consistent with the Comprehensive Plan as required by the North Dakota Century Code 40-47-03.


Section 6.5 Conflicting Provisions


(A)	Conflict with State or Federal Regulations

If  the  provisions  of  this  Zoning  Ordinance  are  inconsistent  with  those  of  the  state  or  federal government, the more restrictive provision will control, to the extent permitted by law.


VI - 1
 

(B)	Conflict with Other City Regulations

If the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions found in other adopted ordinances or regulations of the City, the more restrictive provision will control.

(C)	Conflict with Private Restrictions

It is not the intent of this Zoning Ordinance to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, protective or restrictive covenant, or other agreement between private parties. If the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance impose a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance will control. If the provisions of a valid, enforceable private agreement impose a greater restriction than this Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of the private agreement will control. The City does not enforce private agreements or maintain a record of such agreements.


Section 6.6 Interpretation


In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be liberally construed in favor of the City of Beulah; and shall not be construed to be a limitation or repeal of any other power granted by the North Dakota Century Code.


Section 6.7 Repeal and Re-enactment


All regulations, parts of regulations, existing ordinances, or resolutions in conflict with this Zoning Ordinance and its provisions are hereby repealed and the updated Zoning Ordinance, with new amendments is hereby enacted.


Section 6.8 Severability


If any Court of competent jurisdiction declares any part of this Zoning Ordinance to be invalid, the ruling will not affect the validity of the other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance not expressly included in the ruling.


Section 6.9 Building Permits


The City shall in no case grant any permit for the construction, moving, or alteration of any building if the building as proposed to be constructed, moved or altered would be in violation of city zoning regulations or building codes adopted by the City of Beulah or any other codes or regulations required by the State of North Dakota.
 
Section 6.10 Enforcement


(A)	Notice and Order


Whenever a zoning or code violation is found, the City Building Official shall give written notification to the owner of the property that a violation has occurred and order the violation abated and the property, building, or use brought into compliance with this Zoning Ordinance. A reasonable amount of time shall be allowed for compliance.

(B)	Action to Correct Violations


If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or if any building, structure, or land is used in violation of this Zoning Ordinance, the proper local authorities of the City, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding:

(1)	To  prevent  such  unlawful  erection,  construction,  reconstruction,  alteration,  repair, conversion, maintenance, or use;
(2)	To restrain, correct, or abate such violation;
(3)	To prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land; or
(4)	To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises.

(C)	Penalty


(1)	Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every day that a violation of this Zoning Ordinance shall be continued shall constitute and be considered a separate offense. A violation of any provision of this Zoning Ordinance or the regulations and restrictions made herein shall constitute the maintenance of a public nuisance and shall be an infraction.



Section 6.11 Zoning District Map

(A)	Description


(1)	The City of Beulah is divided into zones, or districts, as shown on the Zoning District Map, which is adopted as part of this Zoning Ordinance. A copy of the Zoning District Map is on file in the office of the Building Official.


(2)	Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:

(a)	The district boundaries are the center lines of streets or alleys, unless otherwise shown.
 
(b)	Where the district boundaries are not center lines of streets or alleys and where the land has been or may hereafter be divided into lots or blocks and lots, the district boundaries shall be lot lines.

(c)	Where land has not been subdivided into lots or blocks and lots, the district boundary lines on the Zoning District Map shall be determined by where district boundary lines follow property lines. In the absence of property lines, a surveyed boundary is required.

(d)	Where uncertainty may exist as to the exact boundary line of a district, the location shall be determined by the Council and a record kept thereof.


Section 6.12 Nonconforming Lots, Structures, and Uses


(A)	Description


(1)	Definitions

(a)	Nonconforming Lot: A lot which does not conform to the location requirements or dimensional or size standards of this Zoning Ordinance or for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Zoning Ordinance, or as a result of zoning changes.

(b)	Nonconforming Structure: A structure which does not conform to the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, or as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Zoning Ordinance, or as a result of zoning changes.

(c)	Nonconforming Use: The use of a building or other structure or of a tract of land which does not conform to the use or regulations of this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the date of this Zoning Ordinance, as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Zoning Ordinance, or as a result of zoning changes

(2)	Authority to Continue

Nonconformities shall be allowed to continue in accordance with the regulations of this section.

(3)	Tenant or Ownership Change

Changes to tenancy, ownership, or management are permitted, as long as no other changes are made that require conformity as specified in the Zoning Ordinance.

(4)	Determination of Nonconformity Status
 
The burden of establishing that a nonconformity lawfully exists is the City’s burden, not the owner’s.

(5)	Extension/Enlargement

No nonconforming use may be enlarged, expanded or extended to occupy a greater area of land or floor area than was occupied at the date the use became a nonconformity: either at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, at the effective date of a subsequent amendment to this Zoning Ordinance, or at the effective date of a zoning change. No additional accessory use, building or structure may be established on the site of a nonconforming use. Uses may be extended throughout any part of a nonconforming building or other structure that was lawfully and manifestly designed or arranged for such use.

(6)	Damage or Destruction


If a structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed by any means, to the extent of more than 50 percent of its taxable assessed valuation as determined by the City prior to the damage, that structure may not be restored unless the structure and the use thereof thereafter complies with all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. The determination of reduced structural valuation shall be made by the City. The property owner may contest the City’s valuation with the use of a third party appraiser to be conducted at the property owner’s expense. In the event that the City’s appraisal is contested, the valuation to be used shall be determined by the Council. If the damage or destruction represents 50 percent or less of the structure’s value prior to the damage, repair and restoration is allowed, provided that a building permit must be obtained within six months of the damage and restoration must begin within one (1) year of the date of damage.

(7)	Repairs and Maintenance

Repairs and normal maintenance required to keep nonconforming uses, structures and lots in a safe condition are permitted, provided that no alterations may be made except those allowed by this Article or required by law or ordinance.

(8)	Discontinuance

In the event any non-conforming use ceases, for whatever reason, for one (1) year, the subsequent use of such parcel or lot must conform to the regulations and provisions set by this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which such parcel or lot is located.

(9)	Moving Structure

Should any structure containing a non-conforming use be moved any distance whatsoever, the structure shall thereafter be used only in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.

(10)	Change
 
A non-conforming use or structure shall not be changed to any use other than those permitted within the district in which the building is located. Once so changed, it shall not revert back to a non-conforming use.

(11)	Accessory Uses

No use accessory to a principal use that is nonconforming may continue after the principal use ceases.

(12)	Deed Notice

The City of Beulah may place a deed notice on lots with nonconforming uses or structures. The deed notice is intended to inform current and future owners that the lot is nonconforming with the Zoning Ordinance. The deed notice must provide detail regarding the nonconforming status.


Section 6.13 Property Owner Responsibility


The responsibility of property owners includes verifying property lines, removing and relocating a structure if placed incorrectly, and identifying all easements on the property.


Section 6.14 Existing Lots of Record

Any nonconforming lot of record existing at the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance and held in separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to the use regulations of the district in which it is located with the approval of the P&Z Commission, even though its dimensions are less than the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, except as set forth hereafter.

Where two (2) or more adjacent lots of record exist under the same ownership with either one or both having less than the needed area and width, the request for a permit shall be referred to the P&Z Commission, which may first require combining the lots, thereby complying with the minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
 

Chapter 7 Wireless Facilities 	


Section 7.0 Purpose and Intent


The purpose of this title is to establish predictable and balanced regulations for the siting and screening of wireless equipment in order to accommodate the growth of wireless communication systems within the City, while protecting the public against any adverse impacts on the City’s aesthetic resources and the public welfare. To accomplish the above-stated  objectives and to  ensure that the placement, construction,  or modification of wireless facilities complies with all applicable federal and state laws, the City of Beulah adopts this comprehensive wireless telecommunications Ordinance.

By enacting this Ordinance, it is the City’s intent to ensure that Beulah has sufficient wireless infrastructure to support its public safety communications and has access to reliable wireless communications services. This Ordinance encourages the use of public right of way, stealth design, and existing structures for wireless infrastructure in order to minimize impacts on surrounding areas.

Section 7.1 Definitions


For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions apply:

(A)	Abandonment:  Cessation  of  use  of  a  wireless  support  structure  for  wireless telecommunications activity for at least the minimum period of time specified under this Chapter.

(B)	Accessory Equipment: Any equipment serving or being used in conjunction with a wireless facility  or wireless support structure. The term includes utility or transmission equipment, power  supplies, generators,  batteries,  cables,  equipment  building,  cabinets  and  storage sheds, shelters or similar structures.

(C)	Antenna: Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of wireless communications services.

(D)	Base Station: The equipment and non-tower supporting structure at a specific site authorized to communicate between user equipment and a communications network, generally consisting of radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies and other associated electronics.

(E)	Collocation: Shall mean and refer to the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

(F)	Concealed Wireless Facility: Any wireless facility that is integrated as an architectural feature of an  existing structure or any new wireless support structure designed to camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers so that the purpose of the facility or wireless support structure is not readily apparent to a casual observer.
 
(G)	Eligible Facilities Request: A request for modification of an existing wireless tower or base station  that involves collocation of new transmission equipment, removal of transmission equipment, or  replacement of transmission equipment but does not include a substantial modification.

(H)	Equipment Compound: An area surrounding or near the base of a wireless support structure within which are located wireless facilities.

(I)	Existing Structure: A wireless support structure, erected prior to the application for an eligible facilities request, collocation or substantial modification under this ordinance that is capable of supporting the attachment of wireless facilities. The term includes but is not limited to, electrical transmission towers, buildings and water towers. The term shall not include any utility pole.

(J)	Fall Zone: The area in which a wireless support structure may be expected to fall in the event of a structural failure, as measured by engineering standards.

(K)	FCC: Shall mean and refer to the Federal Communications Commission or its successor.

(L)	Monopole: A single, freestanding pole-type structure supporting one or more antennas. For the purposes of this Chapter, a monopole is not a tower or a utility pole.

(M)	Ordinary Maintenance: Ensuring that wireless facilities and wireless support structures are kept in good operating condition. Ordinary maintenance includes inspections, testing, and modifications that maintain functional capacity and structural integrity; for example, the strengthening of a wireless support structure’s foundation or of the wireless support structure itself. Ordinary maintenance includes replacing antennas of a similar size, weight, shape and color and accessory equipment within an existing equipment compound and relocating the antennas to different height levels on an existing monopole or tower upon which they are currently located. Ordinary maintenance does not include substantial modifications.

(N)	Replacement Pole: A pole of equal proportions and of equal height or such other height that would not constitute a substantial modification to an existing structure in order to support wireless facilities or to accommodate collocation. Requires removal of the wireless support structure it replaces.

(O)	Site: For towers or monopoles other than towers or monopoles in public right-of-way, referring to the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the tower, monopole, any access, or utility easements currently related to the site, and, for other eligible support structures, shall mean and be further restricted to, that area in proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.

(P)	Substantial Modification: The mounting of a proposed wireless facility or wireless facilities on a wireless support structure that substantially changes the physical dimensions of the support structure. A mounting is presumed to be a substantial modification if it meets any one or more of the following criteria:

1)	Increases the existing vertical height of a wireless support structure by:
 
a)	More than ten percent (10%) or one additional antenna array not more than twenty (20’) feet higher for towers not with a public right-of-way, or

b)	More than ten percent (10%) or ten (10’), whichever is greater, for towers within public right-of-way and all base stations

2)	Increases the existing width of a wireless support structure by:

a)	More than twenty (20’) feet or the tower width at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater, for towers not with public right-of-way, or

b)	Six (6’) feet for towers with public right-of-way and all base stations

3)	The request defeats the existing concealment elements of a tower or base station.

4)	The request violates a prior condition of approval that does not conflict with the other standards for a substantial change.

(Q)	Tower: A lattice-type structure, guyed or freestanding, that supports one or more antennas.

(R)	Utility Pole: A structure owned and/or operated by a public utility, municipality, electric membership corporation or rural electric cooperative that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for telephone, cable television, or electricity, or to provide lighting.

(S)	Water Tower: A water storage tank, or a standpipe or an elevated tank situated on a support structure, originally constructed for use as a reservoir or facility to store or deliver water.

(T)	Wireless Facility or Wireless Facilities: The set  of equipment and network  components, exclusive of the underlying wireless support structure, including, but not limited to, antennas, accessory equipment, transmitters, receivers, base stations, power supplies, cabling and associated equipment necessary to provide wireless telecommunications services.

(U)	Wireless Support Structure: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole or tower, designed to support wireless facilities. This definition does not include utility poles.

(V)	Wireless Transmission Equipment: Any equipment that facilitates transmission for any authorized wireless communication service including backup power

Section 7.2	Approvals Required for Wireless Facilities and Wireless Support Structures.


(A)	Administrative Review and Approval. The following types of applications are subject to the review process as provided in section IV. No other type of Land Development Code review beyond what is listed in section IV is necessary:

(1)	New wireless support structures that are less than one hundred (100) feet in height, in any Industrial District;



(2)	Concealed wireless facilities that are forty (40) feet or less in height, in any residential or commercial district;
 
(3)	Monopoles or replacement poles located on public property or within utility easements or rights-of-way, in any zoning district; and

(4)	Collocations applied under FCC statute 6409(a) that are not substantial modifications.

(B)	Conditional Use. Any application for wireless facilities and/or wireless support structures not subject to administrative review and approval pursuant to this Ordinance shall be permitted in any district upon the granting of a Conditional Use Permit from the Council in accordance with the standards for granting a Conditional Use Permit set forth in Chapter V. Valid conditions include but are not limited to drainage, landscaping, maintenance, lighting, fencing, access, indemnification, and  compliance with  all  generally applicable  laws.  Any application submitted under FCC statute 332(c)(7) shall be reviewed for a Conditional Use Permit.

(C)	Exempt from All Approval Processes. The following are exempt from all Beulah zoning approval processes and requirements:

(1)	Ordinary maintenance of existing wireless facilities and wireless support structures, as defined in this Chapter; and

(2)	Wireless facilities placed on utility poles.

Section 7.3 Administrative Review and Approval Process.


(A)	Content of Application Package-For New Sites. All administrative review application packages must contain the following:

(1)	Administrative review application form signed by applicant;
(2)	Copy of lease or letter of authorization from property owner evidencing applicant’s authority to pursue application. Such submissions need not disclose financial lease terms;

(3)	Site plans detailing proposed improvements. Drawings must depict improvements related to  the applicable requirements including property boundaries,  setbacks, topography, elevation sketch, and dimensions of improvements;

(4)	A statement by applicant setting forth the number of carriers that the proposed tower will be designed to hold;

(5)	An application fee to be set by the Council; and

(6)	An amount to be determined by the City Engineer to cover engineering inspections and fees related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Engineer upon completion of the project. Any engineering fees and/or costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of applicant.



(7)	An amount to be determined by the City Attorney to cover legal fees and costs related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City
 
Attorney upon completion of the project. Any legal fees and costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of applicant.

(B)	Content of Application Package-For Other Sites/Facilities. All administrative review application packages must contain the following:

(1)	Administrative review application form signed by applicant;

(2)	A completed application for collocations shall identify which FCC statuary term the applicant is seeking approval for;

(3)	For collocations and substantial modifications, written verification from a licensed professional engineer certifying that the host support structure is structurally and mechanically capable of supporting the proposed additional antenna or configuration of antennas;

(4)	For substantial modifications, drawings depicting the improvements along with their dimensions;

(5)	An application fee to be set by the Council; and

(6)	An amount to be determined by the City Engineer to cover engineering inspections and fees related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Engineer upon completion of the project. Any engineering fees and/or cost outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of applicant.

(7)	An amount to be determined by the City Attorney to cover legal fees and costs related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Attorney upon completion of the project. Any legal fees and costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of applicant.

(C)	Procedure and Timing.



TIMELINE

30 DAYS-	Applicant notified of application completeness

60 DAYS-	Total Review and Process for FCC statute 6409(a) Collocations 90 DAYS-	Total Review and Process for FCC statute 332(c)(7) Collocations 150 DAYS-	Total Review and Process for New Sites
(1)	Applications for New Sites That Are Subject to Administrative Review and Approval.
Within one hundred fifty (150) calendar days of the receipt of an application for new sites that are subject to administrative review and approval under this Chapter, the City Engineer will:

(a)	Review the application for conformity with this Chapter.

(b)	Make a final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and
 
(c)	Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision. If the City Engineer denies an application, it must provide written justification of the denial, which must be based on substantial evidence of inconsistencies between the application and this Chapter.

(d)	Failure to issue a written decision within one hundred fifty (150) calendar days may result in relief to the applicant as delineated by existing FCC regulations.

2.	Applications for a FCC statute 6409(a) Collocation Subject to Administrative Review and Approval. Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of an application for a collocation, the City Engineer will:

*	Notification of Application Completeness  -	30 days

*	Time for Applicant to Cure Deficiencies	-	10 days

*	Total Review and Process Completed	-	60 days*

*Note: Circumstances such as 60th day landing on a weekend, holiday, or if there is a mutual agreement to extend the timeframe will result in minor change of deadline.

a)	Review the application for conformity with this Chapter. An application under this section is considered complete unless the City Engineer notifies in writing, within thirty (30) calendar days of submission of the application of the specific deficiencies in the application which, if cured, would make the application complete. Upon  receipt of a timely  written  notice  that  an application is deficient, an applicant may take ten (10) calendar days from receiving  such  notice  to  cure  the   specific deficiencies. No  additional deficiencies shall be appended after the written notice is provided to the applicant. If the applicant cures the deficiencies  within ten (10) calendar days, the  application  shall  be  reviewed and  processed  within sixty  (60) calendar  days from  the initial  date  the  application was  received. If  the applicant requires a period of time beyond ten (10) calendar days to cure the specific deficiencies, the sixty (60) calendar days deadline for review shall be extended by the same period of time;

b)	Make a final decision to approve or disapprove the collocation application; and

c)	Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision. If the City Engineer denies an application, it must provide written justification of the denial, which must be based on substantial evidence of inconsistencies between the application and this Chapter.

d)	Failure to issue a written decision within ninety (90) calendar days may result in relief to the applicant as delineated by existing FCC regulations.

3.	Building Permit. Upon approval of the application and grant of the zoning approval, the applicant must apply for a building permit. The applicant must apply for a building permit within 12 months of issuance of the zoning approval. This deadline may be extended for 6 additional months by submitting a letter requesting said extension,
 
and a fee in the amount of ½ of the original building permit fee. Upon receipt of said items, the Council may grant or deny said extension of the deadline to apply for a building permit.

Once a building permit has been issued, any and all construction set forth therein must be substantially completed within 12 months of the issuance of the Building Permit. This deadline may be extended for 6 additional months by submitting a letter requesting said extension, and a fee in the amount of ½ of the original building permit fee. Upon receipt of said items, the Council may grant or deny said extension of the deadline to substantially complete construction.

A building permit application fee shall be set by the Council, and applicant shall pay an additional amount to be determined by the City Engineer to cover engineering inspections and fees related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City and paid to the City Engineer upon completion of the project. Any engineering fees and/or costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Applicant shall also pay an amount to be determined by the City Attorney to cover legal fees and costs related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Attorney upon completion of the project. Any legal fees and costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of applicant

4.	The City Engineer shall set the inspections schedule for the site, and notify the applicant of said schedule. Applicant  shall  strictly  comply  with  all  required inspections.

5.	Upon substantial completion of the project detailed in the building permit, the applicant shall notify the City Engineer who shall conduct a final inspection of the site. If the City Engineer is satisfied that the construction meets all required building code and other  applicable  project  standards  he  shall  issue  applicant  a  certificate  of occupancy.

Section 7.4   Conditional Use Permit Process for Wireless Communication Towers


(A)	Any wireless facility or wireless support structures not meeting the requirements of Section III.A or III.C above, may be permitted in all zoning districts upon the granting of a Conditional Use Permit, subject to:

(1)	The submission requirements of Section V.B;

(2)	The applicable standards of Section VI; and

(3)	The requirements of Conditional Use Permits (as set forth in Chapter 5 herein).

(B)	Contents of Conditional Use Permit Application Package. All Conditional Use Permit application packages must contain the following:

(1)	Conditional Use Permit application form signed by applicant;
 
(2)	Copy of lease or letter of authorization from the property owner evidencing applicant’s authority to pursue Conditional Use Permit application. Such submissions need not disclose financial lease terms;

(3)	Written description and scaled drawings of the proposed wireless support structure or wireless facility, including structure height, ground and structure design, and proposed materials;

(4)	Number of proposed antennas and their height above ground level, including the proposed placement of antennas on the wireless support structure;

(5)	Line-of-sight diagram or photo simulation, showing the proposed wireless support structure set against the skyline and viewed from at least four (4) directions within the surrounding areas;

(6)	A statement that the proposed wireless support structure will be made available for collocation to other service providers at commercially reasonable rates, provided space is available and consistent with Section 7.5(A)(1)(a) of this Chapter;

(7)	Notice of the filing of the application with the City Auditor must be mailed to surrounding property owners within ¼ mile of proposed project site;

(8)	Notice of the filing of the application with the City Auditor must be published twice in the official newspaper of the City, if the proposed site is within City limits, or twice in the official newspaper of the City and the official newspaper of Mercer County if the proposed site is within the City’s extraterritorial zoning jurisdiction;

(9)	An application fee to be set by the Council; and

(10)	An amount to be determined by the City Engineer to cover engineering inspections and fees related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Engineer once the project is completed. Any engineering fees and/or costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of applicant.

(11)	An amount to be determined by the City Attorney to cover legal fees and costs related to the project. Said amount shall be held in  escrow   by   the City, and paid to the Attorney upon completion of the project. Any  legal fees and costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of applicant.

(C)	Procedure and Timing for New Site.

TIMELINE

*	Notification of Application Completeness  -	30 days

*	Time Applicant Has to Cure Deficiencies -  30 days

*	Total Review and Process Complete	-	150 days*
 
*	Note: Circumstances such as 150th day landing on a weekend, holiday, or if there is a mutual agreement to extend the timeframe will result in minor change of deadline.

Within one hundred fifty (150) calendar days of the receipt of an application under Section 7.4 of this Chapter, the City Engineer will:

(1)	Complete the process for reviewing the application for conformity with ordinances applicable to conditional use permits, including conducting a hearing in accordance with Chapter 5 herein. An application under this section is deemed to be complete unless the City Engineer notifies the applicant in writing, within thirty (30) calendar days of submission of the application of the specific deficiencies in the application which, if cured, would make the application complete. Upon receipt of a timely written notice that an application is deficient, an applicant may take thirty (30) calendar days from receiving such notice to cure the specific deficiencies. No additional deficiencies shall be appended after the written notice is provided to the applicant. If the applicant cures the deficiencies within thirty (30) calendar days, the application shall be reviewed and processed within one hundred fifty (150) calendar days from the initial date the application was received. If the applicant requires a period of time beyond thirty (30) calendar days to cure the specific deficiencies, the one hundred fifty (150) calendar days deadline for review shall be extended by the same period of time;

(2)	Make a final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and

(3)	Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision. If the Council denies an application, it must provide written justification of the denial.

(4)	Failure to issue a written decision within one hundred fifty (150) calendar days shall constitute an approval of the application.

(D)	Procedure and Timing for 332(c )(7) Collocations.

TIMELINE

*	Notification of Application Completeness  -	30 days

*	Time Applicant Has to Cure Deficiencies	-	10 days

*	Total Review and Process Complete	-	90 days*

*	Note: Circumstances such as 90th day landing on a weekend, holiday, or if there is a mutual agreement to extend the timeframe will result in minor change of deadline.

Within ninety (90) calendar days of the receipt of an application under Section V. of this Ordinance, the City Engineer will:

(1)	Complete the process for reviewing the application for conformity with ordinances applicable to conditional use permits, including conducting a hearing in accordance with Chapter 5, herein. An application under this
 
section is deemed to be complete unless the City Engineer notifies the applicant in writing, within thirty (30) calendar days of submission of the application of the specific deficiencies in the application which, if cured, would make the application complete. Upon receipt of a timely written notice that an application is deficient, an applicant may take ten (10) calendar days from receiving such notice to cure the specific deficiencies. No additional deficiencies shall be appended after the written notice is provided to the applicant. If the applicant cures the  deficiencies within ten (10) calendar days, the application shall be reviewed and processed within ninety
(90) calendar days from the initial date the application was received. If the
applicant requires a period of time beyond ten (10) calendar days to cure the specific deficiencies, the ninety (90) calendar days deadline for review shall be extended by the same period of time;

(2)	Make a final decision to approve or disapprove the application; and

(3)	Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision. If the Council denies an application, it must provide written justification of the denial.

(4)	Failure to issue a written decision within ninety (90) calendar days shall constitute an approval of the application.

(E)	Building Permit. Upon approval of the application and grant of the Conditional Use Permit, the applicant must apply for a building permit. The building permit fee shall be set by the Council. The applicant must apply for the building permit within 12 months of issuance of the Conditional Use  Permit. This deadline may be extended for 6 additional months by submitting a letter requesting said extension, and a fee in the amount of ½ of the original building permit fee. Upon receipt of said items, the Council may grant or deny said extension of the deadline to apply for a building permit.

Once a building permit has been issued, any and all construction set forth therein must be substantially completed within 12 months of the issuance of the Building Permit. This deadline may be extended for 6 additional months by submitting a letter requesting said extension, and a fee in the amount of ½ of the original building permit fee. Upon receipt of said items, the Council may grant or deny said extension of the deadline to substantially complete construction.

A building permit application fee shall be set by the Council, and applicant shall pay an additional amount to be determined by the City Engineer to cover engineering inspection and fees related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City and paid to the City Engineer upon completion of the project. Any engineering fees and/or costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Applicant shall also pay an amount to be determined by the City Attorney to cover legal fees and costs related to the project. Said amount shall be held in escrow by the City, and paid to the City Attorney upon completion of the project. Any legal fees and costs outstanding after payment of the escrowed funds shall be the responsibility of applicant.

(F)	The City Engineer shall set the inspections schedule for the site, and notify the applicant of said schedule. Applicant shall strictly comply with all required inspections.
 
(G)	Upon substantial completion of the project detailed in the building permit, the applicant shall notify the City Engineer who shall conduct a final inspection of the site. If the City Engineer is satisfied that the construction meets all required building code and other applicable project standards, he shall issue applicant a certificate of occupancy.

Section 7.5   General Standards and Design Requirements.


(A)	Design

(1)	Wireless support structures shall be subject to the following:

a)	Shall be engineered and constructed to accommodate a minimum number of collocations based upon their height:

(i)	Support structures fifty (50) to one hundred (100) feet shall support at least two (2) telecommunications providers;

(ii)	Support structures greater than one hundred (100) feet but less than one hundred-fifty feet (150) shall support at least three (3) telecommunications providers;

(iii)	Support structures greater than  one  hundred fifty (150) feet  in height shall support at least four (4) telecommunications carriers.

b)	The ground lease area that support  structure  owner  has  control  of surrounding the wireless support structure must be of sufficient size to accommodate accessory equipment for the appropriate number of telecommunications providers in accordance with Section 7.5(A)(1)(a). Consideration of the required ground lease area shall take into account the constraints of the surrounding built environment.

(2)	Concealed wireless facilities shall be designed to accommodate the collocation of other antennas whenever economically and technically feasible. Antennas must be enclosed, camouflaged, screened, obscured or otherwise not readily apparent to a casual observer.

(3)	Upon request of the applicant, the Council may waive the requirement that new wireless support structures accommodate the collocation of other service providers if it finds that collocation at the site is not essential to the public interest, or that the construction of a shorter support structure with fewer antennas will promote community compatibility.

(4)	A letter of intent or interest on behalf of a carrier shall be included with the design that once the support structures is constructed, it is reasonably sure that an antenna will be mounted within one (1) year after completion.

(5)	A monopole or replacement pole shall be permitted within utility easements or rights-of-way, in accordance with the following requirements:

a)	The utility easement or right-of-way shall be a minimum of sixty (60) feet in width.
 
b)	The height of the monopole or replacement pole may not exceed by more than thirty (30) feet the height of existing utility support structures.

c)	Monopoles and the accessory equipment shall be set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from all boundaries of the easement or right-of-way.

d)	Single carrier monopoles may be used within utility easements and rights-of- way due to the height restriction imposed by Subsection (c) above.

e)	Poles that use the structure of a utility tower for support are permitted. Such poles may extend up to twenty (20) feet above the height of the utility tower.

f)	Consideration of traffic safety.

(6)	A wireless communication tower utilized for any purposes shall be prohibited from locating in a front yard.

(B)	Setbacks

(1)	Unless otherwise stated herein, each wireless support structure shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to its engineered fall zone. If engineered fall zone documentation is not supplied by applicant, then the setbacks shall be the height of the structure. Said setback may be reduced by the Council upon submission of a report prepared by a registered engineer evaluating potential tower collapse. The Council may then reduce the setback as it sees fit.

(C)	Fall Zone

(1)	Documentation from a licensed professional engineer of calculation of the fall zone and certification that the wireless support structure has sufficient structural integrity to accommodate the required number of additional users as provided in this ordinance shall be provided in the applicant’s application for a building permit.
(D )	Height

(1)	In residential districts, wireless support structures shall not exceed a height equal to one hundred (100) feet from the base of the structure to the top of the highest point, including appurtenances. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Council shall have the authority to vary the foregoing height restriction upon the request of the applicant. With its waiver request the applicant shall submit such technical information or other justifications as are necessary to document the need for the additional height to the satisfaction of the Council.

(2)	In commercial and industrial districts, wireless support structures shall not exceed a height equal to one hundred seventy-five (175) feet from the base of the structure to the top of the highest point, including appurtenances. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Council shall have the authority to vary the foregoing height restriction upon the request of the applicant. With its waiver request the applicant shall submit such technical information or other justifications as are necessary to document the need for the additional height to the satisfaction of the Council.
 
(E)	Aesthetics

(1)	Lighting and Marking. Wireless facilities or wireless support structures shall not be lightened or marked unless required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).

(2)	Signage. Signs located at a wireless facility shall be limited to ownership and contact information, FCC antenna registration number (if required) and any other information as required by government regulation. Commercial advertising is strictly prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit signage that is approved for other uses on property on which wireless facilities are located (e.g., approved signage at locations on which concealed facilities are located).

(F)	Accessory Equipment. Accessory equipment, including any buildings, cabinets or shelters, shall be used only to house equipment and other supplies in support of the operation of the wireless facility or wireless support structure. Any equipment not used in direct support of such operation shall not be stored on the site.

(G)	Fencing

(1)	Ground mounted accessory equipment and wireless support structures shall be secured and enclosed with a fence not less than six (6) feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, as deemed appropriate by the Council.

(2)	The Council may waive the requirement of subsection 7.5(G)(1) if it is deemed that a fence is not appropriate or needed at the proposed location.

(H)	Certificate of Completion and Site Review. Upon completion of the structures, the applicant shall schedule an inspection by the City Engineer to inspect the site and ensure it is in compliance with this Ordinance. Upon successful completion of the inspection, the City Engineer shall issue to the applicant a Certificate of Completion, and said Certificate shall be filed with the City Auditor. Any and all costs of the inspection shall be borne by the applicant.

Section 7.6   Miscellaneous Provisions.


(A)	Abandonment and Removal. If a wireless support structure is abandoned, and it remains abandoned for a period in excess of twelve (12) consecutive months, the Council may require that such wireless support structure be removed only after first providing written notice to the owner of the wireless support structure and giving the owner the opportunity to take such action(s) as may be necessary to reclaim the wireless support structure within ninety (90) days of receipt of said written notice. In the event the owner of the wireless support structure fails to reclaim the wireless support structure within the ninety (90) day period, the owner of the wireless support structure shall be  required to remove the same within six (6) months thereafter. The Council shall ensure and enforce removal by means of its existing regulatory authority, with costs of removal charged to the owner.

(B)	Multiple Uses on a Single Parcel or Lot. Wireless facilities and wireless support structures may be located on a parcel containing another principal use on the same site or may be the principal use itself.
 
(C)	Violations. If at any time, a structure is found to be in violation of this Chapter, the structure shall be declared a nuisance and shall be abated in the manner as provided by law.

Section 7.7   Wireless Facilities and Support Structures in Existence on the Date of Adoption


(A)	Wireless facilities and wireless support structures that were legally permitted on or before the date this Chapter was enacted shall be considered a permitted and lawful use.

(B)	Activities at Non-Conforming Wireless Support Structures. Notwithstanding any provision of this Chapter:

(1)	Ordinary maintenance may be performed on a non-conforming wireless support structure or wireless facility.

(2)	Collocation of wireless facilities on an existing non-conforming wireless support structure shall not be construed as an expansion, enlargement or increase in intensity of a non-conforming structure and/or use and shall be permitted through the administrative approval process defined in Section 7.3; provided that the collocation does not substantially modify the size of the equipment compound at that location or otherwise substantially modify the existing non-conformity.

(3)	Substantial modifications may be made to non-conforming wireless support structures utilizing the conditional use permit process defined in Section 7.4 of this Chapter.
 

Chapter 8 Extraterritorial Zone (reserved for future use) 	




Chapter 9 Definitions 	


Section 9.0 Terms


9.0001 Adult Bookstore


An adult bookstore is an enclosed building having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by the emphasis on matter depicting less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast.


9.0002 Adult Cinema


An adult cinema is an enclosed building used on a regular basis for presenting pictorial materials or other visual images by way of direct or indirect projection, which materials are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction of less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.


9.0003 Adult Entertainment Center

An enclosed building wherein an admission is charged for entrance, or food or nonalcoholic beverages are sold or intended for consumption, and wherein may be observed live presentation of entertainment distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

9.0004 Adult Entertainment Facility

An Adult Bookstore, Adult Cinema, Adult Entertainment Center, or any combination thereof.

9.0005 Accessory Structure

Accessory structures are intended to allow for increased use and enjoyment of property to accommodate storage and other needs, depending on the purpose of the zoning district. It is a structure that:

(a)	Is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection with a principal structure or use
(b)	Is subordinate in area,
(c)	extent and purpose to the principal building or use
(d)	Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal use
(e)	Is located on the same lot and in the same zoning district as the principal use
 
(f)	Accessory buildings are detached structures such as garages, sheds, playhouses, storage buildings and other similar structures, which are not to be used as sleeping quarters or living space and must be separated from the structure by a distance as required in the state fire code and/or state building code; or
(g)	Accessory structures are allowed in all zoning districts


9.0006 Accessory Use

A use on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principle use. It is a use that:

(a)	Is operated and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted use.
(b)	Does not contain structures or structural features inconsistent with the permitted use.
(c)	Includes residential occupancy only as permitted in the Zoning Ordinance.
(d)	Is allowed once the permitted use is present or under construction.
(e)	Does not involve the conduct of any business, trade, or industry, except for home and professional occupations as defined herein, when accessory to residential district permitted uses.

9.0007 Agriculture/Farming

The  use  of  land  for  planting,  growing,  cultivating  and  harvesting  crops  for  human  or  livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding of livestock.

9.0008 Agricultural Public Events

Events related to agricultural vocations and are not temporary uses, but may reoccur indefinitely at regular time periods. Such events could include, but are not limited to farm tours, animal rodeos, corn mazes, horse racing, and barn recreation.

9.0009 Amendment

Any change, revision, or modification of the text of this Zoning Ordinance or the District Zoning Map.

9.0010 Amusement Parks

An outdoor and/or indoor commercial use with rides, shows, refreshments, games of chance or skill, or other entertainments.

9.0011 Animal Hospital/Veterinary Clinic

A facility designed to provide medical care to large or small animals and may have the capability of providing on-site extended care.

9.0012 Animal Kennels

A commercial establishment operated for the purpose of selling, trading, breeding, boarding, training, or grooming customary household pets for compensation.
 
9.0013 Annexation

The act or an instance of annexing, or adding to something larger, especially the incorporation of new territory into the domain of the city.
 
9.0014 Antique Motor Vehicle

Shall include any motor vehicle which is at least forty (40) years old and licensed as an antique vehicle in accordance with Section 39-04-10.4 of the North Dakota Century Code.

9.0015 Apartments

A dwelling unit that shares one or more walls with an adjacent dwelling unit within the same structure, typically a multifamily residence, and designed as a place of residence for a single family, an individual, or a group of individuals. Apartments can share a common ceiling or floor with an adjacent dwelling unit.

9.0016 Appeal

This term refers to a request to a higher authority for review of an administrative decision.

9.0017 Assisted Living Facility

A  facility  offering  residence,  supervision,  and  daily  assistance  to  individuals  who  generally  need assistance to perform daily, routine tasks, non-medical in nature.

9.0018 Aviation

Anything regarding or involving the operation of an airplane/aircraft, including runways and aircraft hangers, as well as, anything regulated under the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
•	Examples: Airfields, Aircraft Runways, Aircraft Hangers

9.0019 Bakeries

A commercial use where bread, cakes and other baked goods are made and/or sold.

9.0020 Banks and Financial Institutions

A use which provides retail banking and related services to individuals and businesses.

9.0021 Barber Shop/Beauty Salon/ Tanning Salon

Any  commercial  building,  room,  place,  or  establishment  that  provides  professional  hairdressing, manicuring, shaving, tanning, and unwanted hair removal (waxing and threading) services.

9.0022 Base flood or 100-year flood

The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

9.0023 Base Flood Elevation (BFE)

The height of the base flood or 100-year flood usually in feet above mean sea level.
 
9.0024 Basement

Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

9.0025 Basement Apartment

A dwelling unit completely located within a basement.

9.0026 Bed and Breakfast Establishment

A private home that is used to provide accommodations for a charge to the public. Bed and breakfast establishments are intended to allow for minor and incidental commercial activity in the residence of the host/owner. A bed and breakfast establishment is an accessory use to the residence.

9.0027 Best Available Data (BAD)

Water elevation information from any source used to estimate or determine a base flood elevation (i.e. high water mark).

9.0028 Billboard

An advertising sign that is not located upon the premises of the businesses that the sign is advertising for.

9.0029 Bowling Alley

A structure utilized primarily for the sport of bowling, and may include the incidental sale or dispensing of food and drink and the sale or rental of bowling equipment.

9.0030 Buffer Strip

An area that provides a buffer, or division, between two areas. "Buffer strips" may be composed of landscaping, a fence, a wall, a combination of these elements, or other means deemed appropriate by the P&Z Commission, or otherwise specified herein.

9.0031 Building

Any structure designed, or intended for the enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals, or property.

9.0032 Building Envelope

The interface between the interior of the building and the outdoor environment, including the walls, roof, and foundation




9.0033 Butcher Shop
 

A retail establishment supplying meat products, excluding the slaughtering of animals on the premises.

9.0034 Campground

A dedicated area or place where tents, camping trailers, recreational vehicles and the like are placed for the purpose of providing temporary shelter for recreational purposes.

9.0035 Car Collector

Means the owner of one or more specialized vehicles, who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest vehicles or parts thereof, for his own use, in order to restore, preserve, and maintain a special interest vehicle or antique vehicle.

9.0036 Car Enthusiast

Means the owner of one or more specialized vehicles, who collects, purchases, acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest vehicles or parts thereof, for his own use, in order to restore, preserve, and maintain a special interest vehicle.

9.0037 Car Wash

A commercial facility for the washing or steam cleaning of motor vehicles, not including semi-trucks or tractors.

9.0038 Cemeteries

Land used or intended to be used for the burial of one or more human bodies or cremated remains thereof, including crematories and mausoleums.

9.0039 Chemical Fertilizer Plant

A production facility which produces material that can be added to soil to sustain plant growth.

9.0040 Coal Mining

An operation that involves an open pit or connected long narrow openings under the ground where coal is removed.

9.0041 Code

Any code regulating the use, construction, maintenance, or renovation of property or structures adopted by the Council.




9.0042 Colleges
 
An educational institution of higher learning which grants degrees of higher achievement than a high school diploma.



9.0043 Commercial Above Ground Fuel Storage

Any individual tank or group of tanks utilized for commercial purposes, storing combustible and flammable liquids as defined by NFPA 30 (National Fire Protection Association, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code).

9.0044 Commercial Skating Rinks

An outdoor or indoor rink where ice or roller skating is permitted for free or for a fee or charge.

9.0045 Commercial Warehouses

A building or portion of a building which goods, merchandise, or equipment is stored for eventual distribution by another commercial use.

9.0046 Communication Tower

A tower erected for the purpose of providing communication services, such as radio, television, phone, to the general public.

9.0047 Community Centers

A building or group of buildings operated by a public or nonprofit group or agency and used for recreational, social, educational or cultural activities.

9.0048 Community Swimming Pool

A facility in an indoor or outdoor setting with a pool and/or water features for public aquatic recreation.

9.0049 Comprehensive Plan


An adopted policy document required by North Dakota Century Code 40-47-03, intended to guide City decisions related to growth and development.


9.0050 Comprehensive Plan Land Use Map


A component of the Comprehensive Plan that indicates future land uses within the City limits and the extraterritorial area of the City. Future land uses are shown as different classifications or designations
	residential, commercial, industrial, public, etc.).



9.0051 Concrete Mixing Plant
 
A premises wherein materials are processed, mixed, and/or treated so as to produce concrete.

9.0052 Conditional Use

Specified uses that are subject to discretionary review by the P&Z Commission and Council.

9.0053 Conservation Area

An area which receives protection because of recognized natural, ecological and/or cultural values.

9.0054 Convenience Stores with Fuel

A retail establishment, typically small in nature, which provides food, fuel, and other consumer goods.
•	Examples: Convenience stores that accommodate dine-in restaurants, fuel stations with a small retail shop.

9.0055 Convenience Stores without Fuel

A retail establishment, typically small in nature, which provides food and other consumer goods. Fuel is not dispensed onsite.

9.0056 Conveyance or hydraulic conveyance

A geometric characteristic of a river or watercourse at a given point that determines the flow-carrying capacity at that point.

9.0057 Council

The City Council of the City of Beulah, ND.

9.0058 Crew Camp

A well-planned and specifically designed temporary housing facility that may offer meals, limited recreational activities, and other services for the benefit and well-being of its residents. The majority of residents of a crew camp are typically nonresidents with jobs in cyclical or temporary industries. A crew camp is not a hotel, motel, recreational vehicle park, mobile home park, or campground. A crew camp is not a facility that provides parking and hookups for individually owned recreational vehicles, fifth wheels, camper trailers, pop-up campers, pickup trucks with on-board campers or similar units. A crew camp is not a conventional “stick-built” on-site structure or group of structures. A crew camp is not intended for permanent or long-term habitation.

9.0059 Cultural Institution

An establishment that provides cultural, intellectual, scientific, environmental, educational or artistic enrichment to members of the community.
•	Examples: museums, art studios, zoos, conservations

9.0060 Dairy Processing Plants
 

An agriculturally-related use which produces milk or other dairy products for sale.

9.0061 Dance Studio

A business establishment that provides training, instruction, and demonstrations/recitals of various forms of dance to individuals, or a group of individuals, of the community.

9.0062 Day Care Facility

An establishment offering temporary supervision services to various individuals.
•	Examples: Day Care of Children, Day Care of Adults

9.0063 Delicatessen

A commercial use which sells and prepares cold cuts, cheeses, and a variety of salads, as well as a selection of unusual or foreign prepared foods.

9.0064 Density


The number of dwelling units per acre.

9.0065 Department Store

A retail establishment which provides a wide range of consumer goods that are segmented into different departments within the facility.
•	Examples: Macy’s, Shopko, Target, Wal-Mart

9.0066 Development

This term refers to the following in reference to Section 2.4: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the special flood hazard area.

9.0067 Dine-In Restaurants

A commercial establishment whose principal business is preparation and sale of food and/or beverages intended for immediate human consumption, within the establishment’s permanent structure. Drive- thru services are not provided. Outdoor seating may be provided, but only in addition to indoor seating.

9.0068 Districts

The areas of the City of Beulah for which the regulations governing the use of land and the uses, density, height, and location of structures and buildings are regulated by uniform standards.

9.0069 Drainage Facilities

Facilities or structures not located within state or city right of way that are designed to convey water
 
•	Examples: Facilities and structures for drainage, flood control, ponding, conservation, erosion control, and reclamation.

9.0070 Drive-Thru Restaurants

A restaurant that has a drive-thru lane to serve customers in motor vehicles and/or an area where motor vehicles may park and be served food while the customers remain in their motor vehicles. In addition, a drive-thru restaurant may also serve customers within the establishment’s permanent structure. Outdoor service to parked vehicles may be provided.

9.0071 Dry Cleaner

A place where cleaning or dyeing of clothing or other like materials is accomplished with chemicals other than water and for which a charge is made. Involves the process of removing dirt, grease, paints, or other stains from wearing apparel, textiles, fabrics, rugs, and similar items, by the use of nonaqueous liquid solvents, whether flammable or nonflammable.

9.0072 Duplex

A building containing two dwelling units constructed in one building on one or more lots.

9.0073 Dwelling Unit

One or more rooms arranged, designed, or used as independent living quarters for a single household. Buildings with more than one kitchen or more than one set of cooking facilities are deemed to contain multiple dwelling units unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory and not intended to serve additional households.

9.0074 Dwelling, Single Family Detached

One dwelling unit occupied by one family that does not share common walls with another dwelling unit, and is located on one or more adjacent lots.

9.0075 Easement

An interest in land owned by another person, consisting in the right to use or control the land, or an area above or below for a specific limited purpose.

9.0076 Emergency Response Facility

An area or facility used to house emergency response equipment and transport vehicles. Such equipment shall include fire-fighting trucks, ambulances, helicopters and any other equipment of similar purpose. Such facilities shall include what is commonly referred to as fire stations and ambulance heliports.

9.0077 Extraterritorial Area
 
The unincorporated land within one mile of the City of Beulah’s corporate boundary. In the inner half- mile, closest to the City’s corporate boundary, the city has sole zoning jurisdiction to receive and review applications for building permits and all planning and zoning matters. In the outer half-mile, the City and the County share zoning jurisdiction. Detail regarding the extraterritorial area is provided in North Dakota Century Code Chapter 40-47-01.1, or as amended.

9.0078 Family

Any number of individuals, related by blood, legal adoption, or marriage, or a group of not more than three persons who need not be related by blood or marriage, living together in a dwelling unit as members of a single housekeeping unit.

9.0079 Feedlots

Areas with an open lot or building intended for feeding, breeding, raising, or holding animals where manure may accumulate.

9.0080 Filling Station

A business establishment designed to allow customers to fill up motor vehicles with various types of fuel.

9.0081 Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)

The official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where special flood hazard areas are designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH, or A99.

9.0082 Flood or Flooding

A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or, from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

9.0083 Floodway or Regulatory Floodway

The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

9.0084 Floor Area

The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors measured in square feet not including the basement floor.
 

9.0085 Foundation Skirts

Permanent material attached to the perimeter of the mobile home or manufactured home structure completely enclosing the underside of the mobile home or manufactured home structure from ground level to bottom of structure.

9.0086 Front Yard

Yard extending across the full width of the lot from side lot lines, the depth of which is the least distance between the front lot line and the front building line.

9.0087 Frontage

The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirement on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to street shall be considered frontage.

9.0088 Frontage Road

Local roads or streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.

9.0089 Games of Chance

Means and includes only games in which prizes including money or anything of monetary value are awarded on the basis of a designated winning number or numbers, color or colors, symbol or symbols determined by chance, but not including games commonly known as “bingo” or “lotto”. No game of chance shall involve wagering of money by one player against another player.

9.0090 Garage

An accessory structure utilized for the storage of vehicles and/or other miscellaneous items. "Garages" shall be at least 12 feet wide by 20 feet long.

9.0091 Golf Courses/Country Clubs

An area of land with highly maintained natural turf laid out for the game of golf with a series of nine or more holes. May include a central building or group of buildings dedicated to facility maintenance, staff offices, or dining.

9.0092 Government Offices/Facility (Other)

A facility owned or substantially controlled by a governmental entity. Does not include sewage disposal plants, solid waste landfills, educational institutions, cemeteries, community centers, health care facilities, or any recreation facilities.
•	Examples: Police stations, fire stations, other emergency response offices, city government offices, state government offices, or federal government offices.
 

9.0093 Grain Mills/Elevators

A facility with a tower containing a bucket elevator or a pneumatic conveyor, which scoops up grain from a lower level and deposits it in a silo or other storage facility.



9.0094 Group Home - Disabled

A group home for the disabled is a dwelling unit which is occupied as a single housekeeping unit in a family-like environment by up to 8 persons with disabilities plus support staff. Residents are supervised by a sponsoring entity or its staff which furnishes habilitative services to the group home residents. A group home is owned or operated under the auspices of a nonprofit association, private care provider, government agency, or other legal entity, other than the residents themselves or their parents or other individuals who are their legal guardians. The group home constitutes a single housekeeping unit where residents share responsibilities, meals, and recreational activities as in any family. The group home staff is specially trained to help the residents achieve the goals of independence, productivity, and integration into the community.

A group home for the disabled is not a clinic or hospital where treatment is the principal or essential service provided. Residency in a group home is long term relatively permanent and measured in years, not months or weeks. A group home can house people with developmental disabilities (mental retardation, autism, etc.), mental illness or physical disabilities as defined by NDCC 25-16-14(1.) It does not include hospices, emergency shelters, residences for victims of abuse, or other group living arrangements. A group home for the disabled is not a group home facility for drug and alcohol treatment, treatment of sex offenders; and alternative or post incarceration.

9.0095 Group Home – Halfway House

A residence for individuals after release from institutionalization (such as for mental disorders, drug or alcohol addiction, treatment of sex offenders, or incarceration) that is designed  to  facilitate their readjustment to private life.

9.0096 Guest House

Living quarters on the same premises with the main dwelling, which is either attached to the main dwelling or is detached, for use by temporary guests of the occupants of the premises. Guest homes are intended to be incidental to the primary single family detached house, and not intended to be a rental facility.

9.0097 Health Care Facilities

An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, disability, and other physical or mental conditions and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, medical offices, and staff residences.
•	Examples: Hospital, ambulatory surgical center, birthing center.
 
9.0098 Health Club

A commercial athletic, recreational, health or fitness establishment.

9.0099 Highway

All roads designated as arterial or collectors by the North Dakota Department of Transportation.

9.0100 Hotel/Motel

A building or group of buildings, which provides rooms for sleeping accommodations for transients on a daily or weekly basis, whether such establishments are designated as a hotel, inn, motel, motor inn, motor lodge, or otherwise.

9.0101 In-home Business

A business, profession, occupation, or trade conducted for gain, conducted within a dwelling unit for gain or support by a resident of the dwelling unit. In-home businesses are intended to be compatible with other permitted uses and with the residential character of the neighborhood where they are located. Includes a gainful occupation within the dwelling or on the premises, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes.

9.0102 Indoor Recreational Center

A public facility that provides recreational opportunities in an indoor setting. Administrative offices, eating, and cooking facilities may be provided on an ancillary basis.

9.0103 Intensity

The percentage of a lot occupied by a structure or use.

9.0104 Junkyard

An establishment that provides for the discarding, keeping, sale, storage, or trading of debris, junk, non- desirable goods, rubbish, scrap metals, trash, waste, dismantled motor vehicles, wrecked motor vehicles, dismantled appliances, wrecked appliances, or anything similar in nature, as well as any parts thereof of the foregoing items.
•	Examples: Auto Wrecking Yard, Salvage Yard

9.0105 Laundromats

A commercial establishment typically equipped with washing machines and dryers, usually coin-operated and self-service.

9.0106 Libraries

A building or room containing collections of books, periodicals, and sometimes films and recorded music for people to read, borrow, or refer to. May include public meeting rooms and related facilities.
 

9.0107 Liquor Stores

A  commercial  establishment  principally  for  the  retail  sale  of  alcoholic  beverages  for  off-premise consumption.

9.0108 Local Roads

The remaining mileage not otherwise classified as arterials or collectors by the North Dakota Department of Transportation shall be assigned to the local road system.

9.0109 Lot

Land designated as a separate and distinct lot on a legally recorded subdivision platted pursuant to Chapter 40-50.1 NDCC.

9.0110 Lot Area

The total area within the boundary lines of the lot, excluding public right-of-way.

9.0111 Lot Combination

A combination of two (2) or more platted lots into a single lot whose boundaries coincide with the lot lines shown on the recorded plat of the subdivision that meets the following criteria: 1) does not involve the vacation of existing easements; and 2) does not involve lots within more than one zoning district.

9.0112 Lot Coverage

The area, in percentage, of the total lot area covered by a structure.

9.0113 Lot, Corner

A lot abutting on two or more streets other than an alley at their intersection.

9.0114 Lot, Interior

A lot bounded by a street on only one side.

9.0115 Lot, Depth

The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.

9.0116 Lot, Line

The property line bounding a lot.
 
9.0117 Lot, Through

A lot that fronts on two public streets and is not a corner lot. Only one street shall be considered as a front lot line, as determined by the Building Official upon issuance of a building permit or the demarcation made on a recorded plat map.

9.0118 Lot Line, Front

For an interior lot, a line separating the lot from the street. On a corner lot, each street side shall constitute a front yard.

9.0119 Lot Line, Rear

On a corner lot, there is no rear lot line. On all other corner lots, the rear lot line is opposite the front lot line as determined by the Building Official upon issuance of a building permit or the demarcation made on a recorded plat map.

9.0120 Lot Line, Side

Any lot lines other than front lot lines or rear lot lines.

9.0121 Lot, Width

The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the front yard setback line.

9.0122 Lowest Floor

The lowest floor of a structure including the basement.

9.0123 Lumber Yard

An establishment where lumber and other building materials, such as brick, tile, cement, insulation, roofing materials, and the like, are sold at retail.

9.0124 Machine or Welding Shop

A structure containing machinery for the manufacture, modification, or repair of metal goods and equipment. Welding may be performed therein.

9.0125 Machinery/Equipment Sales and Services

Establishment which provides agricultural, construction, and related equipment and/or machinery for sale and, as a secondary use, provides services, including maintenance, repair and service, testing, and rental.




9.0126 Major Collector
 

A road serving incorporated cities and other traffic generators or serving as important intra-county travel corridors and designated as such by the North Dakota Department of Transportation.

9.0127 Manufactured Home

A dwelling unit constructed in accordance with Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards in effect after June 15, 1976.

This term refers to the following in reference to Section 2.41: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle", but does include "mobile home".

9.0128 Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision

A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

9.0129 Mineral Extraction

An operation where ore is crushed and separated into valuable substances or waste.

9.0130 Mini Golf Course

A tract of land laid out for playing miniature golf where the only clubs used on the course are putters.

9.0131 Minor Arterial

A road linking cities and larger unincorporated communities, forming an integrated network for inter- county travel, and designated as such by the North Dakota Department of Transportation.

9.0132 Minor Collector

A road collecting traffic from local roads, providing service to communities and linking important traffic generators with rural areas and designated as such by the North Dakota Department of Transportation.

9.0133 Mobile Home

A factory made, transportable, single dwelling unit that was manufactured prior to the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which went into effect on June 15, 1976, and therefore does not comply with the regulations therein.

9.0134 Modular Home

Modular home is to mean the same as “Industrialized Modular Building” under § 108-02-01-07.16 of the North Dakota Administrative Code (NDAC): any building of closed construction, i.e., constructed in such a manner that concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected at the site, without
 
disassembly, damage, or destruction, and which is made or assembled in manufacturing facilities, off the building site, for installation, or assembly and installation, on the building site. Industrialized modular building includes modular housing which is factory-built single-family and multifamily housing, including closed- wall panelized housing, and other modular, nonresidential buildings. Industrialized modular building does not include any structure subject to the requirements of the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.

9.0135 Monopole

A single, freestanding pole-type structure supporting one or more antennas for telecommunication purposes. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a monopole is not a tower or a utility pole.

9.0136 Mortuaries

A commercial facility where preparations are made for burials or cremation and/or where funeral services are conducted.

9.0137 Motor Vehicle Dealership

Any land or buildings used primarily for the sale of motor vehicles fit for transportation. In addition, may provide servicing or mechanical repair of motor vehicles as a use subordinate to motor vehicle sales.

9.0138 Motor Vehicle Repair, Tire Sales, and Services Facility

A facility for the servicing/mechanical repair of motor vehicles and/or selling of parts for motor vehicles.

9.0139 Motor Vehicle Sales Facility

Any land or buildings used primarily for the sale or rental of motor vehicles fit for transportation. Does not include servicing or mechanical repair of motor vehicles.

9.0140 Multi-family Residential

A residential building that contains 3 or more dwelling units that share common walls or common floors/ceilings with one or more dwelling units. The land upon which the building sits is not divided into separate lots.

9.0141 New Construction

Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance.

9.0142 Nonconforming Lot

A lot which does not conform to the location requirements or dimensional or size standards of this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Zoning Ordinance, or as a result of zoning changes.
 

9.0143 Nonconforming Structure

A structure which does not conform to the regulations of this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance, as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Zoning Ordinance, or as a result of zoning changes.

9.0144 Nonconforming Use

The use of a building or other structure or of a tract of land which does not conform to the use or regulations of this Zoning Ordinance for the district in which it is located, either at the date of this Zoning Ordinance, as a result of subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this Zoning Ordinance, or as a result of zoning changes.

9.0145 Nurseries and Greenhouses, Retail

An establishment that provides the cultivation, display, storage and sale of plants, shrubs, trees, as well as other associated materials and tools. Goods are sold onsite.

9.0146 Nurseries and Greenhouses, Wholesale

A facility where plants are grown and sold to retailers for resale. Goods are not sold onsite.

9.0147 Nursing Facility

A facility that offers 24-hour medical care primarily for seniors. Some patients may only be there temporarily for rehabilitation.

9.0148 Offices, Medical

An office or health facility providing health services including, without limitation, preventative and rehabilitation treatment, diagnostic services, testing, and analysis. This use includes offices providing medical, dental, surgical, rehabilitation, podiatral, optometric, chiropractic, and psychiatric services, and medical or dental laboratories incidental to these offices, but exclude inpatient services and overnight accommodation.
•	Examples: Dentist office, Chiropractor office, Medical Clinic

9.0149 Offices, Professional

An establishment providing direct, "over-the-counter" services to consumers (e.g., banks, insurance agencies, real estate offices, travel agencies, utility company offices, etc.) and office-type facilities occupied by businesses providing professional services and/or engaged in the production of intellectual property.
•	Examples: Banks, Insurance agency offices, Office building with multiple tenants



9.0150 Off-Premise Advertising Signs
 
Advertising signs that are not located on the property of the business that is being advertised.
•	Examples: Billboards


9.0151 Oil and Gas Drilling

An operation where facilities, structures, materials, and equipment, whether temporary or permanent, are utilized for the drilling of an oil or gas well.

9.0152 Ordinance, Zoning

The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Beulah, ND.

9.0153 Outdoor Dining

A restaurant that allows the consumption of food and/or beverages on its own property in an area open to the air, such as under an umbrella, on a patio, deck, or porch, whether or not enclosed with screening material.

9.0154 Outdoor Storage

The storage of goods, merchandise, inventory, equipment, or other tangibles for any purpose other than outdoor display in an areas not fully enclosed within a building or structure. Involves storage in connection with a business or public use.

9.0155 P&Z Commission

The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Beulah, ND.

9.0156 Paint Store and Service

An establishment where paint and painting supplies are stored and administrative functions take place. The painting service takes places at the customer’s location. The establishment may also be utilized for the onsite retail sale of paint and painting supplies.

9.0157 Parking Lot, Commercial or Public

A lot or open air vehicle parking facility that may be operated as a business enterprise by charging a fee for parking or may allow free parking. Also includes an open air vehicle parking facility that is publicly owned and is intended to allow parking by the general public.

9.0158 Parking Garage

A parking facility located above ground or underground consisting of one or more levels that may or may not include other primary or accessory uses.

9.0159 Parks

A public area dedicated to recreational activity in an open-air setting.
 

9.0160 Parts Car

A motor vehicle generally in non-operable condition, which is owned by a car enthusiast or collector to furnish parts to restore, preserve, and maintain a special interest vehicle or antique vehicle.

9.0161 Permanent Foundation (with respect to manufactured and mobile homes)

A foundation consisting of skirting which must be attached to the manufactured or mobile home and foundation so as not to permit rodent entry. Skirting material must be of such quality so as to provide weather proofing and not deteriorate unreasonably with weather conditions. The foundation must be a minimum width of 24" x minimum depth of 4" or wide enough to permit the blocking to sit on the foundation and to form weight bearing load points. The footing must also contain anchor provisions for permanent attachment of storm anchors. There shall be a minimum of six anchors on a mobile home 14' x 70' or smaller and eight on mobile homes larger than 14' x 70'.

9.0162 Permitted Use

Any use which complies with the requirements of a zoning district.

9.0163 Photography/Art Studio

A commercial facility primarily engaged in painting, photographic, graphic art, and other art forms or video services.

9.0164 Pipeyard

An establishment where pipes are produced, fabricated and/or stored, either within a structure or outdoors.

9.0165 Plat

Plat or subdivision plat refers to any subdivision platted pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 40-50.1.

9.0166 Plumbing Service

An establishment where plumbing supplies are stored and administrative functions take place. The plumbing service takes places at the customer’s location.

9.0167 Portable Sign

A sign designed for temporary use that is not permanently affixed to the structure or property.



9.0168 Preschool
 
An educational establishment offering early childhood education to children prior to the commencement of compulsory education at primary school. The establishment may be privately operated or government run.

9.0169 Primary School

An educational institution in which children receive elementary education, coming before secondary school and after preschool.
•	Example: Elementary school
9.0170 Principal Structure

A structure used in conjunction with the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.

9.0171 Private Club

Buildings or ground used for regular or periodic meetings or gatherings of a group of persons, but not groups organized to render a service customarily carried on as a business.

9.0172 Production Facility

An establishment that is industrial in nature, which provides for the manufacturing, fabrication, production and distribution of consumer goods.
•	Examples: Manufacturing facilities, freight movement facilities, wholesale facilities, production facilities, storage facilities, bottling plant.

9.0173 Public Utility

Any association, person, firm, corporation, limited liability company, or agency engaged or employed in any business that provides the  following services: electricity, gas, heat, power, steam, telephone, telegraph, transportation, or water. The term also applies to the provision of the listed services within the city zoning jurisdiction through the use of facilities such as water lines, sewer lines, gas lines, electrical power lines, communication lines, and other facilities inherent to provision of utilities to customers.

9.0174 Radio/TV Station

A facility used for all uses related to the production of radio broadcasts, motion pictures, and television film and tape, including motion picture and television stages; exterior sets; laboratories; construction, repair, and storage facilities; all vehicles used to transport this equipment and other related commercial vehicles; and accessory fabrication activities. This use does not include telecommunication facilities or towers.

9.0175 Rear Yard

A yard extending across the full width of the lot from side lot lines, the depth of which is the least distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the principle building.

9.0176 Reasonably Safe from Flooding
 
Base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special flood hazard area, and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.

9.0177 Recovery Living Facilities

A facility that is used by addicts recovering from substance abuse, which serve as an interim environment between rehab and a return to their former lives.

9.0178 Recreational Vehicle (RV)

A vehicle which is:

(a)	built on a single chassis;
(b)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(c)	designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(d)	designed primarily  not for use  as a  permanent dwelling but as temporary  living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use;

Including, but not limited to, travel trailers, trailers on wheels, park-model trailers, and other similar vehicles.

9.0179 Recreational Vehicle Park

An identified area providing space and facilities for recreational vehicles for recreational use or transient lodging. Recreational vehicle parks are developed for the placement and occupancy of recreational vehicles for residential purposes on rented, leased, or owned spaces with necessary accessory uses and amenities.

9.0180 Refineries and Petro-chemical Plant

An industrial installation where a substance is refined in mass quantities.

9.0181 Religious Institutions

An establishment dedicated to the use of a congregation of people for religious worship (primary use is for religious worship).

9.0182 Remodel

Projects where the floor area is being increased by 50 percent or more, or where the cost of the remodeling is greater than the assessed value of the existing improvements on the site. Assessed value is the value shown on the applicable county assessment and taxation records for the current year.



9.0183 Retirement Facility
 
A residential facility that offers limited or no medical care, and places an emphasis on individual privacy. Retirement homes are very similar in function to apartment living.

9.0184 Retail Shop

An establishment primarily used for the sale of consumer goods, merchandise, and/or services to the general public.
•	Examples: Retail farm and feed store, appliance store, department store, mattress store, jewelry store

9.0185 Right-of-Way

The area, either public or private, over which the right of passage exists. The right-of-way shall not be considered as land area when computing lot size.

9.0186 Sand and Gravel Mining

The removal of sand, gravel, and/or scoria from the earth.

9.0187 Sand and Gravel Processing

The refinement of sand, gravel, and/or scoria for the purpose of use or sale.

9.0188 Secondary Schools

An education institution which provides education for students after primary school and before college.
•	Example: High school or middle school

9.0189 Second Dwelling, Detached

An additional dwelling unit established in conjunction with a single-family dwelling on the same lot, but physically separated.

9.0190 Self-Service Storage Facility

A building containing storage areas that are generally rented or leased by an individual, group, or business, for the purpose of storing personal property.

9.0191 Setback

The least horizontal distance between a structure foundation edge and a lot line or right of way edge.





9.0192 Severability
 
If a provision in the Zoning Ordinance states that part of the Zoning Ordinance is held to be illegal or otherwise unenforceable, the remainder of the Zoning Ordinance will still apply.

9.0193 Sewage Treatment Plants

Facilities that receive raw sewage and bring about a reduction in organic and bacterial content of the waste so as to render it less dangerous and less odorous.


9.0194 Shed

An accessory structure designed for general storage use. "Sheds" shall be no larger than 12 feet wide by 18 feet long.

9.0195 Shoemaker

An establishment that involves the production and/or repair of a range of footwear items, including shoes, boots, sandals, clogs and moccasins.

9.0196 Shopping Center

A collection or group of retail shops or department stores, generally located in the same building or site, for the purpose of selling consumer goods, merchandise, and services.
•	Example: Strip Mall, Mall, Plaza

9.0197 Side Yard

A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line, the depth of which is the least distance from the sides of the principal building and the side lot line.

9.0198 Sign

Any outdoor advertising having a permanent location on the ground or attached to or painted on a building, including bulletin boards, billboards, name plates, and poster boards.

9.0199 Sign, Wall

A sign for a business attached or erected against the building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the plane of such building or structure.

9.0200 Sight Visibility Triangle

An area reserved for driver’s visibility at the corner of an intersecting driveway and a street or two intersecting streets. See section 4.02.


9.0201 Solid Waste Landfills

An area where solid waste is disposed.
 

9.0202 Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA)

An area of land that would be inundated by a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

9.0203 Special Interest Vehicle

A motor vehicle, whether licensed or unlicensed, which is used for competition or exhibition by a car enthusiast, and is either operative, or is being diligently worked on by the car enthusiast for the purpose of making the vehicle operative, and also may be a vehicle which is at least twenty (20) years old, and which has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer’s specifications, and, because of its historical interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.

9.0204 Start of Construction

Includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

9.0205 Stealth Antenna

A commercial antenna that is designed to be non-obtrusive, or virtually transparent or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth antennas are typically attached to buildings and other structures throughout the City and provide an alternative method of providing communication services for carriers.
•	Example: Antenna located within a structure such as a church steeple, antenna located on a water tower

9.0206 Storage of Hazardous Materials

A building used primarily for the storage of hazardous materials.
•	Examples: Storage of Explosive Materials, Storage of Flammable Materials

9.0207 Street

Except for  the section lines, a  way for vehicular traffic  whether designated  as a  street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, land place, or however else designated.

9.0208 Structure
 
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent location on the ground.

This term refers to the following in reference to Section 2.41: A walled and roofed building, including manufactured homes and gas or liquid above-ground storage tanks.

9.0209 Subdivision

The division of a tract or parcel of land into lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development, and any plat or plan which includes the creation of any part of one or more streets, public easements, or other rights of way, whether public or private, for access to or from such lots, and the creation of new or enlarged parks, playgrounds, plazas, or open spaces (N.D.C.C. § 40-48- 01(2)).

9.0210 Substantial Damage

Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the building to its pre- damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

9.0211 Substantial Improvement

Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

(a)	Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(b)	If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.


The term does not, however, include either:

(a)	Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b)	Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

9.0212 Tailor

An establishment where clothes are fitted to fit individual customers.



9.0213 Tattoo Parlors
 
Establishments that provide services which create a permanent mark or figure fixed upon the body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars.

9.0214 Taverns/Bars

A public eating or drinking commercial establishment which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises.

9.0215 Technical/Trade School

An education institution which provides mostly employment preparation skills for trained labor.

9.0216 Temporary Residence

A temporary residence is a structure or vehicle that may or may not require a building permit from the City and which may not comply with other standards in this Zoning Ordinance. Temporary residences are utilized for temporary habitation. Temporary residences are intended for habitation during construction of a primary, permanent residence, to be inhabited by residents of the primary, permanent residence.
•	Examples: Recreational vehicles (RVs), mobile homes, manufactured homes

9.0217 Temporary Structure

A temporary structure is a structure that may or may not require a building permit from the City and which may not comply with other standards in this Zoning Ordinance. Temporary structure are used for a specific, temporary purpose, but not for temporary habitation.
•	Examples: Membrane buildings, shipping/storage containers, mobile office

9.0218 Temporary Uses

Uses of a temporary nature, sometimes involving temporary structures, which may be allowed in certain zoning districts in accordance with the procedures established in Section 5.15 of the Zoning Ordinance.

9.0219 Theater

A commercial building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a principal use.

9.0220 Theater, Drive-In

An  open-air  theatre  where  customers may  park  and remain within  their  motor  vehicles  during  a presentation.






9.0221 Townhomes
 
A single family dwelling unit constructed in a group of three or more attached units in which each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. Each single family dwelling unit is on a separate lot.
•	Example: Three or more row houses.

9.0222 Truck Stops

A use where the primary function is providing fuel and other services to semi or tractor-trailer trucks. A truck wash or restaurant may be a secondary use.

9.0223 Twin Home

Two single family dwelling units attached with a common wall. Each unit extends from foundation to roof and with a yard or public way on at least two sides. Each single family dwelling unit is on a separate lot.

9.0224 Unit, Dwelling

A building or portion of it designed and used for residential occupancy by a single household and that includes exclusive sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation facilities. Buildings with more than one set of cooking facilities are considered to be multi-dwelling structures unless the additional cooking facilities are clearly accessory, such as an outdoor grill.

9.0225 Use

The specific purpose for which land or buildings are intended.

9.0226 Utility Building

A building or structure that houses a public utility.
•	Examples: Water and sewage pumping stations, telephone exchange buildings, electrical substations, and gas regulator substations.

9.0227 Utility Corridor

Includes public or private passageways, including easements, for the express purpose of transmitting or transporting electricity, gas, oil, water, sewage, communication signals, or other similar services on a regional level (extending beyond the city zoning jurisdiction).

9.0228 Utility-Scale Solar Facility

Solar-power generating facilities that convert solar energy (energy from the sun) into electrical power. Facilities include, but are not limited to, both photovoltaic and concentrating solar power (CSP) methods utilized at a large scale for commercial purposes. Utility scale solar facilities do not include facilities intended only for individual buildings or businesses.

9.0229 Variance
 
A deviation of Zoning Ordinance requirements to be considered where enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would cause unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty to a property owner.

9.0230 Water Storage Facility

A structure for bulk storage of water for any purpose such as drinking, cleaning, cooking, manufacturing, agriculture, fire retardant, etc.


9.0231 Wind Energy Conversion System

An apparatus for converting the kinetic energy available in wind to mechanical energy that can be used to power machinery and/or to operate an electrical generator. The major components of a typical wind energy conversion system include a wind turbine, a generator, interconnection apparatus, and control systems.

9.0232 Yard

A space on the same lot with the principal building or structure, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from the ground upward, except for accessory structures as permitted by this Zoning Ordinance.

9.0233 Zoning District, Base

These zoning districts cover all properties (public and private), except city and state right of way, within city zoning jurisdiction. The following zoning districts are included: all residential zoning districts, all commercial zoning districts, all industrial zoning districts, the agricultural zoning district, the public and open space conservation zoning district, and the recreational vehicle district.

9.0234 Zoning District Map

The map showing the zoning districts of the City of Beulah officially adopted by the Council.

9.0235 Zoning District, Overlay

An overlay zone is a second, mapped zoning district that is overlaid or superimposed over a base zoning district. An overlay zoning district permits special regulations to exist within parts or all of a base zoning district or across a broad area containing several base zoning districts. Overlay zoning districts within the city include the floodplain overlay and underground mining overlay zoning districts.
 
SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any provision of this Ordinance or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.



SEVERABILITY. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.



EFFECTIVE DATE.  The Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its final passage and approval and publication of its title and penalty clause.



DATED this	day of October, 2016.









DARRELL R. BJERKE, Mayor





ATTEST:







HEATHER FEREBEE, City Auditor



First Reading:	October 3, 2016

Second Reading:	October 17, 2016 Publication Date:	 	


Effective Date:	 	
 



ORDINANCE NO. 421

AN   ORDINANCE   GRANTING   TO   MONTANA-DAKOTA	UTILITIES   CO.,   A CORPORATION, A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AND RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE, WITHIN AND UPON, IN AND UNDER THE STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AN ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR TRANSMITTING AND DISTRIBUTING ELECTRIC ENERGY FOR ALL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE USES.

WHEREAS, pursuant to applicable law, the City of Beulah has the power to grant a non-exclusive franchise for a term of no more than twenty years;

WHEREAS, pursuant to applicable law, those that provide electrical service within city limits shall do so pursuant to a franchise issued by the City;

WHEREAS, both Roughrider Electric Cooperative Inc. and Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. currently serve customers within the City of Beulah;

WHEREAS, Roughrider Electric Cooperative Inc. and Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. have entered into a Service Area Agreement which allocates service territories within the city limits of the City of Beulah;

WHEREAS, due to the allocation of service territory within the city limits of the City
)		of  Beulah  pursuant  to the  aforementioned  Service  Area  Agreement,  and to  maintain appropriate procedures and controls over electric service providers, it is necessary to enter
into a formal franchise with Montana-Dakota Utilities Co.

BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE  BOARD OF CITY  COUNCIL  OF THE CITY OF BEULAH,  NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

 
Section 1.  Definitions: defined as follows:
 
As  used  herein,  the  following  words  and  terms  are
 

a.	"City" means the City of Beulah, North Dakota.
b.	"Franchise" means all of the rights and obligations extended by City to Grantee herein.
c.	"Grantee" means Montana-Dakota Utilities Co.
d.	Any reference to either City or Franchise includes their respective successors and assigns.

Section 2.  Grant of Authority:	The City grants to Grantee, its successors and assigns, subject to the limitations herein stated, the right and franchise to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public grounds of the City as now, or hereafter constituted, for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating, within, upon, and in and under the same, an electric distribution system for transmitting and distributing electric energy for all public and private uses.
To  encourage  harmony  and  operational  efficiency  in  the  provision  of  electric

1
 



distribution service in the City, to promote safety and discourage unreasonable duplication of electric facilities, to assure adequate and reliable service for all consumers within the City, and provide franchise grantees with equitable participation in the provision of electric distribution service within undeveloped areas annexed to the City during the terms of this Franchise, the authority granted by this Franchise to Grantee is limited to the use of the City's streets, alleys and public grounds for the purpose of distributing electric energy for public and private use within the service areas and to the service locations of the Grantee as designated and agreed to in the Service Area Agreement executed by Roughrider Electric Cooperative, Inc. and Grantee and attached as Exhibit A to this Ordinance, including any amendments or modifications to the Service Area Agreement as agreed and approved pursuant to the terms of the Service Area Agreement . The Grantee shall have all the rights, privileges, and obligations to provide electric distribution service within such service areas and to such service locations as stated in the Service Area Agreement. This limitation shall not restrict the Grantee's right to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public grounds of the City anywhere within the City to construct, operate, and maintain transmission and distribution line facilities for the purpose of providing adequate electric service within the service areas and to the service locations of the Grantee under the Service Area Agreement as provided in paragraph 11 of such Agreement .

The rights herein granted to Grantee shall further be subject to all valid laws, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted and promulgated by any State or Federal authority having jurisdiction over Grantee and which may expand or limit Grantee's right to serve pursuant to this Franchise.
)
Section 3.  Grantee's Obligations:  Grantee  shall  maintain an  efficient  distribution
system for furnishing electric energy for public and private use during twenty -four (24) hours of each day at such reasonable rates as may be promulgated by Grantee and as the same may be regulated by the United States of America, its agencies, or by the State of North Dakota or its agencies.

Section 4. Non-Exclusive Grant: This Franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent the City from granting to any other party the right to use the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the City for like purposes.

Section 5.  Compliance with Laws and Ordinances: Grantee shall at all times during
the term of this Franchise comply with all applicable laws and ordinances of the City.

Section 6. Conditions on Street Occupancy:

a.	During the construction, maintenance or enlargement of any part of said system, said Grantee shall not unnecessarily impede or block travel in said streets and highways in said City and shall leave all streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lanes and public places and all grounds disturbed by said construction in good condition upon the completion of said work. All signing and traffic regulation shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).

b.	The City reserves the right to make and adopt, and the rights and privileges

2
 



hereby granted shall at all times be and remain subject to such reasonable regulations of a police nature as it may deem necessary for the best interests of the City, but the City will not by any such  regulations or by acts of its own or agents do anything to prevent or interfere with the Grantee carrying on its business in accordance with the Franchise hereby granted.

c.	In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, the Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in manner approved by the Engineering Superintendent or Engineer, replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved areas in as good a condition  as before the work involving such disturbance was done . Prior to the disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area, Grantee shall provide written notice to the City at least two (2) days prior to said disturbance.

d.	Grantee, at its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate along, under, or over any street, alley, or public place, or remove from any street, alley, or public place, any equipment or facilities when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street excavation, street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installations of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines or tracks, or any other type of structures or improvements by City or other public agencies when acting in as governmental or in a proprietary capacity, or for any public improvement, not limited to the foregoing, of any character whatever.

)		e. Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Grantee shall be given not less than ten (10) days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

Section 7. Reservation of Rights: The City reserves any right it may have, under its police power or otherwise, to control or regulate the use of said streets,alleys, and public grounds by Grantee, and to enact all ordinances necessary and proper in the exercise of that power.

Section 8.  Franchise Fee:	The City hereby reserves the right to implement, by passage of a separate ordinance, a franchise fee to be collected and remitted by Grantee to the City. Said franchise fee will be in accordance with state law and regulations. In the event such a franchise fee is implemented, the  Grantee agrees to make available for inspection by the City at reasonable times all records necessary to audit the Company's determination of the franchise fee payments. The Company shall have sixty (60) days from passage of the ordinance to implement collection of the franchise fee, however, said franchise fee shall be effective upon date of final passage of the ordinance.

Section 9. Maintenance. Grantee sha ll be responsible for the cost and performance of any and all maintenance or repairs to their distribution system.


3
 
)

Section 10. Notice.   Grantee shall be responsible for notifying the City within thirty
(30)	days of Grantee receiving notice of any planned or requested repairs, new projects, new structures, new infrastructure, or maintenance within the City of Beulah . Grantee sha ll notify the Cify of the location of the project, and the estimated cost of the project. The intent of this section is to give the City advance notice of new projects that the City will have to be involved in with regards to financing, or that the City will bear the cost of. (Ex. If the City needs to account for payment for electrical items in a new development, the City needs to know in advance for the purposes of special assessments.)

Section 11. Notice of Rate Changes. Grantee shall notify the City of any rate changes as approved by the North Dakota Public Service Commission in a general rate case, at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the rate change.

Section 12. Tree-trimming.Unless provided in any permit or regulation of the City, Grantee may trim trees and shrubs in and over the streets, alleys, and public grounds to the extent Grantee determines is necessary to avoid interference with the construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the electric distribution facilities, provided Grantee shall hold the City harmless from any liability arising therefrom.

Section 13. Assignment : Grantee may assign this Franchise to another party or corporation, subject to all obligations of the Grantee hereunder, and shall provide notice to the City of any such assignment.

Section 14. Indemnification:	Grantee shall indemnify and save and hold the City harmless from any loss or damage due to the construction, installation, and maintenance ofits distribution systems, and its use of the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the City.

Section 15. Acceptance: Within thirty (30) days after passage and final approval of this Ordinance, Grantee sha ll file with the clerk or auditor of the City, its written acceptance of this Franchise.

Section 16. Term:	This Franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of twenty (20) years from the date upon which this ordinance sha ll become effective as provided by law.

Section 17. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances : ALL ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HEREWITH ARE HEREBY REPEALED.

Section  18.	Effective  Date:	THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT FROM AND AFTER FINAL PASSAGE.

)
)
)
)
)

4
 

 




Heater Ferebee;City Auditor


First Reading: February 6, 2017 Second Reading:April 3. 2017 Final Passage: April 3, 2017












)




























5
 

)

ORDINANCE NO. 422

AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO ROUGHRIDER ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, INC., A COOPERATIVE CORPORATION, A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE AND RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND OPERATE, WITHIN AND UPON, IN AND UNDER THE STREETS, ALLEYS AND PUBLIC GROUNDS OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AN ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR TRANSMITTING AND DISTRIBUTING ELECTRIC ENERGY FOR ALL PUBLIC AND PRIVATE USES.

WHEREAS, pursuant to applicable law, the City of Beulah has the power to grant a non-exclusive franchise for a term of no more than twenty years;

WHEREAS, pursuant to applicable law, those that provide electrical service within
city limits shall do so pursuant to a franchise issued by the City;

WHEREAS, both Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. and Roughrider Electric Cooperative,
Inc. currently serve customers within the City of Beulah;

WHEREAS, Roughrider Electric Cooperative, Inc. and Montana-Dakota Utilities Co. have entered into a Service Area Agreement which allocates service territories within the city limits of the City of Beulah;

)		WHEREAS, due to the allocation of service territory within the city limits of the City of  Beulah  pursuant  to the  aforementioned  Service Area  Agreement,  and to  maintain
appropriate procedures and controls over electric service providers, it is necessary to enter into a formal franchise with Roughrider Electric Cooperative, Inc.

BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE  BOARD OF CITY COUNCIL OF THE  CITY OF BEULAH,  NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

 
Section 1.  Definitions: defined as follows:
 
As  used  herein,  the  following  words  and  terms  are
 

a.	"City" means the City of Beulah, North Dakota.
b.	"Franchise"  means  all of the  rights and  obligations  extended  by City  to ·
Grantee herein.
c.	"Grantee" means Roughrider Electric Cooperative, Inc.
d.	Any reference to either City or Franchise includes their respective successors and assigns.

Section 2.  Grant of Authority:	The City grants to Grantee, its successors and assigns, subject to the limitations herein stated, the right and franchise to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public grounds of the City as now, or hereafter constituted, for the purpose of constructing, maintaining, and operating, within, upon, and in and under the same, an electric distribution system for transmitting and distributing electric energy for all public and private uses.

1
 



To encourage harmony and operational efficiency in the prov1s1on of electric distribution service in the City, to promote safety and discourage unreasonable duplication of electric facilities, to assure adequate and reliable service for all consumers within the City, and provide franchise grantees with equitable participation in the provision of electric distribution service within undeveloped areas annexed to the City during the terms of this Franchise, the authority granted by this Franchise to Grantee is limited to the use of the City's streets, alleys and public grounds for the purpose of distributing electric energy for public and private use within the service areas and to the service locations of the Grantee as designated and agreed to in the Service Area Agreement executed by Montana -Dakota Utilities Co. and Grantee and attached as Exhibit A to this Ordinance, including any amendments or modifications to the Service Area Agreement as agreed and approved pursuant to the terms of the Service Area Agreement. The Grantee shall have all the rights, privileges, and obligations to provide electric distribution service within such service areas and to such service locations as stated in the Service Area Agreement. This limitation shall not restrict the Grantee's right to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public grounds of the City anywhere within the City to construct, operate, and maintain transmission and distribution line facilities for the purpose of providing adequate electric service within the service areas and to the service locations of the Grantee under the Service Area Agreement as provided in paragraph 11of such Agreement.

The rights herein granted to Grantee shall further be subject to all valid laws, rules and regulations now or hereafter adopted and promulgated by any State or Federal authority having jurisdiction over Grantee and which may expand or limit Grantee's right to
)	serve pursuant to this Franchise.

Section 3. Grantee's Obligations: Grantee shall maintain an efficient distribution system for furnishing electric energy for public and private use during twenty-four (24) hours of each day at such reasonable rates as may be promulgated by Grantee and as the same may be regulated by the United States of America, its agencies, or by the State of North Dakota or its agencies.

Section 4. Non-Exclusive Grant: This Franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent the City from granting to any other party the right to use the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the .City for like purposes.

Section 5. Compliance with Laws and Ordinances: Grantee shall at all times during the term of this Franchise comply with all applicable laws and ordinances of the City.

Section 6.  Conditions on Street Occupancy:

a.	During the construction, maintenance or enlargement of any part of said system, said Grantee shall not unnecessarily impede or block travel in said streets and highways in said City and shall leave all streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lanes and public places and all grounds disturbed by said construction in good condition upon the completion of said work. All signing and traffic regulation shall conform to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).


2
 



b.	The City reserves the right to make and adopt, and the rights and privileges hereby granted shall at all times be and remain subject to such reasonable regulations of a police nature as it may deem necessary for the best interests of the City, but the City will not by any such regulations or by acts of its own or agents do anything to prevent or interfere with the Grantee carrying on its business in accordance with the Franchise hereby granted.

c.	In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, the Grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in manner approved by the Engineering Superintendent or Engineer, replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Prior to the disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area, Grantee shall provide written notice to the City at least two (2) days prior to said disturbance.

d.	Grantee, at its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate along, under, or over any street, alley, or public place, or remove from any street, alley, or public place, any equipment or facilities when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street excavation, street ·construction, change or establishment of street grade, installations of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines or tracks, or any other type of structures or improvements by City or other public agencies when acting in as governmental or in a proprietary capacity, or for any public improvement, not limited to the foregoing, of any character whatever .
)
e.	Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit
i.ssued by the City, temporarily  raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance . The Grantee shall be given not less than ten (10) days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

Section 7. Reservation of Rights: The City reserves any right it mav. have, under its police power or otherwise, to control or regulate the use of said streets, alleys, and public grounds by Grantee, and to enact all ordinances necessary and proper in the exercise of that  power.

Section 8. Franchise Fee: The City hereby reserves the right to implement, by passage of a separate ordinance, a franchise fee to be collected and remitted by Grantee to the City. Said franchise fee will be in accordance with state law and regulations. In the event such a franchise fee is implemented, the Grantee agrees to make available for inspection by the City at reasonable times all records necessary to audit the Company's determination of the franchise fee payments. The Company shall have sixty (60) days from passage of the ordinance to implement collection of the franchise fee, however, said franchise fee shall be effective upon date of final passage of the ordinance .

Section 9. Maintenance. Grantee shall be responsible for the cost and performance of any and all maintenance or repairs to their distribution system.

3
 




Section 10. Notice.	Grantee shall be responsible for notifying the City within thirty
(30)	days of Grantee receiving notice of any planned or requested repairs, new projects, new structures, new infrastructure, or maintenance within the City of Beulah. Grantee shall notify the City of the location of the project, and the estimated cost of the project. The intent of this section is to give the City advance notice of new projects that the City will have to be involved in with regards to financing, or that the City will bear the cost of. (Ex. If the City needs to account for payment for electrical items in a new development, the City needs to know in advance for the purposes of special assessments.)

Section 11. Notice of Rate Changes. Grantee shall notify the City of any rate changes at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the rate change.

Section 12.Tree-trimming . Unless provided in any permit or regulation of the City, Grantee may trim trees and shrubs in and over the streets, alleys, and public grounds to the extent Grantee determines is necessary to avoid interference with the construction, operation, maintenance and repair of the electric distribution facilities, provided Grantee shall hold the City harmless from any liability arising therefrom.

Section 13. Assignment: Grantee may assign this Franchise to another party or corporation, subject to all obligations of the Grantee hereunder, and shall provide notice to the City of any such assignment.

)		Section 14. Indemnification:   Grantee shall indemnify and save and hold the City harmless from any loss or damage due to the construction, installation, and maintenance of its distribution systems, and its use of the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the City.

Section 15. Acceptance:  Within thirty (30) days after passage and final approval of this Ordinance, Grantee shall file with the clerk or auditor of the City, its written acceptance of this Franchise.

Section 16. Term: This Franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of twenty (20) years from the date ·upon which this ordinance shall become effective as provided by law.

Section 17. Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances: ALL ORDINANCES AND PARTS OF ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HEREWITH ARE HEREBY REPEALED.

Section 18. Effective Date: THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT FROM AND AFTER FINAL PASSAGE.

)
)
)
)
)

4
 




Darrell Bjerke, Mayor



Heaer Ferebee, City Auditor


First Reading : February 6, 2017
Second Reading: April 3, 2017
Final Passage :April 3. 2017













)





























5
 

ORDINANCE NO. 423



AN  ORDINANCE   GRANTING   TO  MIDCONTINENT   COMMUNICATIONS   THE NONEXCLUSIVE  RIGHT  TO  ERECT,  MAINTAIN  AND  OPERATE  IN,  UNDER , OVER, ALONG,   ACROSS   THE   PRESENT   AND	FUTURE   STREETS,   LANES ,  A VENUES, SIDEWALKS,	ALLEYS,    BRIDGES,	HIGHWAYS,	EASEMENTS	DEDICATED	FOR COMPATIBLE USES AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES IN THE CITY OF BEULAH, NORTH DAKOTA , AND THE SUBSEQUENT ADDITIONS  THERETO,  TOWERS,  POLES, LIN ES, CABLES,   WIRES,   MANHOLES ,  AND   ALL   OTHER   FIXTURES   AND   EQUIPMENT NECESSARY  FOR THE MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION  IN THE CITY OF A CABLE TELEVISION  SYSTEM, FOR  THE PURPOS E OF TRANSMISSION  AND  DISTRIBUTION OF   AUDIO,  VISUAL,   ELECTRON IC   AND   ELECTRICAL   SIGNALS,   AND   OTHER ELECTRONIC	IMPULSES	IN	ORDER	TO	FURNISH	TELEVISION	AND	RADIO PROGRAMS  AND  VARIOUS  OTHER  COMMUNICATION  SERVICES TO THE  PUBLIC , FOR A PERIOD OF FIFTEEN  (15) YEARS, REGULATING THE SAME, AND PROVIDING COMPENSATION TO THE CITY .

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH , MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA :

ARTICLE I. STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

)		The purpose of this Ordinance is to effectuate the City's renewal of a franchise to Company on the 3rd of April, 2017, and to establish the terms and conditions governing the franchise and regulation thereof.

ARTICLE 2. SHORT TITLE

This  Ordinance  is  to  be  known  and  cited  as  the  "City  of  Beulah  Midcontinent Communications Ordinance," hereinafter in this document referred to as "Ordinance."

ARTICLE 3. DEFINITIONS

For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, word s used in the present tense include the future, word s in the plural number include the singu lar number , and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall ", "must", and "will "are mandatory and "may" is permissive; words not defined wi ll be given their common and ordinary meaning.

30.1	"Basic Cable Service" means the service tier that includes the retransmission  of local television broadcast signal s and any public, educational, and governmental access programming


1
 

required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier.  Basic Cable Service as defined herein
shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7).

30.2	"Channel"means a portion of the electromagnetic Frequency spectrum that is u sed in a cable system and is capable of delivering a televi sion channel (as television channel is defined by FCC regulation).

30.3	"City" is the City of Beulah, North Dakota.

30.4	"Council" is the City Council of Beulah, North Dakota.

30.5	"Cable Television System" or "Cable System" is a system utilizing certain electronic and other components which deliver to subscribing members of the public various communications services.

30.6	"Cable Television Reception Service" means the delivery  by the Company to television receivers (or any other suitable type of electronic terminal or receiver) of the electronic signals and other communications services carried over said system.

30.7	"FCC" means Federal Communications Commission.

30.8	"Franchise" means the rights and obligations extended by City to Company herein .

)		3.09 "Company" is Midcontinent Communications or anyone who succeeds Midcontinent Communications in accordance with the provision of this Ordinance.

3.l 0 "Ordinance" shall mean this Ordinance No.  423 of the City of Beulah.

3.11	"Person" is any person, firm , partnership, association, corporation or organization of any kind and any other legally recognized entity.

3.12	"Public Property" means any real property owned by City or any other governm ental unit, other than a street.

3.13	"Street" means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, cartway, highway, freeway, lane, path , public way , alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by City or any easements for compatible uses within the City.

3.14	"Subscribers" are those persons contracting to receive cable  television reception
services furnished und er this Ordinance by Company.

3.15	"Winter" means the time period from November 15 to April 15.


2
 

ARTICLE 4. GRANT OF NON-EXCLUSIVE AUTHORITY

There is hereby granted by the City to the Company, and to its successors, assigns or designees, the non -exclusive right to erect, maintain and operate in, under, over, along, across and upon the present and future streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges, highways, easements dedicated for compatible uses and other public places in the City of Beulah, North Dakota, and subsequent additions thereto, towers, poles, lines cables, wires, manholes and all other fixtures and equipment necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City of a cable television system, for the purpose of transmission and distribution of audio, visual , electronic and electric impulses in order to furnish television and radio program s and various other communications services to the public for a period of fifteen (l5) years, commencing from and after the effective date of this Ordinance.

ARTICLE 5. COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAWS AND ORDINANCES

5.1	The Company shall, during the term hereof, except in those areas which have been preempted by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, or The Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended, or which are regulated by the Federal Communication Commission, be subject to all lawful exercise of the regulating and police powers of the City and the State of North Dakota.

5.2	Company shall obtain any required permit from the proper City  authority before
commencing any construction or alteration of th e system, specifically including the opening or
)	disturbance of any street, sidewalk, driveway, or public place.  No charge will be assessed to Company in obtaining any required permit.

All wires, conduits, cable and other property and facilities of Company must be located , constructed, installed or maintained in compliance with applicable codes. City has the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed subject to the provisions of the Franchise and to make such tests as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the Franchise and pertinent provisions of law or ordinances that are applicable thereto.

ARTICLE 6. TERRITORIAL AREA INVOLVED

This Ordinance relates to the present territorial limits of the City and to any area annexed thereto during the term of this Ordinance. Compa ny is not obligated to extend service beyond the existing system where it is not economica lly feasible to do so, except upon payment by the person requesting service of the capital costs incurred by the Company in bringing service to such site. Company shall evaluate each such request for serv ice and file with the City Auditor a copy of its proposal for furnishing service and the terms for repayment of the cost of furnishing such serv ice. Company may, but is not required to, serve areas or individual hom es adjoining, but outside the City limits, that may be served from its existing facilities. Company may negotiate directly with such customers the amount to be charged for the bringing of the service to the customer.


3
 

ARTICLE 7.  LIABILITY AND INDEMNJFICA TION

7.1	Company  shall,  at  all  times,  keep  in  effect  the  following  types  of  insurance
coverage:

I.	Workmen's Compensation upon its employees engaged in any manner  in the installation or servicing of its plant and equipment within the City of Beulah, North Dakota.

2.		Property damage liability insurance to the extent of Three Hundred Thousand Dollars ($300,000.00) as to each occurrence and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate, and personal injury liability insurance to the extent of Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) as to each occurrence and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate. Excess bodily injury and property damage of One Million Dollars (1,000,000.00) each occurrence and One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) aggregate. Automobile bodily injury and property damage liability combined One Million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence.

7.2	Company shall indemnify, protect, defend,  and save harmless the City from and against losses and physical damage to property and bodily injury or death to persons , including payments made under any Workmen's Compensation law which may arise out of their erection, maintenance,  use or removal  of said attachments or poles within  the City, or by any other act of
)	Company , its agents or employees. Company shall carry insurance in the above described amounts
to protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments , costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result , directly or indirectly , from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage.  Company shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it from all claims under  the Workmen's Compensation laws in effect that may be applicabl e to Company. All insurance required must be and remain in full force and effect for the entire life of the rights granted hereunder and all insurance policies for the insurance coverage required under A(2) above must name the City as an additional insured. Insurance certificates evidencing such insurance coverage must be deposited with and kept on file by the City .

7.3	These damages or penalties include, but are not limited to, damages arising out of copyright, infringements, and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the Cable Television System authorized herein , whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this Ordinance.

7.4	In order for City to assert its rights to be indemnified, defended, and held harmless, City must, with respect to each claim, promptly notify Company in writing of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right.




4
 

ARTICLE 8. GENERAL SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS

The facilities used by the Company must have a minimum capacity of 57 channels. In addition , Company agrees to complete an upgrade to the facilities no later than 18 months from the date of this Franchise, wherein the upgraded services are to be at least comparable to those offered by Company to other similar size communities within a 50 mile radius.

ARTICLE 9. TECHNICAL STANDARDS

9.1	Grantee shall be governed by technical standards established by the FCC.

9.2	Company's methods and schedules for testin g the System must be in compliance with the reasonable standards accepted  in the industry.

9.3	The system must produce, to the extent allowable, a signal at each subscriber's home or place of business that is materially undistorted and free from ghost images, without material degradation of color fidelity. System must also produce a sound signal that is materially undistorted. Company, at its own expense, shall install and maintain the system so as not to interfere with any subscriber's receipt of local broadcast stations.

ARTICLE 10. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM

I 0.0 I  The  Company  shall  render  efficient  service,  make  repairs  promptly,  and  interrupt
)	service only for good cause and for the shortest possible time. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, should be preceded by notice and occur only during periods of minimum use of the system. A record must be maintained for all service interruption s and said record must, upon reasonable notice, be made available to the City Auditor.

I 0.02 A toll-free or collect telephone number for the reception of complaints must be provided to subscribers and Company shall maintain a repair service capable of responding to subscriber complaints , billing requests, or requests for service within 24 hou rs exclusive of Sundays and holidays, after receipt of the complaint or request. Company shall investigate and resolve all complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunction , billing disputes and other matters pursuant to the procedure set forth in this Ordinance. Company will bear the costs included in making such repairs, adjustments or installations unless Company deems such repairs necessary due to gross neglect or abuse by the subscriber. All costs for repairs necessary due to gross neglect or abuse by the subscriber will be borne by the subscriber. Service requests involvin g a loss of service affecting more than one subscriber on the same feeder line will be dealt with as soon as possible.  All other complaints relating to service will be, if possible, rectified within one
(I) day, exclusive  of Sundays  and  holidays .   Jn  the event a subscriber  is without  service,
mainten ance calls must be made, if practicable, seven days a week. For purposes of this Article, "without service" means a material and substantial degradation throughout the basic cable service, or in one or more premium services.


5
 

I 0.03 Company shall maintain at least one serviceman residing within the city limits of the
City of Beulah.

I 0.04 Company shall furnish each subscriber at the time service is installed, written instructions that clearly set forth procedures,  for  making  inquiries  or  complaints,  including  the name, address and telephone number of the office to which such inquires  or  complaints  are addressed.

I 0.05 All cables which are initially  installed on the ground must be buried within 45 days, except for those lines laid in the winter which must be buried within 45 days from May 15. Installation of main cables will be buried  at depths between  24  inches and  36 inches.  Drop  lines into homes  must be buried  at a minimum  depth of  12 inches.

ARTICLE   I  I.   SERVICE TO SCHOOLS AND  CITY

11.0I The Company shall, subject to the line extension provisions of Article 6, provide basic cable service at no cost to public and private schools within the City, at one terminal junction of each school building, for educational purposes upon request of the school system .

11.2	Company shall, subject to the line extension provisions of Article 6, also provide to the City without charge, at three (3) City-owned buildings other than a hospital , nursing home, apartment or building at the airport, to be selected by the City Counci l of Beulah , one junction terminal to said building and shall also furnish to the building, without charge, basic cable service
)	to all sets connected within such building to the terminal junction.

11.3	The Company shall allocate one channel to the City as a public, educationa l or governmental access channel. Until such time as the City files a written request with the company for full-time use of the channel , Company shall have the right to use that portion of the channel capacity that is not being used by the City. Company shall have a reasonab le period of time after notification to vacate its use of the channel. Company shall assist the City in obtaining the necessary licenses and frequency clearance to enable the City to use said channel.  Company agrees to provide City, as soon hereafter as feasible, the basic equipment needed for the operation of the community access channel, which will become the City's equipment. "Equipment" does  not include camera nor microphone equipment. Company will install the equipment and  train operators to the best of our ability. The City agrees to indemnify Company for damages  to Company resulting from misuse of the equipment. City agrees to indemnify Company against copyright and intellectual property licensing fees incurred by City or users  in operation of the commun ity access channel. City warrants that no community access programming will knowingly be obscene or libelous and agrees to indemnify Company for actual damages from the airing of such obscene or libelous material.






6
 

ARTICLE 12.  EMERGENCY  USE OF FACILITIES

In the case of any emergency or disaster, the Company shall, upon request of the City Council, make avai lable its facilities to the City an emergency use during the emergency or disaster. If the City wishes to operate a Civil Emergency Alert System on a plan that is mutually acceptable to the City and Company and provides Company with the necessary equipment for such system, Company will permit the system to be used on the cable system .

ARTICLE  13.  SAFETY REQUIREMENTS

The Company shat I , at all times, employ the standard of care attendant to the risks involved and shall use and maintain commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damages, injuries or nuisances to the public.

ARTICLE  14.  LIMITATIONS  ON RIGHTS GRANTED

14.0I All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the Company within the City must be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference w ith the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places, and said facilities must be removed by Company, at Company's expen se, whenever the City Street Commissioner or Engineer reasonably finds that the same restrict or obstruct the operation or location of any futures streets or public places in the City of
)	Beulah, North Dakota.

14.2	Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system must be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the Nationa l Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, and such applicable Ordinances and  regulations of the City of Beulah , North Dakota, affecting electrica l installation, wh ich may be presently in effect, or changed by future ordinances.

14.3	In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in manner approved by the City Street Commissioner or Engineer, promptly replace and restore such street, sidewa lk, all ey, public way, or paved areas in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done.

14.4	If at any time during the period of this Ordinance the City lawfully elects to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, the Company, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.

14.5	The Company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City or any person who wishes to remove trees or structures from their property, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings or tree removal. The expense
7
 

)		of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires must be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Company has the authority to require such payment in advance. The Company should be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

14.6	Nothing contained in the Franchise is to be deemed to empower or authorize Company to cut or trim and trees, ornamental or otherwise, in any of the streets, alleys or public highways, and all trimming of trees must be done pursuant to the Beulah City Ordinances.

14.7	Company shall, at its expense, within the time schedule required by the City, protect , support, temporarily disconnect , relocate on the same street, alley or public place, or remove from the street, alley or public place, any prope1ty of Company when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction , change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or any other types of structures or improvements by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity, or other structure of public improvement; provided , however, that Company will in all cases have the privileges and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of Company in place as hereinafter provided. If a vacation occurs for a private business, the Company will be reimbursed for cost.

14.8	In all sections of the City where the City designates an area where all presently above ground services are to be placed underground, the Company shall place its wires undergroun d on the same time sched ule and on the same conditions that are applicable to the providers of other
)	above ground services in the designated areas.

14.9	In the event that the use of any part of the system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of this Ordinance, or the rights granted hereunder have been terminated, canceled or have expired, Company shall, subject to the rights of the City to acquire or transfer the system as specified in Article 18, promptly remove from the streets, or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the City may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, Company shall promptly restore the street or other area form which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the City, at Company 's expense.

14.10	Any property of Company to be abandoned in place must be abandon ed in such a manner as the City may prescribe. Upon permanent abandonment of the property of Company in place, Company shall submi t to the City an instrument, to be approved by the City, transferring to the City the ownership of such property.

14.11	Nothing in the Franchise may be construed to prevent City from constructing sewers, grading, paving, repairing and/or altering any street, or laying down, repairing or removing water mains, or constructing or establishing any other public work . All such work will be done, insofar as practicable , in such manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent the free use and operation of the
8

)
 

poles, wires, conduits, conductors, pipes or appurtenances of Company . The City will not be responsible for any damages caused to Company or to Company's facilities, and Company shall hold City harmless from all claims, damages, and costs, including attorney's fees, th at City may incur as the result of any damages to Company's facilities.

14.12 If any property of Company herein interferes with the construction or repair of any street or improvement , thirty (30) days notice must be given to Company  by City and all such poles, wires, conduits, or other appliances and faci lities must be removed or replaced by Company in a manner as directed by the City so that the same does not interfere with the said public work of City, and the removal or repl acement will be at the expense of Company herein .

ARTICLE  15.  OWNERSHIP AND REMOVAL OF FACILITIES

Except as otherwise agreed in writing at the time of installation , all cable and passive equipment for cable television reception servi ce installed by Company at a subscriber's location remain the property of Company and Company has the right to remove said cable and equipment. Company has the right , at any time, to discla im any further ownership rights to the interior wiring and specified equipment and fittings at a subscriber's residence or other building by giving written notice to the subscriber. Once such a noti ce i s given, the interior wiring and any equipment or fitting specified in the notice will becom e the property of the subscriber without any payment obligation s on the part of the subscriber . Provided, however, that Company has the right, as long as it is providing service to the premises , to use said interior wiring and specified equipment without charge.   Upon termination of service to a subscriber, the Company shall , upon the
)	subscriber's request and subject to FCC regulations, promptly  remove all  its above  ground
facilities and equipment that are external to the building.

ARTICLE 16. ASSIGNMENT OF ORDINAN CE

The Company cannot assi gn this Ordinance to another person without prior approval of the
City Council , which approval will not be unrea sonably withheld.

ARTICLE 17. PAYM ENT TO THE CITY

17.01 During the term of the rights granted hereunder, and as long as the Compan y operates said system, the Company shall pay, as compensation to the City, a sum equal to three percent (3%) of the annual total gross receipts of the cable system. "Gross Receipts" consists of those revenu es derived from the monthl y servi ce charges pa id by subscribers for ba sic cable service and premium pay services, such as Showtime. Gross receipts does not include revenues received as installation charges, leased chann el fees, fees for reconnections, inspections, repairs or modifications of any installation , or any other charges for services provided by Company to subscribers and all State and Federal taxes relating thereto, including the fee imposed by thi s section.



9
 

)		17.02 The payments that Company makes to the City are in lieu of any occupation tax , license tax, or similar levy by the City and will be paid on a monthly basis based on the preceding years gross subscriber revenues. Upon completion of Company's audit, Company shall pay to the City within 15 days, the balance due, if any, for the operating year covered by the audit as shown by the statement of Company's auditor.

This amount payable by the Company to the City is the sole amount payable for all of its rights under this Ordinance including, but not limited to, the use of the streets and other facilities of the City in the operation of the Cable System and for the municipal supervision thereof and is in lieu of any other occupational tax.

17.3	Notwithstanding the annual gross receipts fee or tax payable hereunder, if the Company is legally obligated to collect or pay any sales tax or other taxes, the Company has the right to charge the subscribers an additional amount equal to such tax.

17.4	No acceptance of any payment may be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor may acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for further or additional sum s payable under the provisions of this Ordinance. The Company's gross receipts as defined in Article 17.01 and its subscriber records are subject to audit and recomputation by the City .

17.5	City reserves the right to amend, by passage of a separate ordinance, the amount of the compensation listed in Article 17.0I at any time, upon notice to the Company. Any changes to
)	Section 17.01 shall be within the limitation s set forth in 47 U .S.C. 542.

ARTICLE 18. DURATION AND RENEWAL OF ORDINANCE

The rights granted to Company herein will, except as provided in this Section, terminate fifteen (15) years from the effective date of this Ordinance which Ordinance is subject to renewa l pursuant to the provisions of the Cable Communication s Policy Act of 1984, as amended , applicable to new ordinances that are in the nature of a franchise. Pending final completion of renewal proceeding s, this Ordinance wit I remain in effect even if the original fifteen ( 15) year term has expired . Ifthis Ordinance is not renewed, or it is revoked for cause by the City, the transfer of Grantee's system is to be governed by Section 627 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended.

ARTICLE 19. ERECTION, REMOVAL AND COMMON USE OF POLES

19.1	No poles or other wire-holding structures may be erected by the Company without prior approval of the designated representative of the City Council with regard to locations, hei ght, type or any other pertinent aspect, which approval may not be unreasonably withheld . However, no locations of any pole or wire-holding structure of the Company is a vested interest and such poles or structures must be removed or modifi ed by the Company at its own expense whenever the


10
 

City Council  or its designated  representative  determines  that the public  convenience  would  be
enhanced thereby.

19.2	Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing in use in serving the City are available for use by Company, but it does not make arrangements for such use, the City Council may require the Company to use such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby and the te1ms of the use available to the Company are just and reasonable.

19.3	Where the City or a public utility serving the City desires to make use of poles or other wire-holding structures of the Company but agreement therefore with the Company cannot be reached, the City Council may require the Company to permit such use for such consideration as is just and reasonable and upon such terms as the Council determines the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with the Company's operations.

ARTICLES 20. RATES

20.1	Company shall at all times maintain on file with the City Auditor a schedule setting forth all rates and charges to be made to subscribers for basic cable service, including installation charges.

20.2	During the term hereof, Company shall comply with the rate regulation  rules of the
Federal  Communications  Commission.
)
20.3	The Company has the right to pass along to subscribers state and local sales taxes.

20.4	The monthly rate set forth  in  subsection   I  above  is payable  in advance.

20.5	The Company shall not discriminate in rates between customers of the same category except to the extent permitted by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended, The Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended , and Federal Communications Commission regulations.

ARTICLE  21.	MISCELLANEOUS  AND  SPECIAL  PROVISIONS  FOR  THE ClTY  OF
BEULAH

21.0 I Company's technical ability, financial condition  and  legal qualifications , were considered and approved by the City Council in a full public proceeding which afforded reasonable notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard.

21.2	Company currently does not collect nor distribute consumer data. Company agrees to notify the City, in advance, should this policy change. City retains the right to limit distribution of consumer data.


11
 

21.3	Company agrees to allow City to provide billing inserts to Company on request and on limited occasions. Company retains the right to control size and weight restrictions on the inserts.

21.4	Company agrees to provide City an  annual report of donations and activities of Company in the City.

ARTICLE 22. MODIFICATION OF OBLIGATIONS

In addition to any other remedies provided by law or regulation, Company's obligations under this Ordinance may be modified, at its request , in accordance with Section 625 of Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as it now exists, or as hereafter amended. The terms of this agreement may be modified following negotiations between City and Company. All modifications must be mutually agreed upon and in writing to be effective.

ART I CLES  23.    SEVERABILITY

23.1	I City's Right to Revoke. City reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to terminate and cancel the Franchise and all rights and privi leges of the Franchise in the event:

I.	Company violates any material provision of the Franch ise;

 


)





























...)
 
2.	Company practices any fraud or deceit upon City;

3.	Company is adjudged bankrupt; or

4.     Company misrepresents a material fact in the application for, negotiation of or administration of the Franchise.

23.2	Procedures for Revocation and Term ination.

1.	City shall provide Company with a written notice of the cause for termination and its intention to terminate the Franchise and shall allow the Company a minimum of thirty (30) days after service of the notice in which to correct the violation.

2.	Company must be provided with an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before the City Council prior to the termination of the Franchise. The City will hear any persons interested therein, and determine whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect to correct the violation by the Company was without reasonable cause.

3.	If such failure, refusal or neglect by Company to comply within such time was with reasonable cause, City shall direct Company to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable.


12
 

4.	If City determines such failure, refusal or negl ect by Company was without reasonable cause, then City may, by Resolution declare that the Franchise of Company will be terminated unless there is compliance by Company within a reasonable period as City may establish.

ARTICLE 24. FORECLOSURE AND RECEIVERSHIP

24.0 l Foreclosure. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sa le of all or a part of System, Company shall notify City of this fact and such notification will be treated as a notification that a change in control of Company has taken place, and the provision s of the Franchise governing the consent to transfer or change in ownership will apply without regard to how such transfer or change in ownership occurred.

24.2	Receivership .

1.	City has the right to cancel this Franchise one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of company, whether in receivership, reorganization , bankruptcy , or other action or proceeding , unless such receivership or trusteeship has been vacated prior to the expiration of said one hundred twenty (120) days, or unless:

a.	Within one hundred twenty ( 120) days after his election or appointment, such receiver or trustee has fully complied with all the provisions of
)	the Franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder; and

b.	Such receiver or trustee, within said one hundred twenty (120) days, has executed an agreement duly approved by the Court havin g jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of the Franchise.

2.	In the case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property and equipment of the Company, or any part thereof, City may serve notice of termination upon the Company and the successful bidder at such sale, in which event the Franchise herein granted and all rights and privileges of the Company h ereunder will cease and terminate thirty (30) days after service of such notice, unless:

a.	City has approved the transfer of this Franchise; and

b.	The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with City to assume and be bound by all the terms and conditions of this Franchise.






13
 

ARTICLE 25.  SEVERAB ILITY

Ifany Section, subsection , sentence, clause, phrase or portion of thi s Ordinance is, for any reason , held invalid or unconstitutional by any couit of competent jurisdiction , or is superseded or preempted by Federal Comm unication s Commission regulation , that portion will be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and the holdin g will not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof.

ARTICLE 26. PUBLICATION

The Company shall assume the cost of any required publication of this Ordinance. ARTICLE 27. WRITTEN NOTICE
All notices , reports or demands required to be given in writing under the Franchise will be deemed to be given when delivered personally to any officer of Company or City, or when forty­ eight (48) hours have elapsed after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid, addressed to the party to which notice is being given , as follows:

If to Company:	Midcontinent  Communications
410 S. Phillips
Sioux Falls, South Dakota 57117
)
If to City:	City Auditor
P.O. Box 910
Beulah, North Dakota 58523

The addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as provided in this section.

ARTICLE 28. EQUAL PROTECTION

If the City enters into a franchise, permit, license authorization, or other agreement of any kind with any other person or entity other than the Company to enter into the City's public rights of way or utility easements for  the purpose of constructing or operat ing a Cable System or providing cable or other telecommunication s service to any part of the City, the material provisions thereof must be reasonably comparable to those contained herein , in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competition advantage over another, and to provide all pa1ties equal protection under the law.






14
 
)	ARTICLES 29. ORDINANCE REPEAL

All Ord inances, or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repeal ed.















Introduction and First Reading:   March 20, 20 17

Final Passage:Apr il 3, 20 17

Effective Date: Apr il 3, 20 1 7





ACCEPTED:  This franchise is accepted and we agree to be bound by its terms and conditions.
Dated:	"/·1 r·17	MIDCONTINENT  COMMUN ICATIONS







r, llC
Manager Partner of Midcontinent Communications















15
 


ORDINANCE NO. 424



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING CHAPTER XI., WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM, OF THE 1977 REVISED BEULAH MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE CITY COUNCIL  OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:

THAT   CHAPTER   XI   OF  THE   1977  REVISED   BEULAH   MUNICIPAL ORDINANCES BE AMENDED AND RE-ENACTED TO READ AS FOLLOWS:









































1
)
 





CHAPTER XI. WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM ARTICLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Section




















)
 
11-10l Definitions
11-102	Scope of Utilities
11-103	Rules and Regulations 11-104 Assumed Use
11-105	Unauthorized Use Prohibited
11-106	Equipment Damage or Trespass Prohibited
11-107	Emergency Service Interruption or Restriction 11-108 Resale Prohibited
11-109	Rates and Charges for Consumption of Utilities
11-110	Liability for Rates and Charges
11-111	Rates and Charges, Right to Appeal 11-112 Rates and Charges, Used For
11-113	Service Discontinuance
11-114	Payment Provisions
11-115	Claims  for Defective  Service 11-116 Right to Enter _
11-117	System Maintenance Responsibility and Liability
11-118	Excavation  for Repair, Maintenance,  or Connection  to Water  or Sewer Lines
11-119	Plumbing Code
 

ARTICLE 2   WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION UTILITY

Section	11-201 Water Supply and Distribution Utility Established 11-202 Water Utility Fund Established
11-203 Rates and Charges for Water Utility, Use Of 11-204 Application for Water Service
11-205	Water Meters
11-206	Private Fire Protection Systems

ARTICLE 3 SEWER AND WASTEWATER UTILITY

 
Section









)
 
11-301	Wastewater Utility Established
11-302	Wastewater Utility Fund Established
11-303	Rates and Charges for Wastewater Utility, Use Of 11-304 Application for Wastewater Utility Service
11-305	Public and Private Drains
11-306	Obstruction of Wastewater Utility System Prohibited

2
 



11-307	Damage to Wastewater Utility Prohibited

ARTICLE 4   GENERAL PENALTY PROVISION

Section	11-401 General Penalty Provision



















































3
 





ARTICLE 1.	GENERAL  PROVISIONS

11-101	Definitions

"City" refers to the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota

"Water main"  refers to the piping used to transmit and distribute water to the storage facilities outside the treatment plant, and to the various users attached to the distribution piping. Water mains do not include the main piping within mobile  home parks, condominium complexes, and other privately owned developments.

"Sewer main" refers to  the collection system and force mains that collect and transport sewage to the points of final treatment. The sewage is collected from the residential, schools, and business users, and from mobile home parks, condominium complexes, and other privately owned developments. The city sewerage mains do not include the main collection piping within those developments.

11-102	Scope of Utilities

The properties of the City Water and Wastewater Department and all future improvements, extensions, and enlargements thereof, together with all cash and other assets held in the City's Water Fund and Wastewater Fund and all moneys to be derived thereafter from the services, facilities, products, and by-products of said utility, shall be and are hereby appropriated and dedicated to the purpose of ensuring the public health, safety, and welfare by furnishing and making available water and wastewater service to the City and its inhabitants and industries. Said utilities shall at all times be under the management and control of the City Council of the City of Beulah and shall by it be operated and maintained in such manner as to provide its service with maximum efficiency and at the minimum cost which is compatible with the plan of operation described herein.

11-103	Rules and Regulations

1.	The City Council for the City of Beulah has the authority to establish the rules, regulations,	standards, and specifications necessary for the installation, construction, and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the City within or without the City and under the management of the City Council. The rules, regulations, standards, specifications, or ordinances must be filed in the office of the City Auditor. Any violation of the rules, regulations, standards, specifications, or ordinances is an infraction.

2.	Each person applying for water or wastewater  service from this utility, and every


4
 




owner of property for which such application is made, shall be deemed by such application to consent to all the rules, regulations, and rates contained in the resolutions or ordinances of the City and to any modification thereof, and to all rules regulations, or rates duly adopted by the City.

11-104	Assumed  Use

All premises connected to any utility service of the City are assumed to be using the utility service and the owner or occupant shall be charged as such so long as the premises remain connected with the utility service.

11-105	Unauthorized  Use Prohibited

Any person whose application for utility services offered by the City who uses the utility service for a purpose other than stated or allowable under the municipal ordinances is guilty of an infraction.

11-106	Equipment Damage or Trespass Prohibited

It shall be an infraction for a person to open or close a water hydrant or water valve or to tamper with a utility service furnished by the City without first obtaining permission from an authorized City Official or to damage or trespass upon any equipment or premises belonging to the City connected with any utility service.

11-107	Emergency Service Interruption or Restriction

The City, by and through the Water/Wastewater Department or duly authorized City Official, hereby reserves the right to, at any time, restrict or prevent the use of any utility service, including water and wastewater service, furnished by the City  during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. The City reserves the right to interrupt or restrict utility service without notice in the case of emergencies. When an interruption in utility service is necessary for the maintenance and improvement of the utility system, affected customers will be notified as circumstances permit.

11-108	Resale Prohibited

It shall be unlawful to resell a utility service obtained by the City except upon express consent and permission by the City Council of the City of Beulah.

11-109	Rates and Charges for Consumption of Utilities

Water, wastewater, and water meter reserve rates shall be fixed by resolution of the

5
_)
 




City Council and the City reserves the right to change the rates from time to time as it deems necessary. The resolution fixing water, wastewater, and water meter reserve rates shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours. Said monthly rates and charges for water and wastewater service and all subsequent amendments  thereto shall become effective when notice has been given by publication in the official newspaper of the City.

11-110	Liability for Rates and Charges

The owner(s) of all real property in the City furnished water and/or wastewater service or service line repairs shall be responsible for the payment of any and all such charges regardless of who the occupant, tenant, or consumer of said utility may be.  No contract entered into between the owner of the property and his/her tenant whereby the liability for such charges is altered, charged, or amended shall in any way affect the owner's liability hereunder. Owners of premises where water and/or wastewater service(s) are supplied shall notify the Water/Wastewater Department or the City Auditor in case any tenant moves from said premises, prior to such moving. On request of the owner or owners, the City Auditor will bill or cause to be billed  the occupant or tenant for such charges, but if such charges are not paid when due by the occupant or tenant, the owner(s) shall be responsible for such charges and they shall be assessed to the property served. It shall be the duty of the City Auditor to certify to the County Auditor such water or service charges in the same manner and at the same time as other assessments are certified, and they shall be assessed and collected in the same manner.

11-111	Rates and Charges, Right to Appeal

The owner or occupant of any premise who, by reason of special circumstances, finds the foregoing utility rates unjust or inequitable as applied to his/her premises, may make written application to the City Council for adjustment. Said application must state such circumstances and request a different basis of charges for utility services to his/her premises. If such application be approved by the City Council, the City Council shall by majority vote fix and establish fair and equitable rates for such premises during the period of such special circumstances.

11-112	Rates and Charges, Used for

The rates and charges for service and availability of the respective utility shall at all times be imposed and collected according to schedules which are reasonable and are adequate to produce net revenues sufficient for the payment of all obligations to which said net revenues have been pledged, with interest thereon, and to maintain  reserves securing such payments, in accordance with the ordinances or resolutions of the City authorizing the issuance of said obligations. Moneys in the specific utility fund may be also  used  for  the  repair,  enlargement,  alteration,  improvement,  and  extension  of  the


6
 




corresponding utility and may be invested in the manner provided by N.D.C.C. § 40-33- 12, and acts amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto. Any cash surplus resulting from the utility over and above the amount necessary to provide adequately for the operation and maintenance of the corresponding utility for the principal and interest and reserve requirements of all obligations for which net utility revenues have been pledged, and for the repair, enlargement, alteration, improvement, and extension of the corresponding utility, may be transferred to other funds of the City at the times and in the manner prescribed by said N.D.C.C. § 40-33-12 .

11-113	Service Discontinuance

1.	The City has the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any water or wastewater utility service for the following reasons:
a.	Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law.
b.	Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service.
c.	Nonpayment of bills for consumption, service, repairs, or any combination thereof.
d.	Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect  pipes,
fixtures, appliances, or otherwise.
e.	Damaging   or   tampering   with   any   meter,   seal,   or   other   equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service.
)	f.  Theft or diversion and/or use of utility service without payment.
g.	Vacancy of premises.
h.	Failure of consumer or owner of the property to permit entry for service, installation, maintenance, or replacement of equipment related to water or wastewater utilities, including, but not limited to, water meters, water meter reading equipment, drains, or connections to the wastewater utility.
2.	The City shall provide prior notice to the consumer or owner of the property in writing by regular mail to the address shown on billing records at least 10 (ten) days prior to discontinuance of water or wastewater service.
3.	Any consumer or owner wishing to discontinue the use of any municipal utility service must give written notice to the City. Failure to do so renders said owner or consumer liable for payment of all utility bills until such time as notice is given.
4.	Any time service has been discontinued,  either for violation  of this Section or at
the request of the property owner, it shall not be resumed except upon payment of a non-refundable  re-connection fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be payable to the City Auditor.
5.	It is expressly provided that the City shall not be liable under any circumstances
for a deficiency or failure in the supply of water, whether by shutting off of utility service to make repairs or connections, not for any other cause whatsoever.





7
)
 



11-114	Payment Provisions

1.	A statement for utility services furnished by the City shall be issued monthly. The amount shown on each statement shall be due and payable to the City of Beulah on or before the 1oth day of each month.
2.	If not paid by the 10th day of each month, utility services to such premises may be discontinued by the City following reasonable prior notice to the consumer or owner in accordance with Section 11-113.
3.	Upon  termination  of service,  and  upon  payment  of any  unpaid  or outstanding
utility charges, the remaining balance of said deposit shall be due and payable to the depositor immediately. Failure to pay any unpaid or outstanding utility charges within thirty (30) days of the final monthly statement shall result in the outstanding balance for utility charges being deducted from the deposit, and the remaining balance of said deposit, if any, shall be due and payable to the depositor immediately.

11-115	Claims for Defective Service

All claims for defective utility service shall be made in writing and filed with the City Auditor on or before the 10th day of the month immediately succeeding such defective service, or be deemed waived by the claimant.   It shall be the duty of the City
)	Auditor  to have  investigated  the facts alleged  in  any  claim  for defective  service, and determine the amount,  if any, which  should  be  refunded  to the claimant  by reason  of
defective service.  A determination shall be reported to the City Council, and, if approved, such amount shall be allowed as a credit on the following bill or paid as other claims.

11-116	Right to Enter Premises

All authorized City employees or authorized contractor employees shall  have access at a reasonable time to all premises supplied with the utility service by the City for the purpose of service, inspection, installation, maintenance, or replacement of equipment related to water or wastewater utilities, including, but not limited to, water meters, water meter reading equipment, drains, or connections to the wastewater utility

11-117	System Maintenance Responsibility and Liability

1.	All sewers, drains, plumbing, and water pipes, which are hereafter laid, re-laid, or repaired through or on any private premises, shall be under  the  direction  and subject to the inspection by the City, by and through any duly authorized City employee. Any person who is causing the same to be laid, re-laid, or repaired as well as the person laying, re-laying, or repairing the same shall give said authorized City employee access to all reasonable facilities and sufficient notice for  inspecting  the  laying,  re-laying,  or  repairing  of the  same,  and  all  work  in


8
)
 



connection therewith.
2.	Equipment and Plumbing
a.	Property Owner:
i.	The cost of original installation of all plumbing, including, but not limited to, service pipes, stop cocks, curb stop, cap, plug, curb box, corporation cocks, and other fixtures, between the main and any service devices and all extensions made to such plumbing, as well as all maintenance and repairs, shall be entirely the responsibility of the property owner of the premises serviced,  although  such plumbing and services, as well as the water meters and meter reading equipment, shall at all reasonable times be subject to inspection by duly authorized representatives of the  City.  The service pipe, stops, connections, and other plumbing and fixtures must be laid, attached, kept in repair, and protected from frost by the property owner.
ll. All plumbing and equipment, including the curb stop, cap, plug, and curb box, need to be maintained and in working order, and accessible to authorized City representatives. Any damage as a result of a violation of this section shall be the responsibility of the
property owner.
m.   All plumbing,  connections to, and equipment  leading to and from
)	the  water  meter  are the  responsibility  of the  property  owner  and shall be maintained and kept in good working order.  Said property
owner  shall  immediately  notify  the  City  if they  suspect  that  the water meter is not working properly.
b.	City:
1. The City shall forever control all plumbing from the street main to curb. In the event there is no curb, then the City shall have control of the plumbing from the main to the property line.
ii. The City shall retain ownership and responsibility  for the  water meter and water meter reading equipment.
c.	Upon the City receiving knowledge of a defective service line, plumbing,
equipment, or apparatus, the property owner shall promptly be notified of the same in a reasonable manner. If immediate action is not taken by the property owner to repair or fix such defective service line, plumbing, equipment, or apparatus, or ifthe City cannot locate or contact the property owner in this regard, then the City shall have the right to shut off the defective service line or to enter upon said property to repair the same. The cost of said repair shall be billed to the owner of the property serviced by the defective line. If the cost of the repair is not paid within thirty  (30) days of the date of billing, the City shall have the right to discontinue water service until such time as the repair costs have been paid, or to have the charges assessed to the property in accordance with N.D.C.C. 40-05.


9
 




3.	Cost of excavation for repair or maintenance of water or sewer lines
When excavation is to repair water/sewer lines, it shall be the City's responsibility to repair and/or replace any and all pavement,  concrete, and/or asphalt damaged or removed from any street, curb, and/or gutter. The property owner shall be responsible for any sidewalk that must be repaired and/or replaced.

11-118	Excavation for Repair, Maintenance, or Connection to Water or Sewer
Lines

I. All contractors excavating in the public right-of-way with intention to connect, install, or repair sanitary sewer or water services shall conform to any and all North Dakota State Plumbing Board Rules and Regulations. All contractors shall be licensed and bonded and shalJ employ licensed installers to perform all work in conformance with City of Beulah specifications. Said Excavation Permit must be obtained prior to any boring or excavation.
2.	Any excavation upon private property for the express purpose of construction or
repair of any sewer or water service that is or will be connected to a City utility, including storm sewer, shall require an Excavation Permit before excavating. For larger sites, such as manufactured home parks or housing developments with a metered water main, permits are required for any drainage or sanitary  sewer facility installation or repair on private property. A permit is not required for water services located after the site's main water meter. All excavations must be inspected by the City Engineer.
3.	Excavation Permit Required
a.	Private Contractor: No plumber or other person sha11 remove any sidewalk, crosswalk, or pavement, or any portion thereof from, or make any excavation in, any street, avenue, alley, or public ground within the City for the purpose of accessing water or sewer lines; nor shall any person tap or make any perforation or opening of any kind in any sewer, water main, or any public or water service pipe within the boundaries of any street, avenue, alley, or public grounds, without first having obtained  an Excavation Permit from the City Building Official.
b.	Contractor  retained  by the City: A person,  plumber,  or contractor  under
contract with the City for the laying, extending, or relaying such sewer, water main, or public or private service pipe shall be required to obtain an annual Excavation Permit from the City Building Official, which shall be good for one (1) calendar year.
c.	Permit Fee: A permit fee shall be payable to the City Auditor in the amount
of fifty dollars ($50.00).
d.	Revocation: The City reserves the right to revoke said Excavation Permit if, in the judgment of the City Engineer, the work being performed under said Excavation Permit is of such poor quality that the City may be injured

10
)
 

 

thereby.
4.	Bonding: A person, plumber, or contractor must provide the original copy of a Performance Bond in the amount of $25,000.00 (also called a License and Permit Bond). It must state "in accordance with City of Beulah Ordinances." All work within the City right-of-way shall require a warranty period of two (2) years for each permit approved. The bond shall indemnify the City against all costs, loss, and damage caused by the excavation. The bond is to be further conditioned on the guarantee of the excavating party to keep the site in repair, as specified below, for two (2) years from the date of completion. If the contractor fails to restore or maintain the excavation as required, the  City may do the necessary work and recover all costs and expenses from the bond or the defaulting party. The bond is further conditioned upon the work of the excavator  being done in a good and workmanlike manner, and in accordance with specifications of materials as required by the City Engineer.
5.	Restoration of  Excavation Site: In excavating a street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, crosswalk, or pavement of whatever nature for the purposes of accessing water or sewer lines, the earth and removed pavement, concrete, and/or asphalt must be deposited in such a manner as to occasion the least inconvenience to the public. Any and all soil compaction shall be in conformity with specifications supplied by
the City Engineer. Any and all pavement, concrete, and/or asphalt to be removed must be cut by saw, or equivalent thereto,  so as to minimize the damage to any
)		street,  curb,   gutter,   sidewalk,   crosswalk,   or  pavement   of  whatever   nature, occasioned  by  such  excavation  and/or  removal.	When  excavation  is to  repair
water/sewer lines, it shall be the City's responsibility to repair and/or replace any and all pavement, concrete, and/or asphalt damaged or removed from any street, curb, and/or gutter. The property owner shall be responsible for any sidewalk that must be repaired and/or replaced.
6.	Anyone who shall make any excavation in any public right of way, or adjacent thereto, shall provide, and properly place, sufficient shoring and bracing to prevent caving, and upon refilling, remove the same.
7.	Traffic Control Devices: Anyone who shall make any excavation in any public right of way or adjacent thereto, shall provide and maintain sufficient guard fences, barricades, and signing to protect the workers, pedestrians, and travelling public. Said protective devices shall be in place and maintained during the daytime and nighttime hours, and be in accordance with the most recent version of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as published by the Federal  Highway Administration in the section dealing with "Temporary Traffic Control," including any additional illumination needed at night.

11-119	Plumbing Code

1.	Adoption of State Plumbing Code:
To promote and protect the public health, the most current State Plumbing

11
 




Code, which has been adopted by the State Plumbing Board and approved by the State Health Department, consisting of rules and regulations governing plumbing work, and the whole thereof, of which not less than one (1) copy is on file in the office of the City Auditor, is hereby adopted fully as if set out at length herein, and all plumbing work in the City shall comply with said Code.
2.	Enforcement
All plumbing work and all private sanitary drains now existing, or hereafter to be installed, altered, or repaired in any building or in or under any private property within the corporate limits of the City shall be under the supervision and regulation of the City Engineer, whose duty it shall be to enforce all the provisions of this Code relating thereto, and to promulgate rules and regulations as may be appropriate for the execution of the same.
3.	Changes in Existing Installations
The City Engineer is hereby given authority to order the repair, alteration, or removal of any sanitary sewer connection or plumbing, any connection to storm water sewer, or any private sanitary drain, which in his or her judgment is so installed or is in such condition as to be unsanitary,  or to constitute a public nuisance or menace to health. In case of such repair, alteration, or removal, if the Code is not observed and connections not properly executed by the owner or owners thereof, in accordance with the City Engineer's directions, the City Engineer may cause the same to have water and sewer utilities discontinued. It shall thereafter be unlawful for any person in any manner to use any such installation, or to supply water thereto, until the same shall have been put in a safe and sanitary condition, according to the City Engineer's direction.
4.	New Installations
All plumbing work and all excavations in the public streets or alleys, the cutting and replacing of pavement, laying of water and sewer connections and connections to storm water sewers and all construction of private sanitary drains within the corporate limits of the City shall be undertaken and executed only by a master plumber or other persons who have obtained a general license for such work together with the required permit(s) for each separate job, provided that the tapping of water mains and the placing of corporate cocks therein shall be done only under the direction of the City Engineer.

ARTICLE 2.  WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION UTILITY

11-201	Water Supply and Distribution Utility Established

It is hereby found and determined that the City of Beulah now owns and operates a waterworks,  water  mains,  and  water  distribution  system,  together  with  equipment  and


12
 




appliances connected therewith, as a public utility for the use of the municipal government and inhabitants of the City and other customers, in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 33 and 35 of Title 40 of the North Dakota Century Code, as amended; and under the provisions of said laws, the City is authorized to improve, better, and extend said utility and to pay the cost thereof in whole or in part by the issuance of revenue bonds, payable exclusively out of the net revenues of said utility upon  individual  properties within the City. The issuance of special improvement warrants or refunding improvement bonds payable from such special assessments and in part, if so determined by the City Council and approved by the necessary persons, from net revenues derived from such utility improvements.

11-202	Water Utility Fund Established

In furtherance of the operation of said utility and to facilitate the financing of improvements thereof, there is hereby created and shall be maintained on the official books and records of the City a separate and special fund to be designated as the "Water Utility Fund." Into said Fund there shall be created and paid as received the entire gross revenues from time to time derived from the operation of said utility, and from any future additions thereto and betterments thereof, including all income and receipts derived from rates and charges for services, facilities, products and by-products of the utility furnished or sold to the City and its inhabitants and all other customers, and for the availability thereof, and from sale of any of the properties of the utility not necessary to be retained, and from the investment of any of the moneys so collected; but such gross revenues shall not be deemed to include any sums realized from special assessments or taxes which may be levied or from the sale of bonds or other obligations which may be issued to finance improvements to said utility. All such gross revenues shall be deposited as received in a duly qualified depositary bank, and secured as required by law.

11-203	Rates and Charges for Water Utility, Use Of

The Water Utility shall at all times be so operated and maintained, and rates and charges for its services, facilities, products, and by-products shall be such as to make the utility self-supporting and self-perpetuating. Such charges from time to time imposed and collected shall be made and kept adequate to pay as incurred all costs of operation and maintenance of said water utility and to establish and maintain reasonable operating reserves; to produce net revenues which shall be sufficient at all times to pay promptly the principal and interest due on all obligations of the City incurred for the improvement, extension, and enlargement of said utility, to the extent that such obligations are according to their terms payable from said net revenues, and to establish and maintain adequate reserves for the security of said obligations. Charges may be set to produce surplus net revenues, over and above current principal, interest, and reserve requirements, in amounts sufficient to provide reasonable allowances for depreciation and replacement of the utility plus a reasonable return on the City's capital investment therein which surplus revenues,

13
)
 



when actually on hand, and to the extent that they are not required as a reserve for depreciation and replacement, may from time to time be appropriated by the City Council to pay or contribute to the cost of any other City functions, subject to limitations now or hereafter prescribed by law.

The foregoing shall not, however, be deemed or construed to preclude the City from defraying any part or all of the expense of any improvement, enlargement, or extension of the water and sewer utility by the levy of special assessments or taxes or the issuance of general obligation bonds , whenever and to the extent that such action is authorized in the manner provided by law and is deemed fair and equitable by the City Council.

11-204	Application for Water Service

1.	Property not currently connected:
a.	Any party desiring water service from the utility for premises not heretofore connected with the utility shall apply for a connection on a form provided by the City. Such application shall state an exact description of the premises to be served and the uses, both general and special, to which the water is to be put. The application shall be filed with the City Auditor. The City shall only accept and approve applications for properties located
)	within the city limits of the City of Beulah.   An application  shall not be approved for a connection to water or sewer lines of the City until the costs
of all water and sewer improvements have been paid or assessed to the property. The application shall be filed with the City Auditor, along with an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
b.	Connection Charges:
i.	Single family households: $500.00
ii.	Two family dwellings  and multiple family dwellings: $500.00 per dwelling unit.
iii.	Commercial  operations with a line tap of one (1) inch diameter or less: $1,500.00
1.	Connection charge shall increase $750.00  for  each additional half-inch of diameter of water service line, not to exceed  $7,500.00
2.	Property currently connected:
a.	Any party desiring water service from  the utility for premises currently connected with the utility shall apply for water service on a form provided by the City. Such application shall state an exact description of the premises to be served and the uses, both general and special, to which the water is to be put. The application shall be filed with the City Auditor, along with an application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
b.	A renter, tenant, or resident  other than the property  owner desiring water


14
 




services  for a  property  currently  connected  with  the  utility  shall  make written application pursuant to Section 11-201(2)(a).
3.	Deposit: Any party desiring municipal  utility services, upon application for such
service, shall deposit with the City Auditor as security for payment of charges to become due, the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).

11-205	Water Meters

1.	Each property receiving water service shall be issued a water meter and water meter reading equipment provided by the City. A water meter reserve fee shall be charged on the monthly utility bill with a rate provided and approved by resolution in accordance with Section 11-109. The water meter and reading equipment shall remain under the ownership of the City and shall be metered electronically.
2.	It shall be unlawful for any person to use water from any premises without the consent of the owner thereof, or to use water from the utility unless drawn through a meter installed in accordance with this Section.
3.	A water  meter  and/or  its reading  equipment  that  becomes  inoperable  must  be
reported to the City for repair. If damage to the water meter or reading equipment is due to negligence, tampering, freezing, or intentional destruction by the property owner or occupant, the property owner will be charged for the repair or replacement of the water meter reading equipment.
4.	All  water  meters  and  reading  equipment  shall  be  installed  and  maintained  in
accordance with the manufacturer specifications and the North Dakota State Plumbing Code. Such installation and maintenance shall be the sole responsibility of the City.
5.	Meters Tested for Accuracy:
a.	The owner or occupant of any premises may have the installed water meter tested for accuracy. The City shall provide the owner or occupant a temporary replacement water meter during the time period in which the original meter is being tested. The City shall follow the American Waterworks Association specifications for new and used water meters regarding recommendations on accuracy.
i.	If the original meter registers at or above the recommended accuracy level, then the owner or occupant shall reimburse the City
for the expenses  incurred for said meter testing as well as a fee, payable to the City Auditor, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). The original meter will then be re-installed and the temporary replacement meter shall be returned to the City.
ii. If the original meter registers below the  recommended  accuracy level, the City shalJ incur the expense of having the original meter tested and there shall be no fee due and payable by the owner or occupant. The defective original meter will be repaired or replaced by the City.

15
 



b.	The City may, of its own accord or upon reasonable suspicion that a water meter is providing inaccurate readings, have an installed water meter tested for accuracy or inspected by an employee of the City. The City shall be responsible to have the original meter removed and a  temporary replacement meter installed, and the City shall also be responsible  for having the original meter tested for accuracy. Refusal to allow a City employee to access the water meter or equipment in question may result in discontinuance of service to the premises.
6.	Read Monthly:
a.	The water meter in each residential and commercial premises shall be remotely  read  each month.   The meter  reading  will  determine  the water
usage for each month.
b.	A monthly utility statement shall be mailed to the customer billing water in an amount equal to the total of the following items:
i.	The minimum monthly charge;
ii.   Any installment due for connection or reconnection charges; and
iii. Any amount due for water consumed.

11-206	Private Fire Protection Systems

I . Private fire protection water system is defined as the water p1pmg, valves, hydrants, connections and other appurtenances which convey water from the water utility to hydrants, buildings, or structures so that the water may be used to provide fire protection either inside or outside the building.
2.	Hydrants and Catch Basins
Every person constructing areas under sidewalks or around comers must make provisions for the location of hydrants and catch basins on all streets and avenues, as directed by the City Engineer, and in laying walls of said areas, provisions must be made on the line of the front of the building, if produced or extended, for setting the hydrant so that the center of the hydrant post shall be sixteen (16) inches back from the face of the curb.
3.	Use of Private Fire Protection Systems, Restricted
Except for authorized City employees or for the purpose of private fire protection, no person shall operate or take water from a private fire protection system, including the fire hydrant, except in case of fire or for inspection, unless they have first obtained a permit to do so from the designated City official. All water removed pursuant to a permit shall be metered and paid for at rates established by resolution of the City Council.








16
)
 




ARTICLE3.  SEWER AND WASTEWATER  UTILITY

11-301	Wastewater Utility Established

It is hereby found and determined that the City of Beulah now owns and operates a municipal wastewater system, together with equipment  and  appliances  connected therewith, as a public utility for the use of the municipal  government and inhabitants of the City and other customers, in accordance with the provisions of Chapters 33 and 35 of Title 40 of the North Dakota Century Code, as amended; and under the provisions of said laws, the City is authorized to improve, better, and extend said utility and to pay the cost thereof in whole or in part by the issuance of revenue bonds, payable exclusively out of the net revenues of said utility upon individual properties within the City. The issuance of special improvement warrants or refunding improvement bonds payable from such special assessments and in part, if so  determined by the City Council and approved by the necessary persons, from net revenues derived from such utility improvements.

11-302	Wastewater Utility Fund Established

In furtherance of the operation of said utility and to facilitate the financing of improvements thereof, there is hereby created and shall be maintained  on  the  official books and records of the City a separate and special fund to be designated as the "Wastewater Fund". Into said Fund there shall be created and paid as received the entire gross revenues from time to time derived from the operation of said utility, and from any future additions thereto and betterments thereof, including all income and receipts derived from rates and charges for services, facilities, products and by-products of the utility furnished or sold to the City and its inhabitants and all other customers, and for the availability thereof, and from sale of any of the properties of the utility not necessary to be retained, and from the investment of any of the moneys so collected; but such gross revenues shall not be deemed to include any sums realized from special assessments or taxes which may be levied or from the sale of bonds or other obligations which may be issued to finance improvements to said utility.  All such gross revenues shall be deposited as received in a duly qualified depositary bank, and secured as required by law.

11-303	Rates and Charges for Wastewater Utility, Use Of

The Wastewater Utility shall at all times be so operated and maintained, and rates and charges for its services, facilities, products, and by-products shall be such as to make the utility self-supporting and self-perpetuating. Such charges from time to time imposed and collected shall be made and kept adequate to pay as incurred all costs of operation and maintenance of said wastewater utility and to establish and maintain reasonable operating reserves; to produce net revenues which shall be sufficient at all times to pay promptly the principal and interest  due on all obligations of the City incurred for the improvement, extension, and enlargement of said utility, to the extent that such obligations are according

17
 




to their terms payable from said net revenues, and to establish and maintain adequate reserves for the security of said obligations. Charges may be set to produce surplus net revenues, over and above current principal, interest, and reserve requirements, in amounts sufficient to provide reasonable allowances for depreciation and replacement of the utility plus a reasonable return on the City's capital investment therein which surplus revenues, when actually on hand, and to the extent that they are not required as a reserve for depreciation and replacement, may from time to time be appropriated by the City Council to pay or contribute to the cost of any other City functions, subject to limitations now or hereafter prescribed by law.

The foregoing shall not, however, be deemed or construed to preclude the City from defraying any part or all of the expense of any improvement, enlargement, or extension of the water and sewer utility by the levy of special assessments or taxes or the issuance of general obligation bonds, whenever and to the extent that such action is authorized in the manner provided by law and is deemed fair and equitable by the City Council.
11-304	Application for Wastewater Utility Service 4. Property not currently connected:
a.	Any party desiring wastewater service from the utility for premises not heretofore connected with the utility shall apply for a connection on a form provided by the City. Such application shall state an exact description of the premises to be served and the uses, both general and special, to which the wastewater is to be put. The application shall be filed with the City Auditor. The City shall only accept and approve applications for properties located within the city limits of the City of Beulah. An application shall not be approved for a connection to water or sewer lines of the City until the costs of all water and sewer improvements have been paid or assessed to the property.
b.	Connection Charges:
1.	Single family households: $250.00
ii.	Two family dwellings and multiple family dwellings: $250.00 per dwelling unit.
iii.	Commercial operations with a line tap of eight (8) inch diameter or
less: $500.00 per hookup 11-305	Private and Public Drains
Whenever any drain connected with any public sewer or drain becomes clogged,
obstructed, broken, or out of order, or detrimental to the use of the sewer or drain, or unfit for the purpose of drainage, the owner occupant, or person having control over any building, yard, lot or land, or other premises, which are drained by said drain, or sewer,

18
)
 




shall, when directed by the City Engineer or duly authorized City employee, remove, reconstruct, alter, cleanse, or repair said drain as the condition of the drain so requires. In case of neglect or refusal, the City Engineer or duly authorized City employee shall cause the same to be removed,  reconstructed, altered, cleaned, or repaired, if he detennines it harmful to the City drains and sewers. Said repair, cleaning, removal, reconstruction, or other action would be at the expense of the owner, agent, or occupant of the property.

11-306	Obstruction of Wastewater System Prohibited

1.	It shall be an infraction to place, throw, or deposit into any catch basin or man hole any butcher's offal or garbage, dead animals, kitchen slops, or any substance or obstruction of any kind.
2.	It shall be an infraction for an owner, agent, or occupant of any building, yard, lot,
land, or other premises which are drained into any building, sewer, or drain, to permit any substance or matter which may form a deposit or obstruction in any public sewer or drain, or would in any way damage or tend to destroy the usefulness of said sewer or drain, to flow or pass into the same.
3.	Any said owner, occupant, or other person shall, when directed by the City Engineer, within five (5) days after notice in writing, provide or repair said drain with sufficient catch basin to prevent said substance from passing into the drain or sewer which may cause an obstruction.

11-307	Damage to Wastewater System Prohibited

It shall be an infraction for any person to damage, break, or remove any portion of any catch basin, covering, gully grating, manhole, side entrance cover, or any portion of any sewer or drain, or to obstruct the mouth of any sewer or drain.




ARTICLE 4.  GENERAL PENALTY PROVISION

11-401            General Penalty Provision

Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than  one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every day that a violation of this Ordinance shall be continued shall constitute and be considered a separate infraction. A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or the regulations and restrictions made herein shall constitute the maintenance of a public nuisance and shall be an infraction.





19
..)
 





SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any provision ofthis Ordinance or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance or the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.



SEVERABILITY.  All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.

EFFECTIVE DATE.  The Ordinance shall be in full force and effect after its final passage and approval and publication of its title and penalty clause.

DATEDthis	/(o	dayofMay,2017.




11	2
DARRELL R. BJERKE, May



ATTEST:






 
First Reading: Second Reading: Publication Date:
 
May 1, 2017
May 15, 2017
May 25, 2017
 

Effective Date:	May 25, 2017
















20
)
 
ORD NANCE NO. 424

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING CERTAIN SECTIONS OF CHAPTER XI, ARTICLE 3 - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, AS AMENDED OF THE REVISED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA OF 1972.


ARTICLE 4.  GENERAL PENALTY PROVISION

11-401          General Penalty Provision

Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished py a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each and every day that a violation of this Ordinance shall be continued shall constitute and be considered a separate infraction. A violation of any provision of this Ordinance or the regulations and restrictions made herein shall constitute the maintenance of a public nuisance and shall be an infraction.

The title and penalty section of the above Ordinance is published in accordance with the Laws of the State of North Dakota.

 
DATED this 25th day of May, 2017.
 





THER FEREBEE, City Auditor City  of Beulah
 
CITY OF BEULAH, NORTH DAKOTA RESOLUTION NO. 2016-13

RESOLUTION ADJUSTING RATES AND CHARGES FOR WATER AND WASTE WATER SERVICES AS PROVIDED BY THE CITY OF BEULAH, NORTH DAKOTA


WHEREAS, the City of Beulah has an established enterprise for water and waste water
services provided to the residents and businesses in the City o.f Beulah.

WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Beulah has reviewed the revenues and expenditures of the water and waste water services enterprise and determined a rate increase is necessary to balance the aforementioned revenues and expenditures.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the City Council of the City of Beulah, North Dakota that the following monthly rates become effective on the 1st day of January, 2017. This Resolution shall be published in the City of Beulah 's official newspaper, pursuant to Ordinance #408, Chapter XI, Articles 3 and 4.

1.	All water furnished to consumers shall be charged at the rates provided for herein against both the owner of the property and the consumer thereof, but shall ultimately be the personal liability of the owner of the property.  The monthly base rate shall be $20.00 per month, plus
$3.50 per 1,000 gallons for all water used each month.   Provided , however, that as to each
)	premises in which there reside 2-family units having separate kitchen facilities, and to as which
premises all water is drawn through a single meter, the owner or occupant shall pay for water
consumed on such premises and for the availability of water service a minimum service charge of $40.00 per month. The same multiple formula as specified above for 2 units shall be used for any number of units in excess of 1 and beyond 2 units including mobile home courts.

2.	Waste water services furnished to consumers shall be charged at the rates provided for herein against both the owner of the property and the consumer thereof, which shall ultimately be the personal liability of the owner of the property. The monthly rate for waste water services shall be $13.00 per month. Provided , however , that as to each premises in which there reside 2 family units having separate kitchen facilities, and as to which premises all water is drawn through a single meter, the owner or occupant shall pay the monthly waste water service rate on such premises and for the availability of waste water services a monthly  charge of
$26.00 per month.  The same multiple formula as specified above for 2 units shall be used for
any number of units in excess of 1 and beyond 2 units including mobile home courts.

3.	The City of Beulah has established and shall hereafter maintain a water meter reserve account for water meter reader services provided to the residents and businesses in the City of Beulah.	All water and wastewater consumers shall be charged at the rates provided below against both the owner of the property and consumer thereof, which shall ultimately be the personal liability of the owner of the property.





Page 1of2
 
MONTHLY RATES PER METER TYPE
Water meter - 5/8" & 1"
Water meter - 1.5" & 2" - R2 Meter Water meter - 1.5" & 2" - C2 Meter Water meter - 3" - C2 Meter
 
Rate
$3.00
$7.00
$15.00
$20.00
 






The foregoing  resolution  was  offered  by  Council  member  Keller  and  seconded  by
Council member Frey and was declared carried on the following vote:

Ayes:     Schulz, Lenzen, Timmer, Morgan, Keller, Frey, Hoffer 	 Nays:	None 	 
 






)
ATTEST:



·
Heather Ferebee, City Auditor



Date Resolution Passed:  December 19, 2016 Date Resolution Published : December 29, 2016 Effective Date:           January 1, 2017















Page 2 of 2
 
ORDJNANCE NO. 425

AN ORDINANCE AUTHORIZING THE ISSUANCE OF UP TO $6,500,000 PARK FACILITIES SALES TAX REVENUE NOTES
TO FINANCE WELLNESS CENTER

WHEREAS, the Beulah City Coupcil is authorized under the Home Rule Charter and Ordinance No. 413 to levy a two percent (2%) sales and use tax on taxable sales within the City of Beulah, North Dakota (the "City"); and

WHEREAS, Ordinance 413 dedicatesone-half(l/2) of all revenues raised and collected from the two percent sales tax to payment of the original construction indebtedness resulting for the construction of the Beulah recreation center; and

WHEREAS, the City Council and tl).e Park District of the City of Beulah, North Dakota (the "Park District") have determined it necessary to construct and equip a wellness center pursuant to the terms of a Joint Powers Agreement between the City and the Park District; and

WHEREAS, the City Council has determined that it is necessary for the Park District to issue notes payable from future collections of its s les and use tax to finance the improvements .

NOW THEREFORE, THE BEULAH CITY COUNCIL HEREBY ORDAINS:

Section 1.  Authorization of Sales Tax Revenue Notes.	Pursuant to the provisions of the Home Rule Charter and Ordinance 413 of the City of Beulah, North Dakota ,the City hereby authorizes
,	the issuance of sales tax revenue notes of the Park District in an amount not exceeding $6,500,000 for the purpose of financing a wellness center an? related improvements. The notes may be sold at private negotiated sale or competitive sale.             :

Section 2. Source of Payment for th Notes. The notes shall be special, limited obligations, and unless paid from other sources, shall be payable from 100% of the revenues collected from one­ half (1/2) of the two percent sales and use imposed by Ordinance No. 413. The sales and use tax, and so much thereof as is necessary is hereby pledged to prompt payment of the principal of, premium, if any, and the interest on the notes. The Ci shall continue to levy and collect the sales and use taxes until the notes have been paid in full.

Section 3.  Further Action . The B9ard of Park Commissioners and the City Council shall adopt resolutions providing for the issuance nd sale of the notes and specifying the terms of the notes. The appropriate officers of the City are hereby authorized and directed to take all such action, execute, deliver, file and record all such documents, nublish all notices and otherwise carry out the intent of the Beulah City Council in the enactment of this Ordinance and the issuance of the notes including a Joint
Powers Agreement with the Park District.
 
4)0VED:
.
Mayor

. Introduction and First Reading: Second Reading:
Effective Date:
 








May l, 2017
May 15, 2017
May 15, 2017
 


Attest:
 
I'




ORDINANCE NO. 426

AN ORDINANCE REPEALING ORDINANCES 321, 309, AND 298, AND AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING ORDINANCE NO. 404 ESTABLISHING CLASSES OF LICENSES FOR THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES WITHIN THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.

BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE CITY COUNCIL  OF THE CITY OF BEULAH,

MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS:

1.	That Ordinance Nos. 321, 309, and 298 of the City Ordinances of the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota , are hereby repealed.
2.	That Ordinance No. 404 of the City Ordinances of the City of Beulah,  Mercer

County, North Dakota, is hereby amended and re-enacted as follows:

1.	DEFINITIONS . The following definition s shall apply when used  in this

ordinance:

)	a.	Beer - f}ny malt beverage containing more than one-half of one per cent of alcohol by volume.
b.	Liquor - Any alcoholic beverages, except beer, wine and sparklin g

wine.

c.	Wine - The alcoholic bevera ge obtained by fermentation of agricultural products containing natural or added sugar or such beverage fortified with brandy and containing not more than 24% alcohol by volume.
d.	Sparkling Wine - Wine made effervescent with carbon dioxide.

e.	Off-Sale - The sale of alcoholic beverages in the original package or  container  for  consumption  off  or  away  from  the  licensed

Page 1of4
 
premises where sold.

f.		On-Sale - The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises where sold.
g.	On/Off Sale - The sale of alcoholic beverages in the manner set

forth for "on-sale" and "off-sale".

2.	CLASSES OF LICENSE FOR THE SALE OF ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES.

The following classes of licenses and annual fees are established for the sale of alcoholic

beverages:

a.	CLASS I LICENSE: On/Off Sale beer, Wine, Sparkling Wine and Liquor
License Annual Fee - $1,200.00.

b.	CLASS  II LICENSE:   On-Sale  Beer,  Wine, Sparkling  Wine  and
)
Liquor

License Annual Fee - $1,075.00.

c.	CLASS III LICENSE:  Off-Sale Beer, Wine, Sparkling Wine and

Liquor.

License Annual Fee - $875.00.

d.	CLASS IV LICENSE: On-Sale Beer : May sell beer in a restaurant which is separated from the room in which said beer is opened or mixed and where gross sales of food are at least equal to gross sales of alcoholic beverages.
License Annual Fee - $525.00.



Page 2 of4
 



e.	CLASS V LICENSE: On-Sale Beer, wine, and Sparkling Wine License: May sell beer, wine, and sparkling wine in a restaurant which is separated from the room in which said beer, wine and sparkling wine are opened or mixed and where gross sales of food are at least equal to gross sales of alcoholic beverages.
License Annual Fee - $675.00.

3.	DUE DATE AND PRO-RATING OF LICENSE FEES. License fees shall be paid annually, in advance, and shall be due on July 1st of each year. Any license fee paid for a partial year shall be pro-rated on a monthl y basis, with any partial month counting as a full month .
4.	PENALTY SECTION.   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any
)
provision of this Ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to a fine of not more than One Thousand Dollars ($ 1,000.00), and a separate violation may be deemed committed for each day that a person violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance.
5.	EFFECTIVE DATE.  This ordinance shall be in full force and  effect after

publication of its title and penalty clause.

6.	REPEAL  OF  CONFLICTING  ORDINANCES .   All  ordinances  or parts  of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby rescinded and appealed.
7.	SAVINGS CLAUSE. If any provision of this ordinance or its application to

any person or circumstances is held  invalid, the remainder of the ordinance  or the



Page 3 of 4
 
application of the provision to other persons or circumstances is not affected.


 
ATTE;
OrHER FEREBEE, City Auditor



Introduction and First Reading: June 5, 2017 Second Reading : June 19, 2017
Publication Date: June 29, 2017

Effective Date: June 29, 2017


































Page 4 of 4
 
ORDINANCE NO. 427

AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 349 OF THE REVISED ORDINANCES OF 1972 TO THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, RELATING TO ESTABLISHMENT OF RULES AND REGULATIONS, IN REFERENCE TO MAINTENANCE OF CEMETERY LOTS AND SERVICES RENDERED AND ESTABLISHING  GUIDELINES FOR SAID SERVICES.

BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BEULAH CITY COUNCIL:

Ordinance No. 349, Cemetery Code of the City of Beulah, is hereby revised and re­ enacted to read:

Section 1. Definition

Whenever the word cemetery appears in this chapter it shall be construed to mean Beulah Cemetery tract, located at 724 County  Road  21, Beulah, North  Dakota,  except that the Catholic Cemetery tract shall not be considered part of the Beulah Cemetery for the purposes of this Ordinance.

Section 2. General

No person shall be buried in the cemetery, except as prescribed by Ordinance.
)	Any burial or other grave opening must comply with the provisions of this Ordinance,
and applicable state and federal laws and regulations.   The City Auditor's office shall act
as the cemetery secretary, and shall keep a local register of all burials in the cemetery,
showing as to each burial the name of the deceased , the date and location of bur al , and the date of death.

Section 3. Disclaimer

The City shall take every reasonable precaution to protect the property, including markers, monuments, and covers, of lot owners within the cemetery, but it distinctly disclaims all responsibility for loss or damage, whether direct or collatera l, from general maintenance services, from natural wear and tear, the acts of thieves, vandals, rioters or malicious mischief makers; from all acts of providence including but not limited to winds, tornadoes, cyclones, hail, snow, frost, fire, explosion or lightning; and from breakage or accident to equipment of any kind and character and from all causes beyond the City's reasonable control.
The City is not responsible for hiring, locating, or retaining a person or company
to open any grave for interment , disinterment, or relocation of a grave. The  City disclaims any and all responsibility for any damage caused during the course of opening any grave. Any person or company retained to open graves in the Beulah Cemetery shall be a licensed, bonded and insured contractor in the State of North Dakota.
 
Section 4.  General Care

The City shall not provide for the care of monuments or markers. It shall, however, keep the grass cut and also maintain the entire area in a neat and generally tidy condition .
Lot owners or members of their families are permitted to do any work not involving construction (and not otherwise prohibited by Ordinance 427 herein) on their own lots, either before or after interment. However, all of the work shall be subject to the general direction of the City Auditor.
Mausoleums, commonly called private vaults, shall not be permitted in the Beulah
Cemetery.

Section 5. Monuments and Markers Generally

Any stone exceeding one (1) foot in height, two (2) feet in length, or one (1) foot in thickness shall be classified as a monument. The foundation shall be built so as to provide a border five (5) inches in width around the bottom of the base of the monument, shall be adequate to permanentl y support the monument in true position, and shall be of a material approved by the City. Any stone with dimensions less than one (1) foot high, two (2) feet long, and not more than one (1) foot nor less than six (6) inches thick, shall be classified as a marker. All markers shall be set in ·a concrete or stone foundation, which shall have a five (5) inch concrete border around the marker, and the concrete border shall be flush with the level of the ground.

Section 6. Cemetery Guidelines

A.	Vaults, Covers and Monuments

1.	Vaults must be of material other than wood or fiberglass that will remain
in their original condition for many years must be used for all burials.

2.	Urn vaults are required for all burials of urns in the Beulah Cemetery.

3.	Covers shall not be pe1mitted in the Beulah Cemetery.

4.	Monuments shall be of a material approved by the City. (See Ordinance No. 427, Section 5.) They should be similar in style and size typical to the area. Permanent monuments, headstones, or a grave marker are required on each grave site within 24 months after burial. They shall be installed only by a qualified person under the direction of the City of Beulah City Auditor. Grave monument and foot marker must be placed within the perimeter boundaries of the grave lot.

5.	One (1) monument per lot or three (3) markers per lot, or a combination thereof approved by the City, are allowed. For military burials, one (1) monument and one (1) foot marker, or more as permitted by the City, is allowed per lot.



2
 

6.	Two (2) traditional full body vaults or three (3) urn vaults, or a combination thereof approved by the City, per lot are allowed.

7.	Persons wishing to install monuments, markers, or covers outside of the above parameters may submit a written request for a variance to the City Auditor's office. Said variance will be reviewed and decided upon by the Beulah City Council.

B.	Care and Decorations

1.	The grass cutting service is provided by the City of Beulah.

2.	All family members and acquaintances are encouraged to periodically inspect graves of relatives and friends, clean them, and work to enhance cemetery beautification.

3.	Artificial flowers and non-planted floral designs shall be allowed on or around the grave.

4.	Wooden flower boxes, wooden frame borders or fences of any kind will not be allowed on or around the grave area. No lot shall be defined by any fence, railing, coping, hedge, embankment, or depression, nor may trees or
)	shrubs be planted to define comers or boundaries.  No cement curbs or
wooden   frames  shall  be  permitted,   and  all  unsightly   curbs  shall  be
removed.

5.	No trees, plants, flowers, or shrubs shall be planted in the cemetery at any time. However, memorials for trees, shrubs, decorating, cleaning and care of  our deceased loved  ones are  encouraged  for beautification  of the cemetery under the direction of the City of Beulah.

6.	To prevent damage to adjoining lots and to preserve the beauty of the grounds, no trees or shrubs shall be planted on lots unless specifically authorized by the City.

7.	Withered plants and flowers will be removed from lots, vases, and urns, unless said vase or urn is located upon the monument , marker, or foundation.

8.	The City may remove or order removed all floral designs, trees, shrubs, plants, or foliage of any  kind, and may also remove any non-green decoration not otherwise allowed for herein or approved by the City as soon as such items become unsightly, interfere with maintenance activities, become detrimental or diseased, in the opinion of City staff. The





3
 
City has no responsibility  to return to  its owners  any  item the  City so
removes or orders removed.

C.	Monument Contractors

Monument companies and vendors shall be responsible for placement of markers in compliance with City of Beulah cemetery guidelines. Improperly placed items shall be removed at the expense of such companies or vendors.

Section 7. Conduct of Persons in Cemetery

Lot  owners,  their  families,  and  visitors  shall  be  admitted  daily.	They  shall observe the following rules while visiting the cemetery:

A.	Children unattended  by an adult, who will be responsible  for their conduct, shall not be admitted.
 
B.
c.
D.




E.
)	F.

G.
H.
 
Bicycle riding shall not be permitted, except on roads or designated areas.
Bicycles shall not be leaned against stonework of any kind.
Automobiles shall proceed at a slow pace not to exceed  five (5) miles per hour. All automobiles shall remain on the roadways. During funerals, the funeral directors may permit automobiles to drive upon other areas at their sole discretion.
Alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed within the cemetery grounds.
Firearms shall not be permitted, except as required for funeral honor guards.
No live ammunition shall be allowed. Pets shall not be permitted.
All persons are forbidden to sit or otherwise occupy any lot, other than their
own.
 
I.		Cumbersome trucks and vehicles shall not be allowed to enter the grounds without special permission of the Beulah City Auditor's office.
J.	No person shall pluck any wild or cultivated plant, break any tree or shrub,
mar any stonework, or deface any property whatsoever.
K.	No improper use, as determined by the Beulah  City Council, of the national flag  nor the display of any  worn  out or tattered  flag  will  be  allowed.  No permanent  flags or installati.on of permanent flag poles shall be allowed.

Section 8. Purchase of Lots

A.	Procedure for Lot Sales and Site Selection

1.	All the lots of the Beulah Cemetery shall be sold for the price of $250.00
to be paid at the time of reservation and a certificate will be issued.

2.	All lots are available to Beulah area residents, former residents, and their respective families. Separate burial of pets in the Beulah Cemetery shall be prohibited.




4
 
3.	Sale of lots must remain in continuity whenever and wherever possible.

a.	When a buyer desires to purchase two (2) or more lots, the City reserves the right to require that the selection of lots be made in such a location and manner so as not to leave any isolated single grave lots alongside those purchased.
b.	Single grave lots shall be sold only from single grave sections,
except as isolated single grave lots may be elsewhere available.

4. Persons wishing to purchase lots from the Baptist or Catholic sections of the Beulah Cemetery are advised to contact the respective churches directly to purchase said lots.

Section 9.   Repurchase by the City

The City may, by mutual agreement with any lot owner, repurchase any unoccupied lot or lots located in the Beulah Cemetery from a lot owner or authorized person for a sum not to exceed the sum originally paid to the City for said lot(s). Except, however, lots located in the Baptist section of the Beulah Cemetery shall first be offered to the respective church for repurchase before the same are purchased by the City.

Section 10. Lot or Certificate Transfer

)		Reserved lots may be transferred to another person without being returned to the City. Except however, lots located in the Baptist section of the Beulah Cemetery shall be subject to any restrictions or requirements on transfer imposed by the respective church.

Section 11. Penalty Section

Any person, firm, corporation, or other business of legal entity violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of an infraction and shall upon conviction , be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).

Section 12. Savings Clause

Should any section, paragraph , sent nce, clause, or phrase of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason , the remainder of said ordinance shall not be affected thereby.

Section 13. Conflicting Ordinances

All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed , so
far as the conflicting portions thereof are concerned.









5
 
Section 14. Effective Date

This ordinance shall be in full force and affect from and after its final passage and approval and publications of its title and penalty clause in the official newspaper of the City of Beulah, North Dakota .






ATTEST:




HEHERfEREBEE)CITy  AUDITOR

 
First Reading : Second Reading: Final Passage: Publication Date:
 
July 17, 2017
January 15, 2018
January 15, 2018
January 18, 2018
 





)


































6
 

ORDINANCE NO. 428

AN  ORDINANCE  ESTABLISHING  A MUNICIPAL  COURT  FEE  PURSUANT  TO
N.D.C.C.	§27-01-10.

BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE CITY COUNCIL  OF THE CITY OF BEULAH,  MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA AS FOLLOWS:

1.	The municipal judge shall assess a fee of Twenty-Five Dollars ($25.00) as a part of a sentence imposed on a defendant who pleads guilty to or is convicted of violating a municipal ordinance for which  the maximum penalty that may be imposed under the ordinance for the violation includes imprisonment. The municipal judge shall assess the fee when sentence is imposed or when sentence is suspended or imposition of sentence is deferred, unless the defendant is indigent and unable to pay the fee.
2.	The  fee  assessed  under  this  section  is  in  addition  to  any  fine,  penalty,  costs,  or

)	administrative fee prescribed by law.

3.	All fees paid to a municipal court under this Ordinance must be deposited monthly into the city treasury for allocation by the governing body of the City of Beulah to one or more of the following programs as determined by the governing body or by agreement of the attorney general, the North Dakota league of cities, and the North Dakota association of counties:
a.	A private, nonprofit domestic violence or sexual assault program.

b.	A victim and witness advocacy program of which the primary function is to

provide direct services to victims of and witnesses to crime.

c.	The statewide automated victim information and notification system, as provided for under N.D.C.C. Chapter 12.1-34.
 

Savings Clause

Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
Effective Date

This ordinance shall be in full force and effect after passage and approval as provided by law.


DATED this 16th day of October, 2017.


,(()(U;"«/
DARRELL BJERKE
Mayor
)





City Auditor

Introduction and First Reading:	October 2, 2017 Second Reading:	October 16, 2017
Publication Date:	October 19, 2017

Effective Date:	October 19, 2017
 
ORDINANCE NO. 429

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING THE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 5 OF THE REVISED ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA, OF 1972, AND ALL SUBSEQUENT REVISIONS THERETO, SAID REVISED ORDINANCE RELATING  TO ANIMALS AND FOWL.

BE IT ORDAINED  BY THE CITY COUNCIL  OF THE CITY OF BEULAH ,
MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS :

I.	That Chapter 5 of the Revised Ordinances of 1972 and  all  subsequent amendments thereto, including Ordinances No.  123, 127, 200, 233, and 378 of the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota, and hereby amended and re­ enacted as follows:
ARTICLE 1 - General Regulations 5.0101 Definitions
5.0102 Neglect, Abuse, Cruelty, and Abandonment of Animals
5.0103 Cruelty in Transportation
5.0104 Unattended Dog or Cat in Motor Vehicle 5.0105 Poisoning Animals
5.0106 Diseased Animals
5.0107 Housing
5.0108 Keeping of Certain Animals Prohibited 5.0109 Kennels and Other Breeding Establishments 5.0110 Strays
ARTICLE 2 - Dogs 5.0201 License Required
5.0202 Licensing Procedure and Terms
5.0203 License Fee
5.0204 License:  When Due and Payable
5.0205 Dogs or Cats Running at Large Prohibited 5.0206 Impounding
5.0207 Rabies Vaccinations 5.0208 Return to Owner if Known 5.0209 Noisy Dog Prohibited 5.0210 Nuisance - When
5.0211 Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Animals
5.0212 Keeping of Female Dogs in Season Prohibited , Exception. 5.0213 Limitation on Number of Dogs and Cats.
5.0214 Dog and Cat Feces Declared Nuisance.
5.0215 Setting of Dogs or Cats at Large Prohibited





1
 
5.0216 Breaking into Pound - Hindering Officer ARTICLE 3 - Rabies Control
5.0301 Quarantine of Biting Animal.
5.0302 Duty of Owner to Surrender Animal; Redemption. 5.0303 Disposition of Dead Rabid Animal.
5.0304 Destruction, Isolation of Bitten Animals. 5.0305 Destruction, Removal of Rabid Animals. 5.0306 Surrender of Carcass.
5.0307 Report of Bite Cases.
5.0308 Failure to Obey Health Officer. 5.0309 Report of Suspected Cases.

ARTICLE 4 - Penalty

5.0401 Penalty for Violation of Chapter.













































2
 
ARTICLE 1 - General Regulations 5.0101 Definitions
In this Chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires:

1.	"Animal" includes every living animal except the human race.
2.	"Health Officer" shall be the chief of police in the absence of the health officer.
3.	"Keeper" is an adult occupant residing upon the premises on which the animal is kept.

5.0102 Neglect, Abuse, Cruelty and Abandonment of Animals

Please see North Dakota Century Code 36-21.2 for laws related to treatment of animals, including neglect, animal abuse, animal cruelty, animal abandonment, and caged animals.

5.0103 Cruelty in Transportation

No person may carry, or cause to be carried, any live animals upon or within any vehicle or otherwise , without providing suitable racks, crates, or cages, or other proper carrying container, nor may any person carry an animal, or cause an animal to be carried, in any other cruel manner.

5.0104 Unattended  Dog or Cat in Motor Vehicle

1.	An  individual  may  not  leave  an animal  unattended  in  a motor  vehicle  without
ensuring that the animal's health and safety is not endangered .
2.	An individual who violates this section is guilty of an infraction.
3.	A law enforcement  officer may use reasonable means to enter a motor vehicle and remove an animal left in violation of this section.

5.0105 Poisoning Animals

No person may unjustifiably administer or expose any known poisonous substance or noxious drug, whether mixed with meat or other food or not, which may be eaten by a domestic animal.

5.0106  Diseased Animals

No domestic animal afflicted with a contagious or infectious disease shall be allowed to run at large, or to be exposed in any public place whereby the health of man or beast may be affected. The owner, agent, or person having charge of any animal infected or suspected of any contagious disease shall confine the animal immediately in a safe place isolated from all other animals  with all necessary restrictions to prevent the dissemination  of  the  disease,  except  for  transportation  for  veterinary  care  or  in





3
 
accordance with North Dakota Century Code 36-14.

No person may sell, give away, or in any manner part with any animal infected with or suspected or being infected with any contagious or infectious disease, except as may be provided otherwise by the rules of the State Board of Animal Health. If any animal is known to have been infected with or exposed to any such disease within one year of such disposal, due notice of such fact must be given in writing to the person receiving the animal.

5.0107   Housing

No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is or may be kept to be unclean, or unwholesome. Any area in  which animals are kept must be maintained in such a manner as to prevent offensive odors and/or attraction of insects.

5.0108   Keeping of Certain Animals Prohibited

It shall be unlawful to keep any sheep, horses, cattle, swine, goats, rabbits, chickens or other poultry, except for small house birds, dogs and cats, which may be kept pursuit to the regu lations set out herein, within the city limits of the City of Beulah except as provided in areas zoned Agricultura l (A) pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the City of Beulah . The areas zoned Agricultural (A) pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the City of Beulah, shall have the following limitations:

1.	There shall be no more than one (1) adult horse, sheep or cow and one (1) foal, lamb or calf per two (2) acres.

2.	No swine shall be allowed whatsoever.

3.	There shall be no feedlots allowed and the feedlots shall be defined as fenced-off or closed in areas where animals are fed rather than allowed to graze.

Beulah High School FFA projects are excluded from the above described animal limitations with City Council approval. The Beulah High School FFA project, as administered by the Beulah High School Administration and Beulah High  School FFA organization, shall be excluded from the above requirements to the extent that the Beulah High School FFA projects are conducted in accordance with the guidelines as may be established by the Beulah City Council.

Murray Addition/Country Club Estates shall be governed by the Restrictive Covenants filed and recorded  at the Mercer County Recorder's Office. It shall be unlawful to keep any sheep, cattle, swine, goats, rabbits, chickens or other poultry, except for small house birds, dogs and cats, which may be kept pursuit to the regulations set out herein, within the Murray Addition/ County Club Estates. Pursuant to the Restrictive Covenants, each parcel owner in the Murray Addition/ Country Club Estates are allowed





4
 
to  own  and  keep  two  (2) horses and one  (1) foal  on  their  lot,  subject to  the fencing requirements within the Restrictive Covenants.

5.0109 Kennels and Other Breeding Establishments

No person or corporation shall be permitted to maintain or keep kennels or other establishment s for the breeding for sale of dogs and cats within the city limits of the City of Beulah, provided however, that the keeping of dogs and cats as pets shall be permitted as provided in this Chapter.

5.0110  Strays

It shall be unlawful to permit any cattle, horses, sheep, swine, goats or poultry to run at large in the City; and any such animal running at large in any public place in the City shall be impounded. It shall further be unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in any of the streets of the City for the purpose of grazin g or feeding.

ARTICLE 2 - Dogs and Cats

5.0201   License Required

No dog or cat shall be permitted to be or remain in the City without being licensed as herein after provided if over six months of age. It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper of any dog or cat kept within the City to have the dog or cat inoculated against rabies and proof thereof is shown to the person issuing the license.

There shall be a mand atory minimum fine for violation of this section as follows:

 
First Violation: Second Violation: Third Violation:
 
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)
 

For the fourth violation or for any additional violation the owner shall be subject
to a mandatory minimum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per occurrence.

The mandatory minimum fine may not be suspended, deferred, or dismissed.

5.0202   Licensing Procedur e and Terms

All dogs and cats shall be registered as to sex, breed, name and address of owner and name of said dog or cat. If said dog or cat is microchipped, the owner shall provide the microchip number as well. Licenses shall be issued by the chief of police on an annual basis as hereinafter more fully provided. The person paying the license fee shall receive a receipt therefore and a metal tag or badge with which to mark the animal. It shall be the duty of the owner or keeper to cause such license tag or badge to be securely attached around the animal's neck and kept there at all times during the license period.





5
 
5.0203  License Fee

For the first year that an animal is licensed with the City of Beulah, there shall be no license fee.Thereafter , any person keeping, owning, or harboring any dog or cat in the City of Beulah shall pay annually to the City Auditor of the City after the first year, a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each dog or cat. The owner of any cat or dog shall present a veterinarian's certificate ofrabies vaccination that the dog or cat is up to date on rabies vaccinat ions at the time of application for a license.

5.0204 License: When Due and Payable

Owners  are  required  to  obtain  a  license  for  their  animal  pursuant  to  Section
5.0201 within 30 days of bringing the dog and/or cat to reside within city limits.

The annual renewal license fees previously provided for shall become due and payable on the 1st day of January in each year and shall become delinquent on the 1st day of February in each year.  If the fee is not paid before the first day of February a late fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be added to the license or renewal fee.

The annual license fee herein provided shall become due and payable on January 1st of each year and shall license an animal for the ensuing year; all animal licenses shall expire on December 31st of each year. In case of failure of any owner or keeper of a dog and/or cat to pay such license fee upon any such animals, such animals shall be surrendered by the owner or keeper thereof for the  purpose of being disposed of, as hereinafter provided, upon the demand of the City Auditor or any police officer of the city.

Any animal required to be licensed and not wearing upon his collar the license tag herein provided for, found within the city after the 1st day of January in any year, shall be impounded pursuant to 5.0206.

5.0205 Dogs or Cats Running Unleashed and at Large Prohibited

It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any dog or cat to run unleashed and at large at any time, upon any public grounds, streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or school grounds or upon private premises of any person other than such owner or keeper of such dog or cat, and such running at large is hereby declared to be a nuisance. While off owner's premises, said dog or cat must be controlled by a capable individual and restrained by a leash of adequate size and length. The owner or keeper of such dog or cat shall be subject to the penalty hereinafter provided for violation of this chapter.

There shall be a mandatory minimum fine for violation of this section as follows:

 
First Violation: Second Violation: Third Violation:
 
One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) Three Hundred Dollars ($300.00) Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00)





6
 

For the fourth violation or for any additional violation the owner shall be subj ect to a mandatory  minimum fine of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per occurrence; have any dogs or cats owned or kept by said Owner removed from the City of Beulah; and shall be restrained from owning or keeping any dogs or cats within the City of Beulah for three (3) years from the date of entry of Judgment.

The mandatory minimum fine may not be suspended, deferred, or dismissed.

The Court shall also assess any costs as outlined in Section 5.0206, which may not be suspended, deferred, or dismissed.

5.0206 Impounding

Unrestrained or unlicensed dogs or cats may be taken by the City police officer or any other person authorized by the City Council to act and impounded in  an animal shelter or the City pound and there confined in a humane manner. Impounded animals shall be kept for not  less than five (5) days unless reclaimed by their owners. If by a permit tag or other means the owner can be identified , the officer shall immediately upon impoundm ent notify the owner by telephone, email, or mail of the impoundment of the animal. Animals not claimed by their owners within five (5) days after such notification may be adopted, removed to an animal rescue organization or other approved residence, or humanely destroyed pursuant by order of the Beulah Municipal Court. Within five (5) days after impoundment if no such owner can be identified, the animal may be adopted, removed to an animal rescue organization or other approved residence, or humanely destroyed by the police officer or any other person authorized by the City Council of the City of Beulah to so act. Anima ls impounded pursuant to this section, may be claimed by their owners, upon payment of the owner of a Thirty-Five Dollar ($35.00) kennel fee for the first day of impoundment and a Twenty Dollar ($20.00) per day kennel fee for each day thereafter, which shall not be deferred or suspended.

Ifan apparent ly feral cat has not been reclaimed by its owner or keeper within the first three (3) days of the required holding period, the city health officer or other person qualified to verify the temperament of the animal shall verify whether it is feral. If the cat is determined to be feral, or exhibits behavior that poses a risk of injury to any person confining the animal, the cat may be removed to an animal rescue organization or humanely destroyed by the police officer or any other person authorized by the City Council of the City of Beulah to so act after being kept for a period of not less than three
(3) days.

The impounded  animal  must  be currently  licensed  prior  to  release to  owner or
keeper if said animal is to be kept within the city limits.

5.0207 Rabies Vaccinations

The  owner  or  keeper  of  any  dog  or  cat  shall  have  such  pet  given  rabies





7
 
vaccinations by a licensed veterinarian at such times as recommended by the veterinarian. Such owner or keeper shall present a certificate or statement from such veterinarian showing that all rabies vaccinations required have been given when he makes application for a pet license, and no license shall be issued until such proof of rabies vaccination is presented. Said vaccinations must be kept current and proof provided of same. In the alternative, the owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall provide a rabies vaccination titer with proven protective antibody level.

5.0208 Return to Owner if Known

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 5.0206, if a dog or cat is found at large and its owner can be identified and located, such animal need not be impounded but may, instead , be taken to the owner. In such case the policeman or other officer may proceed against the owner or keeper for violation of this article.

5.0209 Noisy Dog Prohibited

It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor within the City any dog that disturbs the peace by habitually howling, barking , whining, or making other disagreeable noise. Any person wishing to file a complaint shall be required to give his name and address and sign a complaint and witness statement.

5.02 10 Nuisance- When

Any licensed or unlicensed dog molesting or harassing passer s-by, chasing vehicles, destroying any property which is not the property of the owner or keeper, or trespassing upon private property within the City of Beulah is hereby declared to be a nuisance.  The owner or keeper of such dog shall be guilty of an infraction.

5.0211 Potentially Dangerous and Dangerous Animals

A.	Designation

1.	Any dog inside the Beulah city limits or Yi mile extraterritorial city limits
may be designated as a potentially dangerou s animal if the animal:
a.	When unprovoked , chases or approaches a person, including a person on a bicycle, upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public or private property , other than the owner' s property, in an aggressive manner ; or
b.	Has	a   known	propensity,	tendency,	or   disposition	to	act
aggressively or in a menacing manner , unprovoked, or otherwise
threatening the safety of humans or domestic animals.
2.	Any  animal  inside the  Beulah  city  limits or  Yi mile extraterritorial  city
limits may be designated as a dangerous animal if the animal has:
a.	When unprovoked , bites a human or domestic animal on public or private property;





8
 
b.	Unprovoked, kills or injures a domestic animal while off the owner's property; or
c.	Been found to be potentially dangerous, and after the owner has been notified that the animal has  been designated as being potentially dangerous, the animal, unprovoked , aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals.
3.	Notwithstanding   the  foregoing,  no  animal  may  be  found  or  declared
dangerous or potentially dangerous if:
a.	Any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon premise occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, was teasing, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
b.	Any injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which at the time such injury or damage was sustained was taunting, abusing, or assaulting the animal;
c.	The animal was protecting or defending a human being within the
immediate vicinity of the animal from an illegal or nonconsensual attack or assault; or
d.	The animal was protecting or defending its young offspring.

B.	Procedure for designating an animal as potentially dangerous or dangerous

1.	Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that an animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous, an application may be presented to the municipal court for a finding that the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous . After receiving evidence at a hearing on the matter, the municipal court shall enter an order containing the court's findings, established by a preponderance of the evidence, whether the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous and the municipal court shall be authorized to order compliance by the owner of the animal with the provisions of this section and any other conditions which are necessary to ensure the  health  and safety of others. Such conditions are outlined in Section 5.0401.
2.	When an animal is designated as potentially  dangerous or dangerous, the owner shall be notified in writing of said designation.
3.	Any animal deemed dangerous or potentially dangerous by another jurisdiction and subsequently brought into the city shall be deemed a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal and abide by the provisions of this chapter to notify the police department and meet registration requirements.

C.	Registration Requirements

No potentially dangerous animal shall be kept in the city of Beulah unless the owner, at his or her own cost, has implanted a microchip in the dog, completed  an  application  to  register  the  animal  as potentially  dangerous,  and





9
 
submitted said application to the Beulah  Police Department. Prior to acceptance of the application, the Beulah Police Department will retrieve and verify from said microchip and record the microchip information. In addition, the owner shall be required to post a sign, satisfactory to the municipal court, at the owner's or keeper 's residence notifying the public of the presence of a potentially dangerous dog.

D.	Potentially dangerous or dangerous dogs brought into the city

No dog designated as dangerous by another jurisdiction may be brought into the City of Beulah. Any dog designated as potentially dangerou s by another jurisdiction must be registered within 24 hours of being brought into the  city limits of Beulah. Such registration shall be with the Beulah Police Department pursuant to subsection (C) above.

E.	Application contents

1.	The application  to  register  the  animal  as potentially  dangerous  shall
include the following:
a.	The owner's address and home, work, and cell telephone number and the  implanted microchip identification number, as well as a backup contact person and number;
b.	Proof   that   said   animal   has   been   sterilized   and   has  current
vaccinations ; and
c.	A yearly registration fee of $200.00.

F.	Yearly registration requirement

All animals designated as potentially dangerous shall file  a  new application each year after designation or entrance after prior designation into the city of Beulah in accordance with the time constraints in Section 5.0204.

G.	Removal of designation of potentially dangerous animal

1.	The owner of a potentially  dangerous animal may apply to the municipal court  to  have  the  designation  removed  once  the  following  criteria have been met:
a.	Minimum of 16 weeks of animal training  classes attended and
providing a certificate of completion signed by a training instructor at an approved training facility;
b.	Successfully passing of the Canine Good Citizen Test approved by
the American Kennel Club, or an equivalent test adopted by a similar nationally recognized organization ;  and  providing certificate of completion; and
c.	No complaints about the animal have been received by the City of
Beulah  within the previous  12 month s as confirmed  by an officer





10
 
of the Beulah Police Department.

H.	An animal designated as potentially dangerous must be leashed and be under the control of a competent adult at all times when off the owner's or keeper 's property.

I.	Requirements for dangerous animals

If an animal is designated as a dangerous animal, such animal shall be humanely destroyed at the owner's expense or removed from the City of Beulah and the Yi mile extraterritorial city limits. If, after having been ordered removed from the city, such animal shall at any time be brought back into the city or Yi mile extraterritorial city limits, such animal shall immediately be taken by the police department  and humanely destroyed, at the owner's expense. A separate penalty under this section shall be assessed against the owner.

J.	Exemptions.

The provision of this section shall not apply to K-9 or other dogs owned by any police department or any law enforcement agency or officer which are used in the performance of police work.

K.	If at any time a ·dangerous animal cannot be taken up and caught by a police officer without exposing said officer to danger of personal injury from such animal, or without exposing other persons to danger of personal injury from such animal , it shall be lawful for the police officer to forthwith destroy such animal.

L.	Violations

1.	Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be found guilty  of  a Class B Misdemeanor and penalized a sum of not more than One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) , thirty (30) days in jail, or a combination of such fine and imprisonment , in addition to any other conditions listed in Section 5.0401. In addition to the foregoing penalty , any person who violates this section shall pay all expenses,  including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this article.
2.	If any person is found to be in violation of this section, said person may be prevented   from  owning   animals  within   the   city   limits  or   Y2   mile
extraterritorial  city limits for a reasonable amount of time as determined
by the municipal court.

5.0212 Keeping of Female Dogs in Season Prohibited, Exception.

It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any female dog within the City of





11
 
Beulah when in season unless such female dog is kept upon the premises  of the owner,
either tethered, kenneled or kept within a building or fence on said premises.

5.0213 Limitation on Number of Dogs and Cats.

No more than two (2) dogs and two (2) cats shall be kept at any personal place of residence or dwelling house (apartment , single-family home, mobile home, or other type of residence or dwelling house), nor shall any one individual or his immediate  family own more than two (2) dogs and two (2) cats located within the city limits of the City of Beulah. However, should a female dog deliver puppies  or female  cat deliver kittens, those puppies or kittens may be kept , along with the mother and one (1) other dog or cat, in said residence or dwelling house for a period of not more than six (6) months after the birth of the puppies or kittens. At the expiration of six (6) months after the birth of any puppies or kittens being kept in a residence or dwelling house, the limits as set out herein , on the number of dogs and cats shall be two (2) dogs and (2) cats as otherwise provided herein.

Said limitation on cats shall not apply in R6 or AG zoned districts

5.0214 Dog and Cat Feces Declared Nuisance.

It is hereby declared a nuisance and a violation of this ordinance for the owner or keeper of a dog or cat to allow dog or cat feces to be deposited on the private property of another or on public property if such feces are deposited by a dog or cat owned or kept by the person. The owner or keeper of said dog or cat shall remove and sanitarily dispose of such deposited dog and cat feces immediately.

5.0215 Setting of Dogs or Cats at Large Prohibited.

It shall be unlawful for any person to open any door or gate of any private premises for the purpose of setting any dog(s) or cat(s) at large, or otherwise enticing or enabling any dog or cat to leave any private premises, within which the same may be, for the purpose of setting such dog at large.

5.0216 Breaking into Pound - Hindering Officer.

It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break into the city pound or any other enclosure in which the police department has impounded any animal or to attempt to do so, or to take or let out any animal therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from any police officer any animal taken up by him in compliance with this ordinance or in any manner to interfere with or hinder such police officer in the discharge of his duties under this ordinance.











12
 
ARTICLE 3 - Rabies Control

5.0301 Quarantine of Biting Animal.

Any animal which bites a person shall be immediately reported to the city health officer and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the city health officer, for a period of ten (10) days followed by an examination of health by a veterinarian, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the city health officer or under his direction. At the discretion of the city health officer, such quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as the city pound, or at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary hospital of his choice. If quarantine is at the city pound, the owner shall pay impound fees pursuant to 5.0206. In the case of stray animals, or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known , such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated  as the city pound. In the alternative, the animal may be humanely euthanized at the discretion of the animal's owner or at the discretion of the chief of police if the owner of the animal cannot be determined and the animal's brain shall be sent in to the public health lab for rabies testing at the expense of the  owner or the City of Beulah if ownership cannot be determined. In the absence of a city health officer, the chief of police shall be appointed to discharge the duties of the city health officer with respect to rabies control.

5.0302 Duty of Owner to Surrender Animal; Redemption.

The owner, upon demand by the city health officer, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall be borne by the owner, in accordance with fees set from time to time by the city council.  If said animal is adjudged to be free of rabies, it may be reclaimed by the owner at the end of the quarantine period upon payment of all expenses incurred by the city as a result of such quarantine and upon providing proof of licensure, unless it shall be ordered destroyed pursuant to Section 5.0211 of this chapter.

5.0303 Disposition of Dead Rabid Animal.

When rabies has been diagnosed in an animal under quarantine or rabies suspected by a licensed veterinarian, and the animal dies while under such observation, the city health officer shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state health department for pathological examination and shall notify the property public health officer of the reports of human contacts and diagnosis.

5.0304 Destruction, Isolation of Bitten Animals.

Animals bitten by a known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed, or if the owner is unwilling to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of  the  animal  in a kennel , designated by the city health officer, for six (6) months shall be enforced. If the animal  has  been  previously  vaccinated,  within  time  limits  established  by  the  Public





13
 
Health  Service  based  on  the  kind  of  vaccination  used ,  re-vaccination   and  restraint
(leashing and confinement) for thirty (30) days shall be carried out.

5.0305 Destruction, Removal of Rabid Animals.

No person shall kill, or caused to be killed, any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been exposed to rabies, or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided , nor remove such animal from the city limits without written permission from the city health officer .

5.0306 Surrender of Carcass.

The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies or which has bitten a person or another animal shall upon demand be surrendered to the city health officer.

5.0307 Report of Bite Cases.

It shall be the duty of every physician, or other medical practitioner, to report to the city health officer, the names and addresses of person s treated for bites, inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.

5.0308 Failure to Obey Health Officer.

No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required herein when demand is made therefore by the city health officer.

5.0309 Report of Suspected Cases.

It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the city health officer any animal considered by him to be a rabies suspect.

ART ICLE 4 - Penalty

5.0401 Penalty for Violation of Chapter.

Any person who shall violate any provisions of this ordinance for which a specific penalty is not otherwise provided shall be guilty of an infraction for which the maximum penalty is a fine of One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00). The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article shall pay all costs and charges assessed for such impoundment before such animal shall be released to the owner.

Further,  the municipal judge  of the City  of Beulah  may,  at his sole discretion ,
order any of the following additional conditions as a part of the sentence:
A.	That the owner not sell or transfer the animal;
B.	That  the  owner  advise  the  court  if  the  animal  bites any  person  or
domestic animal or is the subject of any other criminal or civil action,





14
 
and the factual circumstances of the incident ;
C.	That the animal undergo obedience training;
D.	That the animal not be allowed outdoors during certain times, such as
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.  (i.e. times when school age children may be present), or the time when it is known that the postman or delivery person delivers the mail or packages each day.
E.	Removal of the animal from city limits and Yz mile extraterritorial city
limits;
F.	Prohibition  of the  owner  or keeper  from  owning  or keeping  any animals for an amount of time;
G.	Muzzling of the animal when unenclosed; or
H.	Destruction of the animal.

II.	All Ordinances and parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed so far as the conflicting portions thereof are concerned.

III.	Should any section, paragraph , sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of said chapter shall not be affected thereby .

IV.	This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after its final passage and approval, and publication of  the title and penalty clause in the official newspaper of the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota.

/·.
TRAVIS FREY,
ATTEST:







First Reading: September 4, 2018

Second Reading: November 5, 2018

Publication Date: November 21, 2018

Effect ive Date: November 21, 2018












15
 
ORDINANCE NO. 430



AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND RE-ENACTING ORDINANCE NO. 413 REGULATING CITY SALES, USE, AND GROSS RECEIPTS TAX UNDER THE HOME RULE CHARTER OF THE CITY OF BEULAH, MERCER COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA.



BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNC IL OF THE CITY OF BEULAH , MERCER
COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA , AS FOLLOWS:

That Ordinance No. 413 of the City Ordinances of the City of Beulah, Mercer County, North Dakota , is hereby amended and re-enacted as follows:



SALES, USE, AND GROSS RECEIPTS TAX


Section 1: Definitions.

All terms defined  in chapters 40-05. 1, 57-39.2, 57-39.4, 57-39.5, 57-39.6, and 57-
40.2	of the North Dakota Century Code (N.D.C.C.), i ncluding all  future  amendment s thereto , are adopted by reference. A ll references to the N.D.C.C . includ e  amendments adopted  by the North Dakota  Legislative Assemb ly.

Section 2: Collection and Administration.

Where not in conflict with the provisions of this  Ordinance, the provisions of N.D.C.C.  chapters  40-05 .1,  57-39.2,  57-39.4,  57-39.5,  57-39.6,  and  57-40.2,  and  all
administrative rules adopted by the Tax Comm i ssioner, pertaining to the collection and administration of the retai l sales, use, and gross receipt s tax, including prov isions for liability , refund , penalty , interest or cred it, govern the administration by the North Dakota Office of State Tax Commissioner (hereinafter "Tax Comm i ssioner") of the taxes imposed by this Ordinance.

Section 3: Sales Tax Imposed

Subject to the provisions of N .D.C.C. § 40-05. 1-06, and except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance, or the sales and use tax laws of the State of North Dakota, a tax of two percent (2%) is imposed upon the gross rece ipts of retailers from all sales at retail, including the leasing or renting of tangible persona l property , within the corporate limits of the city of Beulah, Nort h Dakota.
 

Section 4: Use Tax Imposed.

Subject to the provision s of N.D.C.C. § 40-05.1-06, and except as otherwi se provided in this Ordinance , or the sal es and use tax laws of the State of No rth Dakota, an excise tax is imposed upon the storage, use, or consumption with in the corporate limits of the city of Beulah , North Dakota of tangible personal property purchased at retail for storage, use, or consumption in this city, at the rate of two percent (2%) of the pu rchase price of the property. An excise tax i s imposed on the storage, use, or consumpti on within the corporate limits of the city of Beulah, North Dakota of tangible personal property not originally purchased for storage, use, or consumption in th i s city at the rate of two percent (2%) of the fair market va lue of the property at the time it was brought into this city.

With respect to the purchase price of tangible personal property used by a contractor or subcontractor to fulfill a contract as defined in N.D.C.C. § 57-40.2-03.3, the tax im posed by this section  applies only to bid s submitted on or after the effective date of this Ordinance.

Section 5: Gross Receipts of Alcoholic Beverages.

Subject to the provisions of N .D.C.C. § 40-05.1 -06, and except  as otherwise provid ed in this Ord i nance, a gross receipts tax of two percent (2%) is imposed upon all gross receipts from the sal e of alcoholic beverages within the city. A person who receives alcoholi c beverages for storage, u se, or con sumption in thi s city is subject to tax on storage, u se, or consumption of those alcoholic beverages at the rate of two percent (2%).

Section  6:  Gross  Receipts  of  New  Farm  Machinery  and  New  Farm  I rrigation Equipment.

Subject to the prov1s1ons of N.D.C.C. § 40-05.1-06, and except as otherwi se provided in thi s Ordinance, a gross receipts tax of two percent (2%) is imposed upon all gross receipts from the sale of new farm machi nery and new farm irrigation equi pment within the city . A person who receives new farm machinery or new farm irrigation equipment for storage, use, or consumption in this city is subj ect to tax on storage, use, or consumption of that machinery and/or equipment at the rate of two percent (2%).

Section 7: Exemptions.

In addition to the exemptions provided by state law, this Ord inance provide s exemption s from imposition and compu tation of the city sales or use tax for sal es of the following:

1.	All sales, storage, use or consumpti on of tangible personal property which

2
 
are exempt from imposition and computation of the sales or use tax of the State of North Dakota are specificall y exempt from the provi sions of thi s Ordinance.

Section 8: Maximum Tax Imposed.

Any patron or user pay ing a tax imposed by this Ordinance in excess of Twenty Five Dollars ($25.00) upon any single transaction of one or more items may obtain a credit or refund of the excess tax at the time of purch ase directly from the vendor or request a refund of the excess tax payment by filing a request for refund upon the forms provid ed by the Tax Commissioner.

Section 9: Contract with Tax Commissioner.

The Beulah City Auditor is authori zed to contract with the Tax Commissioner for the administration and collection of taxes imposed by this Ordinance. The Beulah City Auditor has all powers granted the Tax Commi ssioner and in the absence of a valid contract with the Tax Commissioner or failure of the Tax Commissioner to perform the delegated duties, shall perform these duties in the place of the Tax Commissioner.

Section 10: Dedication of Tax Proceeds.

There shall hereby be created a City Sal es and U se Tax Fund , whi ch shall consist of three accounts, namel y :

I.	Sales and Use Tax - Municipal Swimming Pool Account;
2.	Sales and U se Tax - Capital Improvements Account; and
3.	Sales and U se Tax- Recreation Center Account.

All revenues raised and collected und er this Ordinance, less administrative expenses, shall be placed in the City Sales and Use Tax Fund , and shall be dedicated exclusively as follows :

1.	One-fourth (1/4) of the two percent (2%) City sales and use tax proceeds shall be placed in the Sales and Use Tax - Municipal Swimmin g Pool Account, and shall be dedicated to the purchase, construction, operation, and maintenance of the municipal swimming pool.
2.	One-fourth (1/4) of the two percent (2%) City sal es and use tax proceeds shall be placed in the Sales and Use Tax - Capita l  Improvements Account and shall be used for the purchase, construction, operation, and maintenan ce of Beulah area capi ta l improvem ents includin g, but not limited to, street systems,  water  system s,  sewer  systems,  publi c   safety   improvements, muni cipal  swimmin g pool, or other projects important for the betterment of

3
 
the City of Beulah .
3.	One-half (1/2) of the two percent (2%) City sales and use tax proceed s shall be placed in the Sales and Use Tax-Recreation Center Account and shall be dedicated to the payment of the original construction indebtedness resulting for the construction of the Beulah recreation center.

Disbursements from either the Sales and Use Tax - Municipa l Swimm i ng Poo l Account , the Sales and Use Tax - Capi tal Improvements Account , or the Sales and U se Tax- Recreation Center Account must first be approved by the Beu lah City Counci l.

Section 11: Compensation.

City sales, use, and gross receipts tax perm it hol ders are allowed to retain a portion of tax collected und er this ordi nance to hel p recover adm inistrat i ve expen ses. This compensation shall equal three percent (3%) of the city tax due; however, the deduction is limited to One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($150.00) per quarter. A tax return mu st be filed and paid in full by the scheduled due date or the compensation will be disallowed, and the tax obli gation will be subj ect to penalty and interest.

Section 12: Effective Date.

This Ordinance shall take effect after its passage, approval, and publicat ion.

Section 13: Termination Date.

The one percent ( I %) sales and u se tax imposed by th i s Ordinance for the Recreation Center shall terminate upon the full payment of the origina l constructi on indebtedness.

Section 14: Savings Clause.

Should any section, paragraph , sentence, clause, or phrase of th i s Ord i nance be declared uncon stituti onal or inva l id for any reason, the rema i nde r of th is Ord inance shall not be affected thereby.

DATED th is 6111  day of January , 2020.






Mayor



4
 

ATTEST:

 




 
Introduction and First Reading:

Second Reading: Publication Date: Effective Date:
 
December 16, 2019

January 6, 2020 Not required. January  6, 2020













