DEVILS LAKE, NORTH DAKOTA MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Devils Lake, North Dakota 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 10, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
    The Devils Lake, North Dakota Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 10, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 960, passed February 22, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10 a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 10, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10 this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. __, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com. 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 892 12-20-10 Include 13 893  1-18-11 Include 13 894  3- 8-11 Include 13 895  6- 6-11 Include 14 896  7- 5-11 Include 14 897  6-20-11 Include 14 898  9-19-11 Include 14 899  9-19-11 Include 14 900  4-16-12 Include 15 901  9-17-12 Include 15 902  9-17-12 Include 15 903  9-17-12 Include 15 905 10-15-12 Include 16 906 10-15-12 Include 16 907 10-15-12 Include 16 908  3- 4-13 Include 16 909 (Did not pass) 17 910  5- 6-13 Include 17 911  5- 6-13 Include 17 912  5- 6-13 Include 17 913  5- 6-13 Include 17 914  5-20-13 Include 17 915  8- 5-13 Include 17 916 (Did not pass) 18 917 (Did not pass) 18 919  3-17-14 Include 18 920  3-17-14 Include 18 921  3-17-14 Include 18 922  7- 7-14 Include 19 923 10-20-14 Include 20 924  2- 2-15 Omit 20 925  3- 2-15 Include 20 926  7-20-15 Include 21 927  7-20-15 Omit 21 928  8-17-15 Include 21 929  8-17-15 Include 21 930  9-21-15 Include 21 931  9-21-15 Include 21 932  2-16-16 Include 22 933  3- 7-16 Include 22 935  3- 7-16 Include 22 936  3- 7-16 Include 22 937  3- 7-16 Include 22 938  5- 2-16 Include 23 939  5- 2-16 Omit 23 940  5- 2-16 Include 23 941  8- 1-16 Include 23 942  3- 6-17 Omit 24 944 12- 5-16 Include 24 945 12- 5-16 Include 24 946  9-18-17 Include 25 948 10-16-17 Include 25 949 10-16-17 Include 25 950 12-18-17 Include 26 951  3-19-18 Include 26 952  4-16-18 Include 27 953  5- 7-18 Include 27 954  5-21-18 Include 27 934  3- 7-16 Include 28 956 12-17-18 Omit 28 957 12- 3-18 Include 28 958 12- 3-18 Include 28 959 12- 3-18 Include 28 960  2-22-19 Include 28  
Home Rule Charter City of Devils Lake, North Nakota 
As approved by the Electorate 
of the 
City of Devils Lake 
at a 
Special Election 
held on June 1, 1977 
ARTICLE 1-INCORPORATION 
    The inhabitants of the city of Devils Lake, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of "city of Devils Lake." 
ARTICLE 2-GOVERNING BODY TO EXERCISE POWERS 
    Subject to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, state law, and this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the elected governing body, or the people. The elected governing body shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and prescribe the functions of government to be performed under this charter by the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance. 
ARTICLE 3-POWERS OF THE CITY 
    The city shall have all powers granted to municipal corporations by the constitution and laws of this state and by this charter, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted. 
    Among its enumerated powers, which may be implemented by ordinance subject to the limitations specified in this chapter, shall be the following: 
a.  To acquire, hold, operate, and dispose of property within or without the corporate limits and exercise the right of eminent domain for such purposes. 
b.  To control its finances and fiscal affairs; to appropriate money for its purposes and make payment of its debts and expenses; to levy and collect taxes, excises, fees, charges and special assessments for benefits conferred, for its public and proprietary functions, activities, operations, undertakings and improvements; to contract debts, borrow money, issue bonds, warrants and other evidences of indebtedness; to establish charges for any city or other services, and to establish debt and mill levy limitations; provided that all real and personal property in order to be subject to the assessment provisions of this subsection shall be assessed in a uniform manner and; provided further that the mill levies ordered imposed by the governing body on taxable property subject to ad valorem taxation shall not exceed in total the sum of levies authorized by state statutes and the constitution for cities of similar classification to that of the city of Devils Lake, however, same may be budgeted for any city purposes. The governing body shall be permitted to promulgate the city budget without regard to the specific dedications of mill levies to specific purposes as long as the total budget is not more than the total amount of mills authorized to be levied by a city. 
c.  To fix the fees, number, terms, conditions, duration, and manner of issuing and revoking licenses in the exercise of its governmental police powers. 
d.  To provide for city officers, agencies, and employees, their selection, terms, powers, duties, qualifications, and compensation. 
e.  To provide for city courts, their jurisdiction and powers over ordinance violations, duties, administration, and selection, qualifications, and compensation of their officers; however, the right of appeal from judgment of such courts shall not be in any way affected. 
f.  To provide for all matters pertaining to city elections, except as to qualifications of electors. 
g.  To provide for the adoption, amendment, and repeal of ordinances, resolutions, and regulations to carry out its governmental and proprietary powers and to provide for public health, safety, morals, and welfare, and penalties for a violation thereof. 
h.  To lay out or vacate streets, alleys, and public grounds, and to provide for the use, operation, and regulation thereof. 
i.  To define offenses against private persons and property and the public health, safety, morals, and welfare, and provide penalties for violation thereof. 
j.  To engage in any utility, business or enterprise permitted by the constitution or not prohibited by statute or to grant and regulate franchises therefor to a private person, firm or corporation. 
k.  To provide for zoning, planning, and subdivision of public or private property within the city limits; to provide for such zoning, planning, and subdivision of public or private property outside the city limits as may be permitted by state law. 
l.  To levy and collect franchise and license taxes for revenue purposes. 
m.  To exercise in the conduct of its affairs all powers usually exercised by a corporation. 
n.  To fix the boundary limits of said city and the annexation and de-annexation of territory adjacent to said city except that such power shall be subjected to, and shall conform with the state law made and provided. 
o.  To contract with and receive grants from any other governmental entity or agency, with respect to any local, state or federal program, project or works. 
p.  The City Commission is empowered to dedicate the proceeds of the 1 percent municipal sales and use tax to the financing of the expansion, construction, and/or renovation of the Devils Lake sewer treatment disposal system, property tax relief, infrastructure improvements, economic development, and debt reserve. 
q.  The City Commission is empowered to increase the sales tax by .5 percent and dedicate the .5 percent increase to the financing of the construction of Flood Protection District No. 1-96 (Dike System) which sales tax increase will terminate when the debt has been retired. 
    The enumeration of particular powers by this charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city shall have and may exercise all powers which under the constitution and laws of this state, it would be competent for this chapter specifically to enumerate. 
(Amended during 4/97 supplement) 
ARTICLE 4-FISCAL & BUDGETARY AFFAIRS 
    The fiscal year of the city shall be established by the governing board. Prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, the preliminary budget of the city shall be approved by the governing board and published in the official newspaper of the city. The preliminary budget shall contain, by fund, the estimated beginning cash balances, estimated receipts, estimated disbursements, and estimated ending cash balances; and the preliminary budget shall also contain a comparative statement showing, by fund, the actual beginning cash balances, actual receipts and disbursements and the budgeted figures, as amended, for the fiscal year which is about to expire, with the last month's figures estimated. The publication of the preliminary budget and the comparative statement shall also set the time and place for a hearing thereon, which shall be held at least ten (10) days after the publication and before the approval of the final budget. 
    The final budget shall be approved by the governing board not later than forty-five (45) days after the beginning of the fiscal year and published in the official newspaper of the city not later than sixty (60) days after the beginning of the fiscal year listing, by fund, the actual beginning cash balances, estimated receipts and disbursements, and estimated ending cash balances. The governing board shall adopt the final budget by resolution and may amend the same by resolution at any meeting provided that at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting, the proposed amendment is published in the official newspaper of the municipality. 
ARTICLE 5-INITIATIVE OF ORDINANCES 
    The citizens of Devils Lake shall have the right to initiate ordinances. Qualified electors at least equal in number to fifteen (15) per cent of the number of electors voting in the city for the office of governor in the last election may, by initiated petition, submit a proposed ordinance to the governing body of the municipality. The petition shall be filed in the city auditor's office, and shall contain a request that the ordinance set out in the petition be submitted to a vote of the electors of the city if it is not passed by the governing body of the municipality. 
    The city auditor shall pass upon each petition, within ten (10) days of receiving the same and if he finds that the same is not in order, he shall notify the "Committee for the Petitioners" and allow five (5) days for correction or amendment. 
    Each petition shall have printed thereon "Initiation of City Ordinance providing for _______" and shall accurately identify and summarize the true nature of the initiated ordinance. In addition, each petition shall have listed the names of three electors who shall constitute the "Committee for the Petitioners" and who represent and act for the petitioners. At the bottom of each petition, the circulator of that particular petition shall sign an affidavit affirming that the signers thereto are known to him to be qualified electors of the city. 
    After receiving the petition for the initiation of a proposed ordinance, the governing body of the municipality shall: 
1.  Pass the ordinance without alteration within twenty (20) days after the attachment of the auditor's certificate to the accompanying petition that it appears in order; or 
2.  Call a special election within ninety (90) days after the filing of the petition and submit to the vote of the electors of the municipality the initiated ordinance without alteration. However, if a general city election is fixed not earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than ninety (90) days after the date of filing said petition, the unaltered initiated ordinance shall be placed upon the ballot for vote consideration at said general election. 
    If a majority of the qualified electors voting on an initiated ordinance vote in favor thereof, it shall become a valid and binding ordinance of the municipality. Any ordinance proposed by a petition and adopted by a vote of the people cannot be repealed or amended except by a vote of the people in a referendum. 
    The city auditor shall cause any ordinance proposed under this article to be published once in a newspaper published in the municipality. 
    This article shall be self-executing and all of its provisions treated as mandatory. Ordinances may be enacted to facilitate its operation but no ordinances shall be enacted to hamper, restrict or impair the exercise of the rights herein reserved to the people. 
ARTICLE 6-REFERENDUM OF ORDINANCES 
    The citizens of Devils Lake shall have the right to refer ordinances. Qualified city electors at least equal in number to fifteen per cent (15%) of the number of electors voting in the city for the office of governor in the last election may, by referendum petition, suspend the operation of any ordinance enacted by the governing body, except emergency ordinances approved by at least three-fourths (3/4ths) of all members of the governing body and except those ordinances implementing public projects upon which an election or a referendum has already been held pursuant to law or this charter, or which provide for meeting obligations of bonded indebtedness incurred by a prior ordinance or a prior election or referendum. An emergency ordinance shall contain a clause declaring an emergency. The filing of referendum petitions against one or more items, sections or parts of any ordinance, shall not prevent the remainder from going into effect. Referendum petitions shall be filed with the city auditor not later than thirty (30) days after adoption of the ordinance. 
    When a referendum petition is filed the governing body of the municipality shall consider the ordinance or the part thereof which has been referred; and if the governing body shall repeal the ordinance or the part which has been referred, the referral procedure shall terminate. 
    Each ordinance referred to the electors shall be placed upon the ballot by the city auditor at a special election within ninety (90) days after the filing of said referral petition or on the ballot at a general city election if same is fixed not earlier than fifteen (15) days nor later than ninety (90) days after the date of filing. 
    If a referendum petition is filed against an emergency ordinance, such ordinance shall be in effect until voted upon by the electors. And, if it is then rejected by a majority of the votes cast thereon, it shall be thereby repealed as of the tenth (10th) day after the election. 
    The city auditor shall pass upon each petition, and if he finds it is not in order, (insufficient) he shall notify the "Committee for the Petitioners" and allow five (5) days for correction or amendment. 
    Each petition shall have printed thereon: "Referral of City Ordinance _______, providing for _______" and shall accurately identify and summarize the true nature of the ordinance, or portion of ordinance, being referred. In addition, each petition shall have listed the names of three electors who shall constitute the "Committee for the Petitioners" and who shall represent and act for the petitioners. At the bottom of each petition, the circulator of that particular petition shall sign an affidavit affirming that the signers thereto are known to him to be qualified electors of the city. 
    This article shall be self-executing and all of its provisions treated as mandatory. Ordinances may be enacted to facilitate its operation but no ordinances shall be enacted to hamper, restrict or impair the exercise of the rights herein reserved to the people. 
ARTICLE 7-REFERENDUM BY GOVERNING BODY 
    Before adopting ordinances the governing body may on its own motion submit questions to the electorate for an advisory vote of the people at any city-wide election specified by the governing body. If a question is submitted in the form of a proposed ordinance and it is approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon, and the governing body thereafter adopts the ordinance within six (6) months of such vote, such ordinance shall not be subject to referral by petition. 
ARTICLE 8-SEPARABILITY CLAUSE 
    If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
ARTICLE 9-PLENARY AND IMPLIED POWERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY 
    The governing body shall have plenary power to enact and make all proper and necessary ordinances, resolutions and orders to carry out and give effect to the express and implied powers granted in this charter to the end that a complete, harmonious and effective municipal government may be initiated, installed, operated and maintained in the city, and thereby protect and safeguard the rights, interests, safety, morality, health and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
ARTICLE 10-SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 
Section 1 -  Rights of Officers and Employees Preserved 
    Nothing in this charter, except as specifically provided, shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or of any office, department or agency existing at the time when this charter shall take effect, or any provision of law in force at the time when this charter shall take effect and not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, in relation to the personnel, appointment, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil rights or any other rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or any office, department or agency. 
Section 2 -  Continuance of Present Officers 
    All persons holding executive and administrative office at the time this charter takes effect shall continue in office and shall continue the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been made by the governing body for the performance of such duties in some other manner or the discontinuance of such office. 
Section 3 -  Continuance of Present Offices, Departments, or Agencies 
    Any office, department, or agency, heretofore existing, shall continue to exercise powers and duties the same as were heretofore exercised and shall have the power to continue any business proceedings or other matters within the scope of its regular powers and duties until such office, department or agency shall be changed or abolished by the governing body. 
    The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the city by the laws of this state, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this charter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by the governing body. 
Section 4 -  Continuance of Appointive Boards and Commissions 
    All appointive boards and commissions, heretofore existing, shall continue and shall exercise such powers and duties as were granted them until such boards and commissions shall be changed or abolished by the governing body. 
Section 5 -  Continuance of Contracts 
    All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this charter, shall continue in full force and effect. 
Section 6 -  Pending Actions and Proceedings 
    The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or proceeding civil or criminal, pending when it takes full effect, brought by or against the city or any office, department, agency, or officer thereof. 
Section 7 -  Ordinances to Remain in Force 
    All ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city in force at the time this charter takes effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, are hereby continued in force until the same shall be duly amended or repealed. 
Section 8 -  Inauguration of Government Under this Charter 
    If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the question, vote to ratify this charter, the provisions of this charter shall go into effect upon the filing of the charter by the governing body with the Secretary of State, the Clerk of the District Court for Ramsey County, and the office of the city auditor of Devils Lake. Said filings shall be completed not later than ninety (90) days after the election ratifying the charter. 
ARTICLE 11-CHANGING THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
    Changes in the form of government may be proposed on motion of the governing body or may be proposed by petitions bearing the signatures of qualified city electors equal to fifteen (15) per cent of those voting for the office of governor in the last election. Proposals for changing the form of government shall be voted upon at a special election called by the governing board not earlier than sixty (60) days nor more than ninety (90) days after the passage of said motion by the governing board or the filing of said petitions with the city auditor, or at a regular municipal election if the same is fixed within said time frame. 
ARTICLE 12-CONSTRUCTION 
    The powers of the city under this charter shall be construed liberally in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power in this charter. 
ARTICLE 13-METHOD OF AMENDMENT AND REPEAL 
    This chapter may be amended or repealed as provided by Section 40-05.1-07 of the North Dakota Century Code and acts amendatory thereto. 
    Submitted by the Devils Lake Home Rule Charter Commission and published in the Devils Lake Daily Journal on April 1, 1977. Adopted by the voters at a special Devils Lake City election held on June 1, 1977. 
    Members of the Home Rule Charter Commission of the City of Devils Lake, North Dakota: 
Mrs. Ruth Taylor Dean Hildebrand Dr. Richard Kunkel LaVerne Gloger Jack Traynor, Chairman RECEIPT OF TRUE AND CORRECT COPIES OF THE FOREGOING HOME RULE CHARTER AND ATTACHED COMMISSION RESOLUTION RELATING THERETO ARE HEREBY ACKNOWLEDGED ON THE DATES HEREINAFTER SPECIFIED. June 27, 1977 (Signed) _____ Date Ben Meier 
Secretary of State 
State of North Dakota June 23, 1977 (Signed) _____ Date Clerk of the District Court 
Ramsey County, North Dakota June 23, 1977 (Signed) _____ City Auditor 
City of Devils Lake, 
North Dakota  
RESOLUTION 
(HOME RULE CHARTER) 
    WHEREAS, a Devils Lake City Special Election was conducted on June 1, 1977, for the purpose of submitting the Home Rule Charter as published in the Devils Lake Journal on April 1, 1977; and 
    WHEREAS, a majority of two hundred eighty-three votes were cast in favor of the proposed charter with ninety-three votes against the same; and 
    WHEREAS, this governing body did this date canvass the returns of said special election and declare that a majority of the qualified electors of the City of Devils Lake, North Dakota, voting on the charter were in favor of the same; and 
    WHEREAS, by virtue of 40-05.1-05, NDCC, as amended, said hereinbefore described Home Rule Charter is now deemed to be ratified and the organic law of the City of Devils Lake, North Dakota, extending to all its local and city matters, now, therefor, IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, that the City Auditor of the City of Devils Lake file copies of said charter with each of the following, namely: 
Hon. Ben Meier 
Secretary of State 
Capitol Building 
Bismarck, North Dakota 
Hon. Ronald M. Dosch 
Clerk of the District Court 
Ramsey County Court House 
Devils Lake, North Dakota 
Mr. Derrel D. Britsch 
City Auditor 
City Hall 
Devils Lake, North Dakota 
    WHEREUPON the courts are to take judicial notice of said new charter. 
Adopted this 2nd day of June, A.D. 1977, by the City Commission of the City of Devils Lake, North Dakota. 
(Signed) _____ Attest: Dennis Riggin, Mayor of the City of Devils Lake, North Dakota. (Signed) _____ Derrel D. Britsch, City Auditor.  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    Pursuant to authority granted by North Dakota Code 40-05-01 and 40-11-09, there is adopted the "Devils Lake Municipal Code" as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 675 § 1, 1984) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation-Reference. 
    This code shall be known as the "Devils Lake Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to this code as the "Devils Lake Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part of portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the "Devils Lake Municipal Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the "Devils Lake Municipal Code" and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 675 § 2, 1984) 
1.01.030 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
    The last ordinance included in the initial code is Ordinance 666, passed June 20, 1983. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 666, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 667, 668, 669, 670, 671, 672, 673 and 674. 
(Ord. 675 § 3, 1984) 
1.01.040 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "Devils Lake Municipal Code" or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Devils Lake, North Dakota, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 675 § 4, 1984) 
1.01.050 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 675 § 5, 1984) 
1.01.060 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this code shall not in any matter affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 675 § 6, 1984) 
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
    Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal of amendments hereby of any ordinance or part of portion of any ordinances of the city of Devils Lake, shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee, or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 675 § 7, 1984) 
1.01.080 - Effective date. 
    This code shall be come effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the "Devils Lake Municipal Code" shall become effective. 
(Ord. 675 § 8, 1984) 
1.01.090 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 675 § 9, 1984) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the city of Devils Lake, North Dakota, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City" and "town" each mean the city of Devils Lake, North Dakota or the areas within the territorial limits of the city of Devils Lake, North Dakota, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Commission" means the board of city commissioners of the city. "All its members" or "all commissioners" means the total number of commissioners holding office. 
C.  "County" means the county of Ramsey. 
D.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of North Dakota, the ordinances of the city, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
E.  "May" is permissive. 
F.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
G.  "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
H.  "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
I.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant-in-common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
J.  "Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, office or employee of any of them. 
K.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
L.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after respectively. 
M.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
N.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
O.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
P.  "State" means the state of North Dakota. 
Q.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
R.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
S.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
T.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 655 § 1, 1983) 
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
    Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city. 
(Ord. 655 § 2, 1983) 
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
    All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 655 § 3, 1983) 
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
    The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the city, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 655 § 4, 1983) 
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
    When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 655 § 5, 1983) 
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permit ting. 
    Whenever in the ordinances of the city, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 655 § 6, 1983) 
1.04.070 - Computation of time. 
    Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 655 § 7, 1983) 
1.04.080 - Construction. 
    The provisions of the ordinances of the city, and all proceedings under them are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 655 § 8, 1983) 
1.04.090 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 655 § 9, 1983) 
Chapter 1.07 - PURCHASING AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 
Sections: 

1.07.010 - Competitive bidding requirements. 
    All purchase of and contracts for supplies and contractual services for the city and all sales of property therewith which has become obsolete or unusable shall, except as otherwise provided herein, be based, whenever possible, on competitive bids. 
(Ord. 708 (part), 1987) 
1.07.020 - Procedure. 
A.  All supplies of a singular or common item contracts for singular services or the total amount of all costs of one project for the city except as otherwise provided herein and in Section 1.07.030, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed thirty thousand dollars shall be purchased from the lowest responsible bidder after due notice inviting bids. 
B.  All sales or disposition of obsolete or unusable property when the estimated value shall exceed two thousand five hundred dollars shall be sold to the highest responsible bidder as provided in Section 1.07.060. 
C.  The lowest responsible bidder, or the highest responsible bidder shall be the bidder who in addition to price, has the best ability, capacity and skill to perform the contract or provide the service required promptly or within the specified time without delay or interference. There shall also be considered character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder, the quality of performance of previous contract, sufficiency of financial resources, and previous and existing compliance with state laws and city ordinances. 
D.  Any plans for improvement, alteration, or construction on any city-owned building must be submitted, for consideration and approval, to the board of city commissioners prior to the commencement of any such improvement, alteration, or construction. 
E.  Any acquisition of property by the city through gift, devise, bequest, or gratuitous consideration, which may subject the city to liability or financial obligation must have prior approval of the board of city commissioners. 
F.  No city commissioner or city employee may obligate the city to pay or approve a voucher in any amount, which would cause the line item authorized budget, as amended, of the appropriate account to be exceeded, without prior approval of the board of city commissioners. 
G.  The guidelines of subsections A through F of this section are inapplicable to the following circumstances: 
1.  Projects which are bid or built pursuant to a call for proposals or general contractor construction, and commission-approved change orders; 
2.  Items or contractual services which are under annual bid to the city; 
3.  Items of finance pursuant to a bond repayment, or contractual repayment schedule and annual audit; 
4.  Payment of insurance premiums; 
5.  Sole source appropriations; 
6.  Items currently bid by the state and available to political subdivisions; 
7.  Emergency repair of water and sewer system; 
8.  An emergency exists as declared by the board of city commissioners; 
9.  The purchase of an item that has already been approved by the city commission in its annual budget, provided that the head of the department has the approval of the commissioner holding the portfolio for that department. 
(Ord. 880 (part), 2008: Ord. 825 (part), 1999: Ord. 755, 1991: Ord. 729, 1989: Ord. 726, 1989: Ord. 708 (part), 1987) 
(Ord. No. 898, 9-19-11) 
1.07.030 - Open market purchases. 
A.  All purchases, contractual services, or sale of obsolete or unusable property for the city, shall be made or obtained in the open market with competitive bidding, unless one of the following apply: 
1.  The purchase or contractual services are for less than thirty thousand dollars. 
2.  The sale of obsolete or unusable property by the city is for less than two thousand five hundred dollars. 
3.  The purchase or sale is from or to another governmental body. 
4.  The city commission has determined that an emergency exists requiring the immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services. 
B.  Upon a motion of the board of city commissioners, the commissioner holding the portfolio of a specific department, or any other designated commissioner, may effect the purchase of a used vehicle for a municipal use or purpose if the amount is less than fifteen thousand dollars by calling for proposals from at least three dealers in the city, if done in person or by giving sufficient notice, time and opportunity to other interested vehicle dealers to submit an appropriate bid on said property if done by newspaper. 
(Ord. 880 (part), 2008: Ord. 825 (part), 1999: Ord. 708 (part), 1987) 
(Ord. No. 899, 9-19-11) 
1.07.040 - Accounts against city to be in writing and verified. 
    Accounts, claims and demands against the city for any property or services for which the city shall be liable, shall be reduced to writing in items and the claimant shall verify the same in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 708 (part), 1987) 
1.07.050 - Further verification may be required. 
    It is provided that the city auditor or any officer of the board of city commissioners before whom any bill, claim, account, or demand against the city shall come for audit and approval may, if deemed necessary, require to be furnished a statement made under oath, containing such other information as is deemed necessary for the further verification of any bill, claim account or demand against the city, or any of its undertakings. 
(Ord. 708 (part), 1987) 
1.07.060 - Conveyance, sale, lease or disposal of property. 
    Real property belonging to the city shall be conveyed, sold, leased, or disposed of only as approved of by a two-thirds vote of all members of the board of city commissioners. Instruments affecting such conveyance, sale, lease or disposal shall be valid only when duly executed by the president of the board of city commissioners and attested by the city auditor. Personal property shall be conveyed by a majority vote of all members of the board of city commissioners. When the property to be disposed of, whether real property or personal property is estimated, by the board of city commissioners to be of a value of less than two thousand five hundred dollars such property may be sold at private sale upon the proper resolution of the board of city commissioners. In all other cases, such property may be sold only at public sale. Bids for the purchase or lease of real property belonging to the municipality, whether or not advertisement therefore has been made, shall be made directly to the board of city commissioners and submitted to the city auditor, who shall present any and all such bids to the board of city commissioners at its next regularly scheduled meeting. When specific statutory provisions contained in the North Dakota Century Code provide for a procedure which is in conflict with this section, governing the conveyance, sale, lease or disposal of real property, the section shall not apply insofar as it is in conflict with such state law. Said statutory procedures are as follows: 
A.  Lease of airports or landing fields, or portions thereof shall be under authority granted in Section 2-01-16, NDCC. Said lease shall further be in compliance with regulations and directives of appropriate federal agencies; 
B.  Conveyance of right-of-way for any state highway shall be as provided in Section 24-01-46, NDCC; 
C.  Leasing of oil and gas lands shall be as provided in Sections 38-09-02 through 39-09-04 and Sections 38-09-14 through 38-09-20, NDCC; 
D.  Conveyance of property to a municipal parking authority shall be provided in Section 40-61-05, NDCC; 
E.  Lease of public buildings or portions thereof shall be as provided in Chapter 48-08, NDCC; 
F.  Granting of concessions for cafes, restaurants, and confectioneries in public buildings or on public grounds shall be as provided in Chapter 48-09, NDCC; 
G.  Granting of right-of-way for a railway, telephone lines, electric light system, or a gas or oil pipeline system shall be as provided in Section 49-09-16, NDCC. 
(Ord. 708 (part), 1987) 
1.07.070 - Real property transfer requirements. 
    As an alternative to the procedure set out in this chapter, the board of city commissioners may by resolution describe the real property which is to be sold; provide a maximum rate of fee, compensation, or commission, and provide that the city reserves the right to reject any and all offers determined to be insufficient. After adoption of the resolution, the board of city commissioners may engage licensed real estate brokers to attempt to sell the described property by way of nonexclusive listing agreements. 
(Ord. 708 (part), 1987) 
1.07.080 - Waiver of separate bids for general, electrical, and mechanical for public buildings. 
A.  For purposes of this section, design-build concept is defined as a preliminary set of performance specifications which are established for a construction project. The specifications are sent to contractors and/or architects who submit proposals to design and build a project at a guaranteed price. Instead of having a number of bids for the same design, each proposal may represent a complete and different design. This is different than the traditional competitive bidding process where uniform specifications are provided to all interested bidders so that comparable bids are submitted on a definite design structure. 
B.  There must be published a request for proposals once a week for three consecutive weeks. 
C.  By action of the city commission, the requirements for individual general, electrical, or mechanical bids in any design-build project shall not be required, even if any combination of these individual contracts exceed one hundred thousand dollars. It is intended that this waiver would not require separate biddings as set forth in Section 49-01.1-06, N.D.C.C., or any amendment to that section of North Dakota law. 
D.  The waiver allowed by subsection C of this section may be made by motion and majority vote of the Devils Lake city commission. 
(Ord. 847, 2001) 
1.07.090 - Disqualification of purchaser. 
    A party is disqualified from purchasing any personal or real property from the city of Devils Lake, if that party owes any amount to the city of Devils Lake or owes any delinquent real estate taxes to any county in the state of North Dakota. This disqualification includes any entity or person having an interest in an entity in which the entity or the person owe any amount to the city of Devils Lake, or is delinquent in the payment of real estate taxes in the state of North Dakota. 
(Ord. No. 888, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 1.08 - RIGHT OF ENTRY 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Authority. 
    Whenever any officer or employee of the city is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance, he may enter the building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect them; provided, that he shall effect entry in the manner provided in Section 1.08.020, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or control of the building or premises has been otherwise obtained. 
(Ord. 656 § 1, 1983) 
1.08.020 - Consent. 
    If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and, if the building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If consent to such entry is not given, the authorized officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, and may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for such entry. 
(Ord. 656 § 2, 1983) 
1.08.030 - Refusal to consent to entry. 
    This chapter is controlling over any other ordinance or part of an ordinance on the same subject, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, unless the ordinance or part of an ordinance provides differently by an express reference to this chapter. Notwithstanding any other ordinance of this city, whether heretofore or hereafter adopted, it is not a violation of ordinance to refuse or fail to consent to an entry for inspection for which a warrant is required to be obtained. 
(Ord. 656 § 3, 1983) 
Chapter 1.12 - ARREST, IMPRISONMENT AND PARDON 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - Arrest without warrant-Permitted when. 
A.  Any police officer, watchman or other peace officer of the city may, without a warrant, arrest a person for the violation of any city ordinance committed or attempted in his presence. 
B.  Any person arrested without a warrant must, without unnecessary delay, be taken before a police magistrate of the city. 
(Prior code § 314) 
1.12.020 - Arrest without warrant-Procedure. 
    When any peace officer brings any person who has been arrested without a warrant before the police magistrate it is the duty of such officer to specify the charges upon which he has made the arrest. It is then the duty of the magistrate or city attorney to make a complaint of the offense charged and cause the peace officer or some other person to subscribe and make oath to the complaint and file it. 
(Prior code § 315) 
1.12.030 - Assessment of costs of prosecution. 
    In the event any person is convicted of violating any ordinance of the city, the costs of the prosecution shall be assessed against him in addition to any fine or imprisonment which may be imposed. 
(Prior code § 316) 
1.12.040 - Pardon. 
    The president of the board of city commissioners may at any time release any person imprisoned for violation of any city ordinance and shall report the release with the cause of it to the board of city commissioners at its first session thereafter. The police magistrate may suspend the execution of any sentence pronounced against any person for violation of any city ordinance or may place the person on parole after having served a portion of the sentence. The suspension or parole may be granted upon such terms as the police magistrate may fix. If any such person accepts the suspension or parole and thereafter is guilty of parole violation they shall be punished as defined in Section 1.16.020 of this code. 
(Ord. 677(part), 1984: Ord. 486 § 1, 1968: prior code § 318) 
1.12.050 - General reputation used as evidence when. 
    When at any prosecution it becomes necessary to establish that any house, room or place is a bawdy house or house of ill fame, or a place where gambling or other unlawful practices are permitted, proof of general reputation of such house, room or place shall be sufficient evidence of its character. 
(Prior code § 319) 
Chapter 1.16 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.16.010 - Violation a misdemeanor when. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of the ordinances of the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor except in the following instances: 
A.  If the violation is made an infraction by ordinance; or 
B.  If the violation carries with it a penalty different than what is set out in this chapter and which ordinance becomes effective after August 1, 1997. 
(Ord. 812 (part), 1997: Ord. 657 § 1(part), 1983) 
1.16.020 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a violation of an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 812 (part), 1997: Ord. 657 § 1(part), 1983) 
1.16.030 - Repeal provision. 
    This chapter is intended to repeal any penalty provision in effect in the city so that all ordinances of the city shall carry the same penalty, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 812 (part), 1997) 
1.16.040 - Assessment of crime victim and witness fee. 
    The municipal judge may assess a fee of not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) as part of a sentence imposed on a defendant who pleads guilty to or is convicted of violating a municipal ordinance for which the maximum penalty that may be imposed by law for the offense includes imprisonment. The fee assessed under this section is in addition to any fine, penalty, costs, or administrative fee prescribed by law. The municipal judge may assess the fee when sentence is imposed or when sentence is suspended or imposition of sentence is deferred, unless the defendant is indigent and unable to pay the fee. All fees paid to the municipal court under this section shall be deposited in the general fund for allocation by the city commission to: 
A.  A private, nonprofit domestic violence assault program; 
B.  A victim and witness advocacy program of which the primary function is to provide direct services to victims of and witnesses to crime; or 
C.  The statewide automated victim information and notification system (SAVIN) administered by the North Dakota Attorney General. 
(Ord. No. 949, 10-16-2017) 
Chapter 1.17 - RIGHT TO INITIATE AND REFER ORDINANCES 
Sections: 

1.17.010 - Initiative of ordinances. 
A.  The citizens of Devils Lake shall have the right to initiate ordinances. Qualified electors at least equal in number to fifteen percent of the number of electors voting in the city for the office of governor in the last election may, by initiated petition, submit a proposed ordinance to the governing body of the municipality. The petition shall be filed in the city auditor's office, and shall contain a request that the ordinance set out in the petition be submitted to a vote of the electors of the city if it is not passed by the governing body of the municipality. 
B.  The city auditor shall pass upon each petition, within ten days of receiving the same and if he finds that the same is not in order, he shall notify the "committee for the petitioners" and allow five days for correction or amendment. 
C.  Each petition shall have printed thereon "Initiation of City Ordinance providing for _______" and shall accurately identify and summarize the true nature of the initiated ordinance. In addition, each petition shall have listed the names of three electors who shall constitute the "committee for the petitioners" and who represent and act for the petitioners. At the bottom of each petition, the circulator of that particular petition shall sign an affidavit affirming that the signers thereto are known to him to be qualified electors of the city. 
D.  After receiving the petition for the initiation of a proposed ordinance, the governing body of the municipality shall: 
1.  Pass the ordinance without alteration within twenty days after the attachment of the auditor's certificate to the accompanying petition that it appears in order, or 
2.  Call a special election within ninety days after the filing of the petition and submit to the vote of the electors of the municipality that initiated ordinance without alteration. However, if a general city election is fixed not earlier than fifteen days nor later than ninety days after the date of filing said petition, the unaltered initiated ordinance shall be placed upon the ballot for vote consideration at said general election. 
E.  If a majority of the qualified electors voting on an initiated ordinance vote in favor thereof, it shall become a valid and binding ordinance of the municipality. Any ordinance proposed by a petition and adopted by a vote of the people cannot be repealed or amended except by a vote of the people in a referendum. 
F.  The city auditor shall cause any ordinance proposed under this chapter to be published once in the newspaper published in the municipality. 
G.  This chapter shall be self-executing and all of its provisions treated as mandatory. Ordinances may be enacted to facilitate its operation but no ordinances shall be enacted to hamper, restrict or impair the exercise of the rights herein reserved to the people. 
(Ord. 804 (part), 1997) 
1.17.020 - Referendum of ordinances. 
A.  The citizens of Devils Lake shall have the right to refer ordinances. Qualified city electors at least equal in number to fifteen percent of the number of electors voting in the city for the office of governor in the last election may, by referendum petition, suspend the operation of any ordinance enacted by the governing body, except emergency ordinances approved by at least three-fourths of all members of the governing body and except those ordinances implementing public projects upon which an election or a referendum has already been held pursuant to law or this charter, or which provide for meeting obligations of bonded indebtedness incurred by a prior ordinance or a prior election or referendum. An emergency ordinance shall contain a clause declaring an emergency. The filing of referendum petitions against one or more items, sections or parts of any ordinance, shall not prevent the remainder from going into effect. Referendum petitions shall be filed with the city auditor not later than thirty days after adoption of the ordinance. 
B.  When a referendum petition is filed the governing body of the municipality shall consider the ordinance or the part thereof which has been referred; and if the governing body shall repeal the ordinance or the part which has been referred, the referral procedure shall terminate. 
C.  Each ordinance referred to the electors shall be placed upon the ballot by the city auditor at a special election within ninety days after the filing of said referral petition or on the ballot at a general city election if same is fixed not earlier than fifteen days nor later than ninety days after the date of filing. 
D.  If a referendum petition is filed against an emergency ordinance, such ordinance shall be in effect until voted upon by the electors. And, if it is then rejected by a majority of the votes cast thereon, it shall be repealed as of the tenth day after the election. 
E.  The city auditor shall pass upon each petition, and if he finds it is not in order, (insufficient) he shall notify the "committee for the petitioners" and allow five days for correction or amendment. 
F.  Each petition shall have printed thereon: "Referral of City Ordinance _______, providing for _______ " and shall accurately identify and summarize the true nature of the ordinance, or portion of ordinance, being referred. In addition, each petition shall have listed the names of three electors who shall constitute the "committee for the petitioners" and who shall represent and act for the petitioners. At the bottom of each petition, the circulator of that particular petition shall sign an affidavit affirming that the signers thereto are known to him to be qualified electors of the city. 
G.  This chapter shall be self-executing and all of its provisions treated as mandatory. Ordinances may be enacted to facilitate its operation but no ordinances shall be enacted to hamper, restrict or impair the exercise of the rights herein reserved to the people. 
(Ord. 804 (part), 1997) 
1.17.030 - Referendum by governing body. 
    Before adopting ordinances the governing body may on its own motion submit questions to the electorate for an advisory vote of the people at any city-wide election specified by the governing body. If a question is submitted in the form of a proposed ordinance and it is approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon, the governing body thereafter adopts the ordinance within six months of such vote, such ordinance shall not be subject to referral by petition. 
(Ord. 804 (part), 1997) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.01 - OFFICERS-GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

2.01.010 - Meals and lodging-Amount allowed. 
A.  Each elective or appointive officer, employee, representative, or agent of the city, or of any of its subdivisions, boards, or commissions may make claim and shall upon approval of such claim, be paid an allowance for meals and lodging while engaged within this state, in the discharge of a public duty away from their normal working and living residence for all or any part of any quarter of a day at the rates specified by state law. 
B.  Verifications of claims shall not be required for the first three quarters listed above and only a lodging receipt shall be required for the fourth quarter; provided, however, the amount paid for such lodging shall not be required to be listed. 
C.  Such persons engaged in travel without the state shall not claim a sum in excess of that allowed by state law per day for meals and in addition thereto actual lodging expenses. Verification by receipt for such out-of-state travel expense shall be required only for the lodging expense claimed. Verification of any other type of expenses not prescribed by this section shall be by sworn statement and receipts shall be required for taxi or cab fares. 
D.  Any person filing a false claim with the city for mileage or expenses as herein permitted is guilty of an offense, and may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars and imprisonment not to exceed thirty days. 
(Ord. 748 (part), 1990) 
2.01.020 - Personal interest in contract by public officer-Prohibited. 
    No contract for the furnishing of supplies to the city, or buying of property from the city shall be entered into by any officer of the municipality; provided, however, that such contracts may be entered into with an officer of the city, if such contract is unanimously approved by other members of the governing body of the city by a finding unanimously adopted by such other members, and entered in the official minutes of the governing body, to be necessary for the reason that the services or property are not otherwise available at equal cost. 
(Ord. 748 (part), 1990) 
2.01.030 - Retiring officer to turn over books. 
    Any person having been an officer of the city shall, within five days after notification and request, deliver to the successor in office, all property, books and effects of every description belonging to the city or appertaining to such office; and upon refusal to do so, shall be liable for all damages caused thereby, and guilty of an offense and may be punished by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars and imprisonment of not to exceed thirty days. 
(Ord. 748 (part), 1990) 
2.01.040 - Administrative policy and procedure. 
A.  Each officer shall: 
1.  Perform all duties required by their office by law or ordinance and such other duties not in conflict as may be required by the governing body; 
2.  Be immediately responsible to the governing body for the effective administration of their departments and all activities assigned thereto; 
3.  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate with approval of the governing body such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public; 
4.  Submit such reports of activities of their department as the governing board may request; 
5.  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in the department; 
6.  Establish and maintain records in sufficient detail to furnish all information needed for proper control of department activities and to form a basis for reports to the governing board; 
7.  Cooperate with other officers, departments and employees; and 
8.  Have power to direct and supervise all subordinates. 
(Ord. 748 (part), 1990) 
2.01.050 - Obstructing a public official-Prohibited. 
    Every person who wilfully delays or obstructs public officers in the discharge or attempt to discharge any duty of their office shall be guilty of an infraction. Upon conviction for a violation of this section, such person shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 748 (part), 1990) 
2.01.060 - Ex officio officers. 
    "Ex officio" is defined as "by virtue or because of an office." Any assignment of duties as ex officio means whoever holds the stated position or duty is the person fulfilling the requirement, and such person will change from time to time as the office assignment changes. Ex officio designated positions shall have equal power to voice, vote, and action the same as other members on all matters, and shall be included for the purpose of calculating quorum at all meetings. 
(Ord. 749 (part), 1990) 
Chapter 2.02 - AUDITOR-FINANCE OFFICER 
Sections: 

2.02.010 - Description. 
    The office of city administrator/city auditor shall perform high level of administrative, technical and professional work in directing and supervising the administration of the city. The city administrator/city auditor shall exercise supervision over all municipal employees either directly or through subordinate supervisors. The city administrator/city auditor shall work under the direction of the mayor with formal guidance from the city commission. 
(Ord. 875 (part), 2007: Ord. 699 (part), 1986) 
2.02.020 - Employment status. 
    The city administrator/city auditor shall be on probation for the first six months of employment and may be removed by the city commission without cause during the probationary period. After the probationary period, the city administrator/city auditor may be removed only for cause. All provisions of the Personnel Policy Manual of the city shall apply. 
(Ord. 875 (part), 2007: Ord. 699 (part), 1986) 
2.02.030 - Duties and responsibilities. 
    The city administrator/city auditor shall perform the following: 
A.  Oversee the management of all departments, agencies and offices of the city to achieve goals within available resources; 
B.  Provide leadership and direction in the development of the city; participate in economic development activities of the city; gather, interpret and prepare data for studies, reports and recommendations; coordinate department activities with other departments and agencies as needed; 
C.  Administer the overall financial operation of the city by planning, organizing, directing, and reviewing general procedures, methods, and results of budgeting operations, special assessments, the investment program of the city, revenue collection, budget preparation, and expenditure control; 
D.  Provide professional advice to the city commission and department heads, make presentations to commissions, boards, and general public; communicate official plans, policies, and procedures to the city commission, staff, other government entities, and the general public; 
E.  Assure the assigned areas of responsibility are performed within budget; perform cost control activities; monitor revenues and expenditures in assigned areas to assure sound fiscal control; coordinate and review annual budget requests; assure effective and efficient use of budgeted funds, personnel, materials, facilities, and time; 
F.  Review staffing levels of all departments to ensure fiscal efficiency while ensuring defined service standards are maintained; 
G.  Responsible for establishing and maintaining an employee evaluation system; serve as second level supervisor for evaluation appeals for all other city employees; review disciplinary actions and grievances; 
H.  Countersign all bonds, orders, contracts, or other orders on the city treasury; 
I.  See that all laws, ordinances, and charters are adhered to in all operations within the city; 
J.  Supervise the revision and maintenance of city ordinance books and records all meetings of the city commission; 
K.  Serve as liaison for legislative issues, including pending legislation, changes in current legislation, or advocating through other organizations; 
L.  Supervise the conduct of city elections and compilation of voters registration lists; 
M.  Act as public information officer and public works director during emergencies; 
N.  Act as city auditor where the statutory reference is made to the position in the North Dakota Century Code or by the city of Devils Lake Municipal Code; 
O.  Perform other duties and assume additional responsibilities as directed by the city commission to ensure efficient and effective city operation. 
(Ord. 875 (part), 2007: Ord. 699 (part), 1986) 
2.02.040 - Deputy auditor. 
    The city administrator/city auditor, with the consent and approval of the governing body of the city, shall appoint a deputy and file such appointment in his office. The deputy shall aid in the performance of the duties of the office under the city administrator/city auditor's direction and in the absence or disability of the city administrator/city auditor, the deputy shall perform the duties of the city administrator/city auditor. The city administrator/city auditor and the surety on his official bond shall be liable for the acts of the deputy. 
(Ord. 875 (part), 2007: Ord. 699 (part), 1986) 
Chapter 2.08 - CITY COMMISSION* 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Board of city commissioners. 
    The governing body of the city shall be the board of commissioners, also referred to as the commission, which shall be composed of the president and four city commissioners. The president and four city commissioners shall be elected as provided by law. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.020 - Commissioners-Terms of office-Terms of members of first commission-Resignation. 
    Each commissioner and the president shall hold office for four years from and after the date of election, and until a successor shall have been duly elected and qualified. The president and any other commissioner may resign their office by filing their written resignation with the city auditor, who shall levy the resignation before the commission at its next regular meeting, or at a special meeting called for consideration of such resignation. The resignation shall become effective upon its acceptance by the commission. The term of each commissioner shall commence on the fourth Tuesday in June in the year in which elected. 
(Ord. 877 (part), 2008: Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.030 - President as executive officer-Duties-No veto power. 
    The president shall be the executive officer of the city and shall see that all the laws of the city are enforced. The president shall have the right to vote as a member of the commission, but shall have no veto power. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.040 - Vice-president and acting president-Powers and duties. 
    At the fist meeting of the commission after each biennial election, one of its own members shall be elected vice-president. The vice-president shall perform all the duties of the office of president in the absence or inability of the president to act. In the absence or inability to act of both the president and the vice-president, the commission shall elect one of its members as acting president, who shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the president. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.050 - Vacancies. 
    If a vacancy occurs the commission may call a special city election, to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term, or may, after fifteen days from the date of such vacancy appoint a person to fill such vacancy until the next city election, at which election the unexpired term shall be filled. Upon petition of five percent of the electors, however as determined by the total number of votes cast in the city in the last general election, the commission shall call a special city election to fill a vacancy if occurring more than six months prior to the next city election, provided such petition has been submitted within fifteen days of such vacancy. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.060 - Appointment of commissioners-Duties. 
A.  The president shall appoint from among the members of the board of city commissioners, subject to approval by a majority vote of all the members therefor, the following: 
1.  A police commissioner who shall have special charge of the enforcement of all police regulations of the city; 
2.  A fire commissioner who shall have special charge of the general supervision of the fire department of the city; 
3.  A street commissioner who shall have special charge of the streets and alleys of the city and with the enforcement of all rules and regulations relating thereto; 
4.  A water commissioner who shall have special charge of the water system of the city and who shall see to the enforcement of all regulations to same; 
5.  A sewer commissioner who shall have special charge of the sewer of the city and who shall see to the enforcement of all regulations to same; 
6.  A finance commissioner who shall have special charge of the enforcement of all laws for the assessment and collection of taxes of every kind and the collection of all revenues belonging to the city, from whatever source the same may be derived, and who shall examine into and keep informed as to the finances of the city; 
7.  A sanitation commissioner who shall have special charge of the sanitation system of the city and who shall see to the enforcement of all regulations with respect to same; 
8.  A cemetery commissioner who shall have special charge of the enforcement of all cemetery regulations of the city; 
9.  An engineering commissioner who shall have special charge of the engineering department of the city and who shall see to the enforcement of all regulations with respect to the same; 
10.  A municipal judge and city attorney commissioner who shall have special charge of the municipal judge and city attorney departments of the city and who shall see to the enforcement of all regulations with respect to the same; 
11.  An assessing/building official commissioner who shall have special charge of the assessing/building official department of the city and who shall see to the enforcement of all regulations with respect to the same. 
B.  The duties assigned by this section or any other duties specifically mandated by operation of law may be otherwise distributed by a majority vote of the commission. 
C.  In the event that any commissioner shall cease serving as such, either voluntarily or involuntarily, membership on any committees related to city business which originated with the appointment process shall automatically terminate and the commission shall appoint an eligible member to fill the position as soon as possible. 
(Ord. 749 (part), 1990; Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.070 - Auditing accounts-Approval. 
    The commissioner of each portfolio shall audit all accounts against it, but before payment the accounts shall be acted upon and approved by at least three members of the commission. Approval by at least three members of the commission shall be recorded in the minutes and this shall be sufficient to indicate approval without requiring the approving members to sign or initial the voucher or order for payment of the account. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.080 - Rules and regulations for city departments. 
    The commission shall have the sole authority to pass and adopt rules and regulations concerning the organization, management, and operation of all the departments of the city and other agencies created by it for the administration of city affairs. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.090 - Attendance of witnesses-Contempt process. 
A.  Whenever it is necessary for the more effective discharge of its duties, the commission may summon and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers before it. The commission may punish for contempt of the board with the same of the county court. 
B.  All process necessary to enforce the powers conferred by this section shall be signed by the president, attested by the city auditor, and served by any member of the police force of the city. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.100 - Restrictions on commissioner. 
A.  No commissioner shall: 
1.  Be eligible for any other office the salary of which is payable out of the city treasury; 
2.  Hold any other office under the city government; 
3.  Hold a position, or provide goods and/or services to the city for remuneration, in the employment of the city unless authorized and approved by a majority vote of the commission. Such authorization may be given for up to a two-year period if done at the organizational meeting of the commission on the fourth Tuesday of each even-numbered year, but in no case shall it extend beyond the fourth Tuesday of each even-numbered year. 
(Ord. 877 (part), 2008: Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.110 - Regular meetings. 
    The commission shall meet regularly at the City Hall on the first and third Monday of each month at the hour of five-thirty p.m. unless some other time and place shall be specifically fixed by the commission. 
(Ord. 877 (part), 2008: Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.120 - Special meetings. 
    Special meetings may be called at any time by the president, or any two commissioners to consider matters mentioned in the call of such meetings. Written notice of any special meeting shall be given to each commissioner, and the official newspaper of the city, at least twenty-four hours before the time of the meeting, unless the special meeting is declared at any other public meeting. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.130 - Public attendance-Journal of proceedings. 
    All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public, and a journal of its proceedings shall be kept. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.140 - Quorum. 
    A majority of the commissioners shall constitute a quorum to do business but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time. The commission may compel the attendance of absentees under such penalties as may be prescribed by ordinance, and may employ the police for that purpose. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.150 - Rescinding votes. 
    No vote of the commission shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting unless there is present at such special meeting as large a number of commissioners as were present when such vote was taken. 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.160 - Rules for meetings. 
    Rules for the parliamentary government of the commission shall be governed by "Roberts Rules of Order." 
(Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.170 - Order of business. 
    The order of business shall be as follows: 
A.  Minutes of previous meetings; 
B.  Bids and/or hearings; 
C.  Visitors or delegations; 
D.  Commission portfolios; 
E.  Old business; 
F.  New business; 
G.  Bills; 
H.  Adjournment. 
(Ord. 861, 2003: Ord. 739 (part), 1989) 
2.08.180 - Salaries of city commissioners. 
    The salaries of the city commissioners shall be fixed by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. 748 (part), 1990) 
Chapter 2.10 - MUNICIPAL JUDGE 
Sections: 

2.10.010 - Generally. 
    There shall be elected each four years a municipal judge who shall hold office until a successor is elected and qualified. The municipal judge shall perform all the duties prescribed by law and the ordinances of the city, and shall receive an annual salary as full compensation for all services rendered. 
(Ord. 746 (part), 1990) 
2.10.020 - Report to board of city commissioners. 
    It shall be the duty of the municipal judge to make a full report, under oath, of all proceedings in the actions or matters in which the city is a party, or interested therein, to the governing body of the city, at the close of each month. Until such report has been filed with the city auditor, no salary shall be paid the judge for such work. 
(Ord. 746 (part), 1990) 
2.10.030 - Contents of report. 
    The report described in Section 2.10.020 shall contain the names of the parties to such actions or proceedings, a statement of all orders made whether the defendants be committed, fined or released from custody, the judgement, the extent thereof, the costs, the amount of costs and fine paid, if any, with the disposition thereof, together with an itemized account of any fees of all officers and witnesses and the names of each, the name of each person making the complaint, and the nature and date thereof. 
(Ord. 746 (part), 1990) 
2.10.040 - Receipt to accompany report. 
    The report will be accompanied by a duplicate receipt or receipts of the city auditor for the total amount of the fees and money so collected on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. 746 (part), 1990) 
2.10.050 - Court hours. 
    The municipal judge shall be in attendance at municipal court for the transaction of business, and shall devote the time necessary to handle and dispose of the business. 
(Ord. 746 (part), 1990) 
2.10.060 - Duties. 
    Additional duties of the municipal judge shall be as provided by the provisions of Chapter 40-18 of the North Dakota Century Code and all amendments thereto. 
(Ord. 746 (part), 1990) 
2.10.070 - Distribution of fees for domestic violence cases. 
A.  The municipal judge is authorized to assess a fee, not to exceed twenty-five dollars as part of a sentence imposed on a defendant who pleads guilty or is convicted of a criminal offense for which the maximum penalty that may be imposed by the law for the offense includes imprisonment. 
B.  The fee assessed is in addition to any fine, penalty, costs, or administrative fee prescribed by law. The municipal judge may assess the fee when sentence is imposed or when sentence is suspended or imposition of sentence is deferred, unless the defendant is indigent and unable to pay the fee. 
C.  All fees paid to the city must be deposited monthly in the city treasury for allocation by the governing body of the city to one or more of the following programs as determined by the governing body: 
1.  A victim/witness assistance program of which the primary function is to provide direct services to victims of and witnesses to crime; 
2.  A private, nonprofit domestic violence or sexual assault program. 
(Ord. 773, 1992) 
Chapter 2.12 - APPOINTIVE OFFICERS* 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Appointive officers-Right to dispense with offices. 
A.  At the first meeting after the qualification of its members, or as soon thereafter as possible, the board of city commissioners shall appoint the following officers: 
1.  City attorney; 
2.  City auditor; 
3.  City assessor; 
4.  Chief of police; 
5.  City engineer; 
6.  Fire chief. 
B.  In addition, the governing body may appoint such other officers it may deem necessary, or may, by a majority vote, dispense with any appointive office, and provide that the duties thereof shall be performed by other officers or boards, by the board of city commissioners, or by a committee or committees thereof. 
(Ord. 878 (part), 2008: Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
2.12.020 - Term of appointive officers. 
    The term of all appointive officers shall begin on July 1st, after the regular election of city commissioners and shall continue for a term of two years until their successors have been appointed and qualified. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold the office for the unexpired term unless appointed as an "acting" officer. An acting officer shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body. Before entering upon the duties of their office, appointed officers shall take oath and give the bond required by law. 
(Ord. 878 (part), 2008: Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
2.12.030 - Postponement of appointments. 
    The commission may, upon the concurrence of two-thirds of the commissioners present, postpone action on such appointments, or any of them, to a special session of the commission to be held not later than one week from the date of such adjournment. 
(Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
2.12.040 - Appointive officers-Removal upon hearing-Suspension of appointment-Removal of temporary officer. 
    Any person appointed to any office may be removed by a majority vote of all the members of the board of city commissioners, but no officer shall be removed except for cause and unless charges are preferred, and the person is accorded an opportunity to be heard. Within ten days after charges are filed against any such person in the office of the city auditor, the board shall proceed to hear and determine the case upon its merits. The president of the board of city commissioners, or the board, by a majority vote of its members, may suspend any officer against whom charges have been preferred until the disposition of the charges. The president may appoint a person to fill any vacancy temporarily until charges against the incumbent of such office have been disposed of. Any person appointed by the president without confirmation may be removed when the president deems it is for the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
2.12.050 - General duties of city attorney. 
    The city attorney shall conduct all the law business of the city and of the departments thereof, and all law business in which the city shall be interested; and shall furnish written opinions when requested by the city commission, or any other department. It shall also be the city attorney's duty to draft all ordinances, bonds, contracts, leases, conveyances and such other instruments as may be required by the officers of the city; to examine and inspect tax and assessment rolls and all other proceedings in reference to the levying and collection of taxes and to perform each and every and all duties and things prescribed to do by statutes of the state, or by an ordinance, resolution or proper instruction of the city commission. 
(Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
2.12.060 - General duties of other appointive officers. 
    All other appointive officers shall perform such duties as directed by the board of city commissioners, these ordinances, or directed or authorized by the laws of the state of North Dakota. 
(Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
2.12.070 - Bonds of municipal officers and employees. 
A.  The following officers and employees of the city shall be bonded in the sums as hereinafter set forth: 
1.  President of the city commission; 
2.  City auditor-finance officer; 
3.  City commissioners; 
4.  Deputy city auditor; 
5.  Municipal judge; 
6.  Police officers; 
7.  City assessor; 
8.  City engineer. 
B.  Said officers or employees shall be bonded from the State Bonding Fund in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 26-23 of the North Dakota Century Code and in such amounts as are set by the laws of the state of North Dakota, the board of city commissioners, or the commissioner of insurance. 
(Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
2.12.080 - Oaths of municipal officers. 
    Every person appointed to any municipal office, before entering upon the discharge of the duties thereof, shall take and subscribe the oath of office prescribed for civil officers and, except in the case of the city auditor, shall file the same with the city auditor within ten days after notice of election or appointment has been given. The oath of the city auditor shall be filed in the office of the county auditor. In addition, each commissioner shall take an oath that they are not under any direct or indirect obligation to appoint or elect any persons to the office of policeman, fireman, or any other office, position or appointment under the city government. 
(Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
2.12.090 - Salaries of city officials and appointive officers. 
    Salaries of city officials and appointive officers, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be in such sums and amounts as may be, by resolution of the governing body, fixed from time to time. 
(Ord. 747 (part), 1990) 
Chapter 2.16 - POLICE DEPARTMENT* 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Members. 
    The police department shall consist of the chief of police and as many policemen, policewomen, patrolmen and officers as may be authorized by the governing body. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.020 - Additional officers-Emergency. 
    In case of riot or unusual or general disturbances of the peace, the chief of police shall have the power to appoint such other and additional policemen and policewomen as he may deem necessary for the preservation of the public peace. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.030 - Duties of chief. 
    The chief of police shall keep such records and make such reports concerning the activities of his department as may be required by statute or by the governing body. The chief shall be responsible for the performance by the police department of its functions, and all persons who are members of the police department shall serve subject to the orders of the chief of police. The chief of police shall have the authority to administer oaths to police officers under his supervision. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.040 - Rules and regulations. 
    The chief of the police department may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the governing body, shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the department. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.050 - Duties of police-Generally. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the police department, and each and every member of the police force, to notice and diligently inquire into and report to the chief of police all violations of the city ordinances, violations of the criminal laws of the state and breaches of peace, and to make complaint against the person or persons guilty thereof, and to attend punctually on all trials of offenses in regard to which complaint has been made by any policeman. 
B.  Within the city limits and for a distance of one and one-half miles in all directions outside the city limits, the police officers shall perform the duties and exercise the powers of peace officers as defined and prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.060 - Duties of police-Hot pursuit-Defined. 
    A police officer in hot pursuit may continue beyond the one and one-half mile limit to make an arrest, in obedience to a warrant or without a warrant under the conditions of Section 25-06-15 of the North Dakota Century Code, whenever obtaining the aid of peace officers having jurisdiction beyond that limit, would cause a delay permitting escape. As used in this subsection, "hot pursuit" means the immediate pursuit of a person who is endeavoring to avoid arrest. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.070 - Duties of police-Service of process. 
    Police officers shall serve and execute any warrant, writ, process, order and notice issued to them by a municipal judge within the city in which the city is a party or interested beneficially. The police, within the limits prescribed in this section, may serve and execute all writs and process issued by justices in civil actions. In addition to the duties set out in this section, the police shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by chief of police and governing body. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.080 - Special police. 
    At the request of any corporation, firm or person, the chief of police may appoint one or more special policemen or policewomen to duty for such corporation, firm or person which special policemen or policewomen shall have all the authority now, or which may be hereafter conferred by law upon policemen, and may make arrangements that such special policemen or policewomen shall be paid by the corporation, firm or person requesting the same, and covered by their Workmens Compensation coverage in which case such special police shall receive no compensation from the city and the city shall not be responsible for the negligent or unauthorized acts, this being the responsibility of the firm, person or corporation requesting their appointment. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.090 - Money or property of arrested persons. 
    It shall be the duty of the police department, and of each and every member of the police force, to safely keep all moneys or property which may be found on the person, in possession of, or claimed by, any person arrested for crime, and pay or deliver over the same by the order of the municipal judge, and forthwith after taking the same, to report in writing the kind and amount thereof, to the municipal judge. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.100 - Arrested persons. 
    Any police officer after making any arrest, with or without a warrant, for any violation of city ordinances, shall take the person or persons so arrested, without any unreasonable delay, before the municipal judge, to be dealt with according to law and the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.110 - Stolen, abandoned, lost property. 
    The chief of police shall have the custody of all lost, stolen or abandoned property recovered in the city and shall make a report concerning such property. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.120 - Traffic administration. 
    The police department shall have such duties concerning enforcement, investigation, record keeping and other matters concerning traffic administration as are more fully set forth in ordinances. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.130 - Witness fees and mileage of municipal police officers. 
    Police officers of the city shall be entitled to be paid the witness fees and mileage expenses allowed by law for other witnesses while off duty when such officers are subpoenaed to testify in actions involving the city. The police officers shall submit vouchers for the above payment in accordance with department policies. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.140 - False alarms-Interference. 
    No person shall give or cause to be given, or make, or place or cause to be given any false report, call or communication of any kind to the police, or any false police alarms with intent to deceive; or tamper with or set off any police alarm or signal box with like intent; or tamper, meddle, or interfere with any such police alarm box, or intentionally cut, break, deface or remove any such box, or any of the wires or supports thereof, connected with the police alarm system; or intentionally interfere with or injure any property of any kind belonging to or used by the police department; or hinder or delay any apparatus or equipment or vehicle belonging to the police department. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
2.16.150 - Right-of-way. 
    Any motor vehicle or motorcycle of the police department shall, when going to or returning on business of the department, have the right-of-way upon giving an audible signal by bell, siren, exhaust whistle or red flashing light. The driver of any other vehicle shall drive to the nearest right-hand curb or edge of the road, stop and remain until the police vehicle shall have passed. 
(Ord. 737 (part), 1989) 
Chapter 2.17 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.17.010 - Appointment of members. 
A.  The city commissioners, when found to be necessary, shall appoint three reputable persons as members of a commission which shall be known as the special assessment commission. The terms of office for said members shall be as follows: 
1.  One member shall hold office until the first meeting of the governing body in April in the first odd-numbered year following the appointment; 
2.  One member shall hold office until the first meeting of the governing body in April in the second odd-numbered year following the appointment; 
3.  One member shall hold office until the first meeting of the governing body in April in the third odd-numbered year following the appointment. 
B.  At the first meeting of the governing body in April of each odd-numbered year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the city commission shall appoint a member of such commission. After the members of the initial special assessment commission have been appointed as provided in this chapter, each appointment thereafter shall be made for a term of six years. 
C.  In addition to appointing the members of the special assessment commission, the governing body, at the first meeting in April of each odd-numbered year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, will also name an alternate member to the special assessment commission. This alternate member shall serve until the next odd-numbered year. The alternate member shall serve as an alternate no more than six years. The alternate member shall act as a member of the special assessment commission in the absence of any member of the special assessment commission. This will include the alternate member having a vote as a member of the special assessment commission when the alternate does act as a member of the special assessment commission in the absence of a member of the special assessment commission. 
(Ord. 860, 2003; Ord. 758 (part), 1991) 
2.17.020 - Incorporation by reference. 
    Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings as defined and provided in the North Dakota Century Code in Title 40. In addition, all existing provisions and/or subsequent amendments in Chapter 40-23 of the North Dakota Century code, which are not inconsistent with this chapter, shall be and are incorporated by reference as the governing rules and procedures for the special assessment commission so created by this chapter. 
(Ord. 758 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 2.28 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.28.010 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to establish a program for the preservation, protection and regulation of historic properties within the city for the educational, cultural, economic and general welfare of the public; to safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving and regulating historic properties which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history; to preserve the city's economic base by the stimulation of the tourist industry; to establish and improve property values; to foster economic development; to manage growth; to foster civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the past; and to promote the use of historic properties for the education, pleasure and welfare of the people of the city. 
B.  It is intended that the commission will cooperate with and assist various local, state and federal entities and/or agencies in the enforcement of federal and state legislation to identify, evaluate, designate, record, protect and preserve properties significant in the prehistory, history, architecture, engineering and culture of the community, state and nation. 
C.  It is further declared that the purposes of this chapter are to: 
1.  Retain and enhance those historic properties within the city while allowing their adaption for current use by assuring that alterations are compatible with their historic character; and 
2.  Assure that new construction and subdivision of lots in historic districts, i.e., concentrations of historic properties, are compatible with the character of such districts. 
(Ord. 743 § 1, 1990) 
2.28.020 - Preservation commission-Created. 
    There is created a commission to be known as the city historical preservation commission. 
(Ord. 743 § 2, 1990) 
2.28.030 - Commission members-Number-Appointment-Terms-Compensation. 
A.  Numbers. The commission shall consist of no less than five members and up to and including eight members. 
B.  Appointment. The commission members shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city commission. 
C.  Terms. Each of the members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of two years, and such terms shall be staggered. 
D.  Compensation. The members shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. 808, 1997; Ord. 743 § 3, 1990) 
2.28.040 - Member qualifications. 
    Members appointed by the mayor shall be persons who, in the opinion of the mayor, have demonstrated outstanding interest and knowledge of history or architecture. A majority of the commission members shall be made up of persons from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, art history, planning, engineering, archeology or other historic preservation related disciplines, such as urban planning, American studies, American civilization, cultural geography or cultural anthropology, to the extent that such professionals are available in the community. 
(Ord. 743 § 4, 1990) 
2.28.050 - Selection of chairperson. 
    The mayor shall designate one of the members of the commission to be chairperson and one to be vice-chairperson. 
(Ord. 743 § 5, 1990) 
2.28.060 - Authorization to conduct studies and surveys. 
    The commission shall have the authority to conduct or to have conducted on its behalf studies and/or surveys of properties within the city limits. The commission shall conduct such studies and/or surveys in accordance with guidelines recommended by the state Historical Society. All collected data shall be recorded and maintained. Copies of such data must be provided to the state Historical Society. 
(Ord. 743 § 6, 1990) 
2.28.070 - Commission powers. 
A.  Unless otherwise specified herein, the powers and duties of the commission shall be to: 
1.  Promulgate criteria for classifying properties within the city as having historic significance; 
2.  Prepare, or have prepared on its behalf, a comprehensive inventory of historically significant and potentially historically significant properties within the city; 
3.  Make recommendations to the city commission concerning the acquisition of fee simple and less than fee simple rights in properties within the city for purposes of historic preservation; 
4.  Make recommendations to the city commission for any additional ordinances and/or administrative procedures required to implement the public policy declared in Section 2.28.010; 
5.  Develop and participate in public programs to increase public awareness of the value of historic properties and of the preservation program established by this chapter; 
6.  Make recommendations to the city commission (i) regarding application for and acceptance and utilization of grants from federal, state and local agencies or other entities, private groups, and individuals, and (ii) for budgetary appropriations to promote and achieve the preservation of historic properties in the city and to otherwise implement the public policy declared in Section 2.28.010 of this chapter; 
7.  Evaluate and comment upon plans, proposals, permits and applications which are developed or required by federal, state, municipal agencies or other public agencies, including those developed by other commissions, offices, and departments of the city, which may affect, either directly or indirectly, any property or properties deemed by the commission to have historic value; 
8.  Prepare and submit, in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, nominations to the National Register of Historic Places for properties deemed by the commission to be significant in local, state and/or natural history; 
9.  Review and comment upon all certifications of significance and certifications of rehabilitation as requested by the state Historic Preservation Officer; and 
10.  Perform any other functions which may be designated to it by resolution or motion of the city commission. 
(Ord. 743 § 7, 1990) 
2.28.080 - Power to adopt rules of procedure. 
    The commission shall have the power to make whatever rules are necessary for the execution of its duties as set forth in this article. All such rules shall be approved by the city commission by resolution before becoming effective. 
(Ord. 743 § 8, 1990) 
2.28.090 - Meetings-Notice-Minutes. 
A.  The commission shall meet not less than four times annually, according to a schedule established one year in advance. The commission may meet at such other times as deemed convenient, prudent and necessary by the commission. 
B.  All commission meetings shall be open to the public and advertised not less than ten days in advance of the meeting. 
C.  Minutes of all meetings shall be maintained and kept in the office of the mayor and shall be provided to the state Historical Society within sixty days following each commission meeting, or at such other times as may be directed. 
(Ord. 743 § 9, 1990) 
2.28.100 - Authority to employ staff and services. 
    Within the limit of funds appropriated generally for the performance of its work, the commission may obtain the services of qualified persons to direct, advise, and assist the commission and may obtain the equipment, supplies, services and other material necessary to its effective operation. 
(Ord. 743 § 10, 1990) 
2.28.110 - Authority to receive funding. 
    The city commission may annually appropriate funds, within budget limitations, for the operation of the city historical preservation commission. A fund known as historical preservation will be created as a trust and agency fund. All revenue from any source will be deposited in this fund. 
    The city historical preservation commission may receive revenues and turn them in to the city auditor for deposit into this fund. The city historical preservation commission shall make recommendations for expenditures they deem necessary to the city commission. All expenditures from this fund will be disbursed in the customary and usual manner as other disbursements are handled by city policy and procedures. 
(Ord. 743 § 11, 1990) 
Chapter 2.32 - SHADE TREE COMMITTEE 
Sections: 

2.32.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the municipal shade tree ordinance of the municipality of Devils Lake, county of Ramsey, state of North Dakota. 
(Ord. 636 § 1, 1980) 
2.32.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directive. 
A.  "Forestry department" is that department that works under the supervision of the shade tree committee of the municipality, under whose jurisdiction city-owned trees fall. 
B.  "Large trees" mean those attaining a height of forty-five feet or more. 
C.  "Medium trees" mean those attaining a height of thirty to forty-five feet. 
D.  "Municipality" is the city, town, village, subdivision or otherwise designated area unit of Devils Lake, county of Ramsey, state of North Dakota. 
E.  "Nuisance" means any dangerous or unsafe tree or portions thereof; and any tree harboring insect or disease organisms of a contagious and fatal nature which pose a serious threat to surrounding trees if not immediately removed and disposed of. 
F.  "Park" means and includes all public parks having individual names. 
G.  "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
H.  "Property line" means the outer edge of a street, highway or other public places owned by the city. 
I.  "Property owner" means the person owning such property as shown by the county auditor's plat of Ramsey County, state of North Dakota. 
J.  "Public places" means and includes all other grounds owned by the municipality of Devils Lake, county of Ramsey, state of North Dakota. 
K.  "Public trees" means and includes all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing on any street or any public place where otherwise indicated. 
L.  "Shade tree foreman" means the forester, tree warden or other qualified official of the municipality of Devils Lake, county of Ramsey, assigned to carry out the enforcement of this chapter under the supervision of the shade tree committee. 
M.  "Small trees" mean those attaining a height of twenty to thirty feet. 
N.  "Street" or "highway" means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part of it is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
O.  "Tree lawn" means that part of a street or highway, not covered by a sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 636 § 2, 1980) 
2.32.030 - Established. 
A.  There shall be a committee known as the shade tree committee of Devils Lake composed of ten citizens. The members shall be appointed by the mayor with approval of the city commission. The majority of the members of the shade tree committee shall be residents of the city. The committee shall consist of the following or a similar composition: 
1.  One member of the city commission; 
2.  One member of the planning commission; 
3.  One staff member of the city as named by the city commission; 
4.  One representative of a licensed local nursery or greenhouse; 
5.  One representative of public utilities; 
6.  One representative of the North Dakota State University, Bottineau School of Forestry, or other recognized school of forestry or horticulture; 
7.  No less than four and no more than six citizens at large. 
B.  Terms shall be for three years. Upon adoption, the initial terms shall be a continuation of the terms under the previous shade tree ordinance. The slate of officers shall also be carried over from the committee under the previous shade tree ordinance. Vacancies caused by death, resignation or otherwise, shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments are made. All members of the committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. 852, 2002; Ord. 833 (part), 2000; Ord. 811, 1997; Ord. 636 § 3(I), 1980) 
2.32.040 - Powers and duties. 
    The duties of the shade tree committee shall be as follows: 
A.  To study the problems and determine the needs of the municipality of Devils Lake, county of Ramsey, state of North Dakota, in connection with its tree planting and maintenance program; 
B.  To recommend to the proper authority, the type and kind of trees to be planted on the right-of-way or berm, which include but are not limited to Canadian Red Cherry (tree), Burr Oak, Linden, Ash and Seedless Cottonwood. Other species may be permitted by the forester granting a written permit. Conifers, shrubs and similar plantings shall not be acceptable for right-of-way plantings; 
C.  To assist the properly constituted officials of the municipality, as well as the commission and citizens of the municipality, in the dissemination of news and information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits, whether it is on private or public property, and to make such recommendations from time to time to the city commission as to de- sirable legislation concerning the tree program and activities for the municipality; 
D.  To provide regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees insofar as it relates to the municipality may be discussed by members of the committee, officers and personnel of the municipality and its several divisions, and all others interested in the tree program. 
(Ord. 833 (part), 2000; Ord. 636 § 3(II), 1980) 
2.32.050 - Foreman-Appointment and salary. 
    The shade tree foreman shall be appointed by the city commission upon the recommendation of the shade tree committee, and shall receive a salary commensurate with his training and experience as full compensation for all services rendered and in lieu of all fees. 
(Ord. 636 § 4, 1980) 
2.32.060 - Foreman-Duties. 
    The shade tree foreman, under the direction of the shade tree committee, has the authority to promulgate the rules and regulations of the arboricultural specifications and standards of practice governing the planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning and bracing of trees on the streets or other public sites in the municipality, and shall direct, regulate and control the planting, maintenance and removal of all trees growing now or hereafter in public of the municipality. He shall cause the provision of this chapter to be enforced. In his absence these duties shall be the responsibility of a qualified alternate designated by the shade tree committee. 
(Ord. 636 § 5, 1980) 
2.32.070 - Foreman-Planting and removal of trees. 
    The shade tree foreman, under the supervision of the shade tree committee, has the authority and jurisdiction of regulating the planting, maintenance and removal of trees on streets and other publicly owned property to insure safety or preserve the aesthetics of such public sites. 
(Ord. 636 § 6(I), 1980) 
2.32.080 - Foreman-Work supervision. 
    The shade tree foreman has the authority and it shall be his duty to supervise or inspect all work done under a permit issued in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 § 6 (II), 1980) 
2.32.090 - Foreman-Conditions for granting of permit. 
    The shade tree foreman has the authority to affix reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 636 § 6(III), 1980) 
2.32.100 - Foreman-Community forestry management plan. 
A.  The shade tree foreman has the authority to formulate a community forestry management plan with the advice, a hearing and approval of the shade tree committee. The community forestry management plan shall specify the species of tree to be planted on each of the streets or other public sites of the municipality. The city commission shall annually review, alter if necessary, and approve the plan by resolution. From and after the effective date of the community forestry management plan or any amendment thereof, all planting shall conform to it. 
B.  The shade tree foreman shall consider all existing and future utility and environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the streets and other public sites of the municipality. 
C.  The shade tree foreman, with the approval of the shade tree committee, has the authority to amend or add to the community forestry management plan at any time that circumstances make it advisable. 
(Ord. 636 § 6(IV), 1980) 
Chapter 2.36 - DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED OR UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Storage of abandoned property. 
    Any personal property abandoned or left unclaimed upon the streets, alleys or other public ways of the city for a period exceeding ten days shall be taken up by any police officer of the city and stored and held in such place as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 408 § 1, 1958) 
2.36.020 - Police department to keep records. 
    An accurate record of any property taken by the police department as described in Section 2.36.010 shall be kept in the office of the police department with the date of such taking. 
(Ord. 408 § 2, 1958) 
2.36.030 - Redemption by owner. 
    Any person who satisfactorily establishes that he is the owner thereof, may reclaim any such articles of personal property from the chief of police thereof as set forth in this chapter, upon payment to the city treasurer of the necessary expenses of taking and storing, payment to be certified to by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 408 § 3, 1958) 
2.36.040 - Sale of abandoned property. 
    Whenever, in the judgment of the chief of police, sufficient articles have been accumulated and held for a period of sixty days or more, to justify the expense of a sale thereof, the articles may be sold by the chief of police at public auction. Each item of property, which has been held by the police department for more than sixty days, shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash and the chief of police shall convey to the purchaser, by bill of sale, title to the property. Accurate records of each sale shall be kept, showing the price for which each article was sold. 
(Ord. 408 § 4, 1958) 
2.36.050 - Notice of sale. 
    Notice of time and place of sale and a brief description of the articles to be sold shall be published not less than ten days prior to the date of sale. 
(Ord. 408 § 5, 1958) 
2.36.060 - Owner entitled to proceeds of sale. 
A.  At any time within six months after the sale, the owner of the property, upon written application, shall be entitled to receive the proceeds of the sale less the necessary expenses of taking, storing and selling them. 
B.  Applications for repayment by the owner of any such property shall be filed with the city auditor and passed on by the city commission. 
(Ord. 408 § 6, 1980) 
2.36.070 - Report and remittance of funds to commission. 
    Immediately after a sale, the chief of police shall report to the city commission his proceedings upon the sale, together with the price of each article sold, and shall remit to the city treasurer the entire proceeds of the sale. 
(Ord. 408 § 7, 1980) 
Chapter 2.40 - MUNICIPAL AIRPORT 
Sections: 

2.40.010 - Vehicles not to interfere with takeoff and landing of aircraft. 
    No one shall drive or cause to be driven, any vehicle other than an aircraft, upon the runways, taxiways or aircraft parking ramps at the municipal airport or at any place thereon which will interfere with the taking off or landing of aircraft at the airport, except authorized repair and maintenance men. 
(Ord. 484 § 1, 1968) 
2.40.020 - Livestock running loose prohibited. 
    No one shall permit livestock to run loose upon the municipal airport, nor shall any animal be driven upon the runways, taxiways or parking ramps of the airport. 
(Ord. 484 § 2, 1968) 
2.40.030 - Lessee to keep premises in neat condition. 
    Any lessee of a site upon the municipal airport shall keep the leased premises in a neat condition. 
(Ord. 484 § 3, 1968) 
2.40.040 - Leased premises not to be used as living quarters. 
    No one shall use any of the leased premises as living quarters or maintain residential quarters in any hangar. 
(Ord. 484 § 4, 1968) 
Chapter 2.41 - AIRPORT REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

2.41.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Designated Representative. The airport manager shall be the designated representative of the Devils Lake municipal airport authority to enforce the regulations and ordinances provided for in the Devils Lake Municipal Airport Standard Operating Procedures and any city ordinances. The airport manager is authorized to administer fines and corrections in accordance with this chapter of the municipal code. 
B.  Hunting or Shooting Within Boundaries of Airport. Hunting or shooting within the boundaries of the airport is strictly prohibited, other than wildlife control that is deemed necessary by the airport manager or designee. No persons, except law enforcement officers, members of the Armed Forces of the United States on official duty, or persons duly authorized by the Devils Lake municipal airport authority, shall carry any weapons, explosive material or hazardous material on the airport, except cased sporting firearms carried for trans-shipment or in locked racks covered under the North Dakota Century Code. 
C.  Public Nuisance. No person shall be or become intoxicated, commit any disorderly, obscene or indecent act, or commit any action of nuisance, destroy, injure, deface or disturb in any way any building, sign equipment, marker, light fixture or other structure or property in the airport. 
D.  Advertisement. No person may post, distribute or display a sign, advertisement, circular, or other written or printed matter in the airport without the permission of the airport manager. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
2.41.020 - Commercial activity. 
A.  General. No person shall use the airport for commercial activities without a written contractual arrangement with the airport authority and the holder of a commercial lease at the airport will be authorized to conduct only those legal commercial activities that are approved in the commercial lease. Commercial activities shall include, but are not limited to, carrying passengers for hire, flight instruction, aircraft rental, sales of goods and services, agricultural operations and aircraft maintenance and repairs. Any individual owner of aircraft, or where joint ownership exits which engages in these activities for hire, shall be considered to be engaged in commercial activities. 
B.  Commercial Authorization. All commercial aviation activities shall be authorized by the airport authority, in accordance with all local, city and federal regulations. 
C.  Nondiscrimination. Any commercial operation engaged in providing services to the public shall perform those services in a fair, equal, safe and legal manner and shall not discriminate against any user but shall make reasonable and nondiscriminatory all pricing, discounts, rebates or other price reductions to volume customers. 
D.  Fuel. No aviation fuels shall be brought in the airport for use or for sale without the expressed permission of the airport authority. This permission is to be granted in a written document providing for safety in storage and handling. All fueling performed on the airport must be in accordance with the 14 CFR Part Section 139 of the Federal Aviation Regulations. 
E.  Aerial Application. Any person using the airport as a base for agricultural aerial application which involves the loading, unloading and storage of chemical must receive a permit from the airport authority. This permit will specify the areas to be used, restrictions which will apply, and the payment of an operating fee. No permit will be granted for less than a thirty-day period. Spraying operations are strictly prohibited on taxiways, runways and other controlled areas. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
2.41.030 - Leases. 
A.  General. All tenants shall be required to maintain their lease property in a condition of cleanliness and free from all fire hazards, and shall dispose of garbage, refuse or other material in the receptacles approved for that purpose. No tenants, lessees or grantees will be permitted to affect structural or decorative changes or additions of any type without submitting plans to the city assessor/building official for review and obtaining prior permission of the airport authority. Tenants, and their lessees and grantees, shall be fully responsible for all damages to buildings, equipment, real property and appurtenances in the ownership or custody of the airport caused by their negligence or abuse of carelessness. 
B.  Property Improvement. No person shall use, occupy, improve or construct any structure on any part or portion of the airport without first submitting plans to the city assessor/building official for review approval, and issuance of any necessary building permit and have secured written permission from the airport authority. 
C.  Construction. No person shall construct, erect or install any building or improvements upon any of the lots at the airport without first securing written permission from the airport authority. A proper building permit must be obtained from the city assessor/building official and any required FAA for including FAA Form No. 7460-1 shall be completed and submitted to both the FAA and the airport manager for review, before any construction is commenced. The airport authority shall have the right to inspect the plans and specifications of any such buildings, structures and improvements prior to construction or maintenance. The airport authority reserve the right to refuse such construction or maintenance, if the external appearance does not meet reasonable requirements for substantial uniformity of appearance of all buildings and structures on the airport, or if the type of construction or installation or the location does not meet reasonable requirements for safe use of the airport and appurtenances. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
2.41.040 - Vehicle regulations. 
A.  Vehicle Authorization. Only authorized vehicles that have been certified by the airport manager and are in possession of a valid airport operations security badge will be permitted to drive on the apron or other controlled area in the airport. Airport operation security badges will be issued by the airport manager upon successful completion of any requirements set out by the airport authority and may be suspended or revoked at any time by the airport authority. 
B.  Unauthorized Vehicles. No private vehicle shall be driven onto the ramp, except as necessary to go directly to and from specific aircraft for loading and unloading baggage or other special purposes and must be escorted by an authorized vehicle driven by personnel in possession of a valid airport operation security badge. 
C.  Two-wheeled Vehicles. No person may operate a bicycle or a two-wheeled motor vehicle on the landing area or ramp in the airport. 
D.  Speed Limit. No unauthorized vehicle, other than airport maintenance or FAA personnel equipped with a UNICOM and whose vehicle has a flashing light mounted on the roof, may operate a motor vehicle at a speed of more than ten miles an hour on any taxiway, runway, restricted service road, or other aircraft movement area. 
E.  Operational Control. No person may operate a motor vehicle in the airport in a careless or reckless manner as to endanger the life or property of others. Each person operating a motor vehicle in the airport will have a valid operator's license, and shall operate it so as to have it under proper control at all times. 
F.  Parking. No person may park or stand a motor vehicle in the airport, except in an area specifically designated for parking or standing. No person may park a motor vehicle in any area in the airport for a period longer than is designated for that area. No person may park or stand a motor vehicle within ten feet of a water hydrant in the airport. 
G.  Removal. The airport authority or its authorized representatives may tow away or move any motor vehicle in the airport that is parked in violation of the regulations of the airport. Any vehicle, equipment, mobile structure, trailer or boat without any specific aviation use, or abandoned property left for a period of more than seventy-two hours will be removed. The airport may charge a reasonable amount for the moving service and for storage of the vehicle, equipment, mobile structure, trailer or boat, if any. The moved property is subject to a lien for reasonable charges. 
H.  Large Vehicles. Any vehicles larger than a one-ton truck, excluding buses used to transport passengers to and from the airport terminal, are prohibited from driving or parking on the streets or parking lots restricted by the airport authority. 
I.  Traffic Code. Any vehicles operating in the airport are subject to the provisions of the city traffic code. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
2.41.050 - Aircraft regulations. 
A.  General. All aircraft operating on the Devils Lake airport shall conform with all rules and regulations set by the Federal Aviation Administration and shall only operate on those areas designated for aircraft use, unless otherwise permitted, in writing by the airport authority. 
B.  Aircraft Parking. All aircraft parked on the airport whether temporary or permanent shall be parked only in assigned or designated parking areas. Aircraft not parked in the proper area will be notified, if possible, and will be given twenty-four hours in which to move the aircraft to an authorized parking area. 
C.  Minor Maintenance. Only minor maintenance or repairs, excluding fluid changes (oil, hydraulics, battery acid, coolant, etc.), will be performed on aircraft parked on the ramp of the airport, except when necessary to move the aircraft to a designated maintenance facility. 
D.  Securing of Aircraft. The operator of each aircraft permanently based and parked on the airport will be responsible for properly securing the aircraft to protect it and other aircraft from wind damage. Individual airplanes may tie down in designated and established tie-down areas. The airport authority, airport manager, or authorized agent of the airport shall not provide tie-down restraints, including ropes, chains, etc.; nor shall the airport authority, airport manager or authorized agent be responsible to the owner of any aircraft for any damage sustained to such aircraft while using the tie-down space. A schedule of fees for tie-downs may be established by the airport authority, if so deemed necessary. 
E.  Engine Warming. Aircraft engines will be warmed up only in places normally approved for such purpose. At no time will aircraft with engines running be left unattended by any person. At no time shall engines be warmed up or operated when hangars, shops, offices, buildings, persons, equipment, passengers or aircraft are in the path of the propeller stream or turbine engine exhaust. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
2.41.060 - Fire regulations. 
A.  Fueling. No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while its engine is running, or while in a hangar or other enclosed place, except for maintenance purposes. Fueling shall be done in accordance with 14 CFR Part Section 139 of the Federal Aviation Regulations as amended and in such a manner and with such equipment that adequate connections for the grounding of static electricity shall be continuously maintained during such time. No person shall perform or allow performance of any refueling operation during an electrical, wind or dust storm. 
B.  Hazardous Materials. No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents, chemicals, acids or other hazardous material shall be disposed of or dumped in drains on the ramp area, catch basins, ditches or elsewhere in the airport. 
C.  Explosives. No person shall store, keep, use, dispose or transport to, in or upon the airport any Class A or Class B explosives (as defined in the ICC regulations for transportation of explosive and other dangerous articles), dynamite, nitroglycerine, black powder, fireworks, alcohol, ether, liquid shellac, kerosene, turpentine, or other flammable or combustible liquids, ammonium nitrate, sodium chlorate, powdered metallic magnesium, or other easily flammable solids, corrosive liquids or gas, any radioactive article, substance or other hazardous material prohibited by the transportation security administration (TSA), at such time or place or in such manner or condition as to endanger unreasonably or as to be likely to endanger unreasonably persons or property. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
2.41.070 - Airport safety. 
    Any accident or emergency shall be reported to the Lake Region Law Enforcement Center and the airport manager, immediately. No unauthorized personnel shall go to the scene of an accident, except to render aid in the absence of authorized personnel. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
2.41.080 - Terminal use. 
A.  General. The corridor and lobby areas of the terminal shall be open to all airport tenants and airline customers as long as the terminal is open. All private areas in the terminal (TSA screening rooms, airline offices, etc.) shall be occupied at the will of their perspective owners and shall be closed to public use, unless otherwise authorized by the owner. Unauthorized use of the terminal is prohibited, unless written authorization is obtained by the airport authority. 
B.  Smoking. Terminal facilities, as with all public facilities, shall be smoke free at all times. 
C.  Alcohol. Alcohol in the terminal facilities is strictly prohibited, unless specifically authorized by the airport authority. 
D.  Animals. Dogs, cats, birds, wild animals, rodents and other animals are prohibited in the terminal building, unless the animal is authorized to be transported on an aircraft and the animal is properly caged and/or restrained. This does not include any dog used to assist someone who is vision impaired. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
2.41.090 - Enforcement. 
A.  General. Any person who knowingly and wilfully violates any rule or regulation prescribed in these regulations or any order or instruction issued by the Devils Lake municipal airport authority authorized in this chapter may be fined and or ejected from the airport and may be denied the use of the airport and its facilities, if it is determined by the airport authority that such denial is necessary under the circumstances. An act is done "knowingly," if it is done voluntarily and intentionally, and not because of mistake or accident or other innocent reason. An act is done "wilfully," if done voluntarily and intentionally, and with the intent to do something which the actor knows the regulations forbid. 
B.  Fines. The airport manager or the airport authority has the authority to impose fines for any violation of this chapter of the Devils Lake Municipal Code. The fine shall be one hundred dollars for each violation. Each day in which a violation occurs is a separate violation resulting to one hundred dollars per day fine. A fine is imposed by written notification to the party against whom the fine is imposed. The party has ten days in which to appeal the decision of the fine to the airport authority. The failure to appeal the imposition of the fine or the decision of the airport authority on the fine shall be final. 
C.  Denial of Use. Any party may be denied of use of the airport by action of the airport authority. If the airport manager or the airport authority feels such action is necessary, notice shall be provided to the party whose privileges are sought to be denied. The notice shall specify the actions of the party considered to be such that the party's privileges may be denied, and the date, time and place when the airport authority will conduct a hearing on the denial of the privileges. The hearing will be in no less than seven or more than fourteen days from the date of the notice. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be sufficient cause to deny a party the right to use the airport. The failure to pay a fine imposed in subsection B of this section is sufficient grounds to deny a party of the use of the airport. The airport authority may dismiss the matter, suspend the party's use of the airport for a period of time, impose such conditions on the party's use of the airport, if it feels necessary or suspend and deny the party's use of the airport. The decision of the airport authority shall be final. 
(Ord. 864 (part), 2005) 
Chapter 2.44 - CITY CEMETERY* 
Sections: 

2.44.010 - Designated. 
    The land and property acquired by the city from the G.A.R. Cemetery Association and St. Joseph's Church of Devils Lake, together with all additions to it, shall be known as the Devils Lake Cemetery. 
(Ord. 314 § 1, 1948) 
2.44.020 - Maintained for inhabitants. 
    The cemetery shall be maintained as a burial ground for the inhabitants of the city and for such other persons as the city commission may by ordinance or resolution permit to be buried in it. 
(Ord. 314 § 2, 1948) 
2.44.030 - Interment within city prohibited. 
    No interment of any deceased person shall be made within the city. 
(Ord. 314 § 3, 1948) 
2.44.040 - Preferred right of burial to Roman Catholics on certain premises. 
    Persons dying in the Roman Catholic faith shall have a preferred right to burial on the premises deeded by St. Joseph's Church. Ministers of all faiths may conduct funeral services within the cemetery in accordance with the rituals of their respective faiths. Membership or nonmembership in any faith, however, shall not affect the right to burial in any part of the cemetery. 
(Ord. 314 § 4, 1948) 
2.44.050 - Recognition of rights of owners of burial lots. 
    The rights of all owners of burial lots or burial rights through conveyances heretofore made by the respective owners of the cemetery property shall be recognized and the title is accepted by the city subject to all burial rights heretofore granted. 
(Ord. 314 § 5, 1948) 
2.44.060 - Platting. 
    Portions of the cemetery have heretofore been platted and the plats are recognized, and additional portions of the cemetery shall be platted from time to time as may be found necessary. The plots are laid out in blocks, lots and single grave rights. 
(Ord. 314 § 6, 1948) 
2.44.070 - Purchase of grave sites by residents and nonresidents. 
A.  Any resident of the city or nonresident owning property and paying property taxes within the city may purchase one or more single grave sites at the city cemetery. The number of such grave sites may be limited by the superintendent or other official of the city to such number as the purchaser may reasonably use for his immediate family. Any person who has shown a bonafide intent to become a permanent resident of the city by residing in the city for ninety days or more shall be deemed a resident for the purpose of this chapter. The ordinance codified in this section shall be in full force and effect after its passage and approval as provided by law. 
B.  Nonresidents of the city may purchase one or more single grave sites within the city cemetery as long as the superintendent or other official of the city deems the facilities ample to provide for the future requirements of the residents of the city. Any person who moves from the city after establishing residence in it shall be deemed a resident until the person has established residence elsewhere. 
C.  The date of burial or cremation shall be the date of the committal service (North Dakota Century Code 23-0604). Bodies may be stored in the storage vault at the cemetery from the date of the committal service to the date of interment. 
(Ord. 745, 1990; Ord. 696, 1986; Ord. 645 § 1(part), 1981: Ord. 544 § 1(part), 1973: Ord. 485 § 1(part), 1968: Ord. 455 § 1(part), 1965) 
2.44.080 - Fees. 
    The fees to be charged for burial rights, grave openings and other services shall be established by resolution of the city commission and revised as it may see fit. 
(Ord. 645 § 1(part), 1981: Ord. 544 § 1 (part), 1973: Ord. 485 § 1(part), 1968: Ord. 455 § 1 (part), 1965) 
2.44.090 - Burial of infants. 
    Persons desiring to bury infants in the cemetery may, with the approval of the superintendent, purchase less than a single grave right and in such case appropriate notation shall be made by the superintendent on his records. 
(Ord. 314 § 9, 1948) 
2.44.100 - Burial of more than one person in single grave. 
    Not more than one person shall be buried in any single grave right except in the case of infants. 
(Ord. 314 § 10, 1948) 
2.44.110 - No title to land to purchasers of grave rights. 
    Purchasers of grave rights shall acquire only the right to make interment in the space purchased and shall acquire no title to the land. 
(Ord. 314 § 11, 1948) 
2.44.120 - Superintendent-Office created. 
    There is created the office of superintendent of cemetery. The superintendent shall be appointed by the president of the board of city commissioners for a term of two years. The same person may be appointed as assessor of the city and as superintendent of the cemetery. 
(Ord. 314 § 16, 1948) 
2.44.130 - Superintendent-Receipt to purchaser for grave rights. 
    The superintendent shall issue to the purchaser of all grave rights a receipt specifying the amount of money paid by the purchaser and designating the specific grave rights in which burial may be made. One copy of the receipt shall be delivered to the purchaser and one copy shall be furnished to the city auditor, while one copy shall be retained by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 314 § 12, 1948) 
2.44.140 - Moneys received credited to cemetery fund. 
    All moneys received from the sale of lots or grave rights and all other moneys received under the provisions of this chapter shall be credited to the cemetery fund of the city. All expenditures for the maintenance of the cemetery shall be paid out of such fund upon vouchers properly certified and approved by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 314 § 13, 1948) 
2.44.150 - Certificate procured for interment. 
    When the owner of any grave right desires to have interment made, the owner or his representatives shall procure from the superintendent a certificate designating the specific grave right in which interment will be made, and he shall pay to the superintendent the sum of fifty cents for such certificate. 
(Ord. 314 § 14, 1948) 
2.44.160 - Superintendent-To keep records of grave rights. 
    It shall be the duty of the superintendent to keep adequate and sufficient records to readily show who are the owners of grave rights which have been sold and also to show the particular grave rights in which interment has been made and who has been buried therein and to comply with all laws of the state and regulations of the State Health Department with reference to burial permits and the keeping of records in connection with burials in the cemetery. 
(Ord. 314 § 15, 1948) 
2.44.170 - Superintendent-Salary. 
    The salary of the superintendent shall be fixed by the board of city commissioners from time to time and in the event the same person may hold another appointment under the city, his salary may be apportioned among the several departments served, as the board of city commissioners may determine. 
(Ord. 314 § 17, 1948) 
2.44.180 - Superintendent-Jurisdiction. 
    The superintendent shall have general jurisdiction over the cemetery and shall supervise the digging of graves, the placing of monuments, the planting of trees and shrubbery, the erection of improvements and the general management of the cemetery. 
(Ord. 314 § 18, 1948) 
2.44.190 - Superintendent-Power to make rules. 
    Subject to the provisions of this chapter and such ordinances and resolutions as may be adopted by the board of city commissioners, the superintendent shall have the power to make such reasonable rules and regulations as he may deem necessary with reference to the use, care and improvement of the cemetery. 
(Ord. 314 § 19, 1948) 
2.44.200 - Superintendent-May employ assistants. 
    The superintendent, subject to approval by the board of city commissioners, may employ such assistance as may be required for the operation and management of the cemetery and shall direct the activities of such employees. 
(Ord. 314 § 20, 1948) 
2.44.210 - Superintendent-Opening of grave. 
    All graves shall be opened under the direction of the superintendent. When a certificate for burial is issued by him he shall collect from the person desiring to make interment an amount sufficient to pay for the opening of a grave. The amount shall be determined from time to time by the superintendent with the approval of the board of city commissioners. The superintendent at his discretion may permit the person desiring to make interment to himself open the grave or hire the opening to be made. 
(Ord. 314 § 21, 1948) 
2.44.220 - Superintendent-Additional platting and land set aside for chapels. 
    The superintendent shall cause additional portions of the cemetery to be platted from time to time as need may occur. Upon application of any church within the city he may set aside a portion of the cemetery to be occupied by a chapel to be erected by such church, but all costs in connection with the erection or maintenance of such chapel shall be borne by such church, and it and the surrounding grounds must be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. 314 § 22, 1948) 
2.44.230 - Use regulations for burial vaults. 
    The burial vault at the cemetery may be used for the storage of cemetery equipment but otherwise shall be used exclusively for storing dead bodies during such time as it is impracticable to make interment in the cemetery, and such storage shall be made without discrimination. Such storage shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent and he may require any body to be removed from the vault and interred when conditions require. 
(Ord. 314 § 23, 1948) 
2.44.240 - Construction of burial vaults. 
    All burial vaults used in the Devils Lake cemetery shall be constructed of permanent material which is acceptable by the State Health Department and meets the minimum requirements of any applicable federal or state law; provided, however, that certain exceptions to this section may be allowed in the event of religious beliefs contrary to the requirements specified in this section. 
(Ord. 529 § 1, 1972) 
2.44.250 - Improperly installed monuments to be reset. 
    Monuments and markers which are not properly installed or which constitute a hazard or are in an unsightly condition shall be reset by the employees of the cemetery when time and facilities permit. The cost shall be charged to the lot owners, and shall be collected before other burials are permitted in the lot belonging to such owner. 
(Ord. 314 § 24, 1948) 
2.44.260 - Installation of monuments on concrete foundation. 
    Installation of monuments and markers shall be made on a concrete foundation in such a manner as to assure the permanence and sightliness of the monument or marker, and to facilitate the cutting of grass around it. 
(Ord. 314 § 25, 1948) 
2.44.270 - Foundation installation supervised by superintendent. 
    All foundation work shall be done under the supervision of the superintendent. He may direct such work to be done by regular employees or may engage persons qualified for the work. Individuals with experience in this work may do their own work with the permission and under the supervision of the superintendent. 
(Ord. 314 § 26, 1948) 
2.44.280 - Fees for work and services. 
    Fees for all work and services shall be fixed from time to time by the superintendent, subject to approval by the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. 314 § 27, 1948) 
2.44.290 - General regulations. 
A.  No person shall disturb the quiet by noise of any kind, or by any improper conduct. 
B.  No person shall have in his possession or shall discharge any firearm in the cemetery, except soldiers and veterans at military funerals and at Memorial Day services. 
C.  No person shall drive any vehicle faster than ten miles per hour nor drive anywhere except on the roads. 
D.  No person shall obstruct passage by parking on any road. 
E.  No person shall loiter any place in the cemetery. 
F.  No person shall remove any object or make any excavation without the express consent of the superintendent. 
G.  No person shall wilfully injure or destroy any monument, marker, tree or decoration or commit any act of vandalism in the cemetery. 
H.  No person shall leave or store any object or property in the cemetery which is not for immediate installation in it. 
(Ord. 314 § 28, 1948) 
Chapter 2.48 - PUBLIC LIBRARY 

2.48.001 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the board of city commissioners means the governing body of the city, and the board of directors means the governing body of Lake Region Public Library. 
(Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.010 - Established. 
    There is organized and established for the city a public library to be known as Lake Region Public Library. 
(Prior code § 477) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.020 - Taking of library materials against rules prohibited. 
    Every person who takes from the public library any library materials, pamphlet, periodical, paper, audio-visual materials, or other property, except in accordance with the rules of the library, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished for each offense as provided in the fees and rates. 
(Prior code § 478) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.030 - Late return of library materials prohibited. 
    Every person who takes or borrows from the public library any library materials, pamphlet, periodical, paper, audio-visual materials, or other property and who refuses or neglects to return it within three weeks from the date of mailing a notice of delinquency to the person's address, and refuses or neglects during that time to pay the librarian the value of the property, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished for each offense as provided in the fees and rates. 
(Prior code § 479) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.040 - Damage to library property prohibited. 
    Every person who willfully and wantonly cuts, mutilates, marks, tears, writes upon, defaces or otherwise destroys or injuries, in whole or in part any library property, pamphlet, periodical, map, document, picture, audio-visual materials, or written or engraved or printed paper belonging to the public library, or suffers any such injury to be done while such property is in the person's custody, or willfully or wantonly injures any of the furniture or property in the rooms or buildings occupied by the library, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine for each offense as provided in the fees and rates. 
(Prior code § 480) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.050 - Fines. 
    All fines collected under this chapter shall be paid into the library fund for the use of the library; provided, however, that all costs due the city must be paid before any sums are paid into the library fund; and it shall be the duty of the city attorney to prosecute all violations of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 481) 
2.48.060 - Library fund. 
A.  For the purpose of maintaining a public library service, the board of city commissioners has established a library fund. The library fund consists of annually levying and causing to be collected as other taxes are collected, a municipal tax not exceeding six mills as previously voted on by the electors, and any other moneys received for library purposes from any source. 
B.  The city auditor shall maintain the fund to account for library revenues and shall make payments from the fund for invoices that have been submitted and approved by the library board of directors. On request of the city auditor, the library board of directors shall supply its records. The records must be provided on a timely basis. The fund may not revert to the city at the end of any fiscal year. The fund must be used exclusively for the maintenance of public library service. 
C.  Whenever a tax for county library service is levied, the city auditor shall execute a written application to be exempted from the county tax levy for the property located within the city limits, as allowed under the provisions of North Dakota Century Code 40-38-02. 
(Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
2.48.070 - Board of directors. 
A.  The board of directors of the Lake Region Public Library shall consist of seven persons. The board of city commissioners shall appoint four of those directors to govern the library. Of the four directors appointed by the city commission, one of them shall be a member of the board of commissioners or designated as the representative of the board of city commissioners. The remaining three members of the board of directors of the library shall be appointed by the Ramsey County Commission. 
B.  The director's term of office shall be three years from the first day of July in the year of appointment and until a successor has been appointed. No member shall serve for more than two consecutive terms, after which an interval of one year must elapse before the same member may be reappointed. 
C.  All vacancies on the board of directors shall be reported to the appointing board, who shall appoint to the unexpired term for the residue only. This unexpired term shall count as one of the two consecutive terms which a director is limited to serve. 
D.  No compensation shall be paid or allowed to a director. At the first meeting following the appointment of its members, the board of directors shall meet and organize by electing a president. 
E.  The board of city commissioners may contract directly with the library board established by another governing body of a municipality, county or school board for the purpose of public library service. 
(Ord. 817, 1997: Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.080 - General powers and duties. 
    The board of directors shall have the following powers and duties: 
A.  To make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations relating to the duties of their officers as may be expedient and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, and file the same with the city auditor; 
B.  To make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for the management of the library as are expedient and not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, and file the same with the city auditor; 
C.  To control, exclusively, the expenditures of all moneys collected for or contributed to the library fund; 
D.  To have the supervision, care, and custody of the library property and of the rooms or buildings constructed, leased, or set apart for use of library purposes; 
E.  To contract to receive library service from other counties, school districts, cities and the state library; 
F.  To employ qualified personnel to administer the public library and dispense library services. 
(Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
2.48.090 - Library buildings. 
A.  The board of directors, with the approval of the board of city commissioners, may build, lease, lease-purchase, or purchase an appropriate building for a library and purchase a site therefor. 
B.  Prior to approval, the board of city commissioners shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least once, not less than six days prior to the hearing, in the official city newspaper. 
C.  The board of city commissioners shall seek the advice and comment of the state library and the general public at the hearing. After such hearing the board of city commissioners may establish by resolution a library building fund for the purpose of construction, enlargement, alteration of a building or for the purchase of an existing building to be used as a public library. 
D.  The city auditor shall place in the library building fund all monies as may be appropriated or received for such purposes from any source. 
E.  The library building fund shall not revert to the library general fund or the general fund of the city without authorization by formal resolution from both the library board of directors and the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.100 - Vouchers. 
    The city auditor may draw money from the library fund only upon vouchers approved by the board of directors without any other approval. 
(Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
2.48.110 - Library free to residents of Ramsey County. 
A.  The library established under this chapter and the services provided thereof shall be free to all residents of Ramsey County, subject to such reasonable rules and regulations as the board of directors may deem necessary to adopt to render the greatest benefit. Such rules shall be posted in a location readily accessible to the public. The board may exclude from the use of the library any and all persons who willfully violate such rules. 
B.  Pursuant to North Dakota Century Code, any person residing outside of Ramsey County, North Dakota, shall be considered a non-resident and shall be charged a fee for public library service, the amount of which and duration of time paid for shall be determined by the library board of directors. 
(Ord. 771, 1992; Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.120 - Donations. 
    All persons desirous of making donations of money, books, personal property or real estate for the benefit of the library may vest the same in the board of directors. The board of directors shall hold and control all property accepted for the use of the library as a special trustee. 
(Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
2.48.130 - Annual report of board of directors. 
    The board of directors shall make a report not later than May 1 of each year to the board of city commissioners stating: 
A.  The condition of the library and property; 
B.  The various sums of money received from all sources; 
C.  How much money has been expended and for what purpose; 
D.  The number of books and other materials on hand; 
E.  The number of books and other materials added by purchase or gift during the year and the number thereof lost or loaned out; 
F.  The character and kind of materials contained in the library; 
G.  Such other statistics, information, and suggestions or as may be required by the state library. Copies of the report shall be filed with the state library by the board of directors. 
(Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 930, 9-21-15) 
2.48.140 - Open records exception. 
    Any record maintained or received by the library, which provides a patron's name or information sufficient to identify a patron together with the subject about which the patron requested information, is considered private and is excepted from the public records disclosure requirements of Section 44-04-18 of the North Dakota Century Code. These records may be released when required pursuant to a court order or a subpoena. 
(Ord. 759 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 2.52 - PROCEDURE FOR BIDS 
Sections: 

2.52.010 - Filing, sealing, endorsing, opening, considering. 
    Bids for the work to be let shall be forwarded to the city auditor and shall be sealed securely to prevent the opening thereof without detection. There shall be endorsed upon the outside of the envelope containing the bid, a statement of what work such proposal is for. The bids shall be opened by the board of city commissioners at the expiration of the time limited in the advertisement for receiving the same, which shall not be less than seven days after the first publication of the advertisement, or at such other time as the board of city commissioners may appoint. Only bids which are accompanied by the bond provided for in Section 40-22-20, North Dakota Century Code, or any act amendatory to thereof, shall be considered by the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. 720, 1988) 
Chapter 2.60 - EMERGENCY EMPLOYEES 
Sections: 

2.60.010 - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to require emergency employees to reside within the city so that they are available to assist in emergency situations and that the response to emergency situations is timely given. 
(Ord. 806 (part), 1997) 
2.60.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
    "Emergency employee" means an employee of the public works department, the fire department or the police department of the city of Devils Lake. 
    "Resident" means a person who has their place of abode in the city of Devils Lake and is a bona fide resident of the city of Devils Lake. A bona fide resident is a person having a permanent domicile within the city of Devils Lake and a domicile which has not been adopted with the intention of later moving back to a previous residence acquired outside of the city limits. 
(Ord. 806 (part), 1997) 
2.60.030 - Residency requirements. 
    All emergency employees, as a condition of their employment, shall be residents of the city. 
(Ord. 806 (part), 1997) 
2.60.040 - Exceptions to residency requirements. 
    Residency requirements in Section 2.60.030 of this chapter do not apply to the following: 
A.  Emergency employees who on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not residents of the city. This exception is not intended, however, to allow present emergency employees who are residents of the city to move their residence outside of the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; 
B.  Administration personnel, not including department heads, who are designated by their department head as an employee who is not required to be available in an emergency. The department head is intended to be an emergency employee; 
C.  An emergency employee who does request, in writing, to be granted an exception to the residency requirement, which request is granted by the city commission. 
(Ord. 806 (part), 1997) 
2.60.050 - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter will be effective upon its adoption by the Devils Lake city commission. 
(Ord. 806 (part), 1997) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.01 - UTILITY BILL 
Sections: 

3.01.010 - Utility bill. 
A.  A utility bill consisting of charges for the service and usage of water, sewer (wastewater), garbage, and other charges authorized by the city commission, shall be sent to each customer using any or all of these services monthly on a cycle basis. 
B.  For all utilities, the monthly charge shall be added to and collected as a part of the utility bill, but each service shall be separately stated on the bill. The proceeds from the collection of the fees and charges for each service shall be placed in the appropriate fund for each respectively. 
C.  If the utility bill, together with the penalty is not paid, the city may maintain an action for the collection of such charges. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.020 - Special assessment of unpaid utility bill. 
    It shall be the duty of the city auditor to certify to the county auditor such unpaid utility bill in the same manner and at the same time as other assessments are certified, and they shall be assessed and collected in the same manner. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.030 - Rates and charges. 
    Rates shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the governing body and the city reserves the right to change the rates from time to time as it deems best. The resolution fixing rates and charges shall be kept on file in the office of the city auditor and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.040 - Penalty. 
    A late charge shall be assessed according to the current resolution of fees and rates to all account amounts shown as previous balance. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.050 - Rates and charges-Liability. 
A.  The owner or owners of all real property in the city furnished service or repairs shall be responsible for the payment of any and all such charges regardless of who the occupant or tenant may be. 
B.  Owners of premises where service is supplied shall notify the city auditor's office in case any tenant moves from the premises, prior to such moving. 
C.  On request of the owner, the city auditor will bill the occupant or tenant for such charges. 
D.  If such charges are not paid within sixty days of the consumption period by the occupant or tenant, the owner or owners shall be responsible for such charges. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.060 - Notice of discontinuance required. 
    Any person desiring to discontinue the use of the water must give notice thereof at the office of the city auditor. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.070 - Billing method. 
    The method of billing shall be as follows: 
A.  Payment due twenty-five days after billing with shutoff sixty days after the consumption period. 
B.  Any account with an amount not paid within sixty days of the consumption period will receive a disconnect notice on the past due amount as shown on the utility billing. This notice is sent to the renter and owner of the account as appropriate. 
C.  If a city representative is sent to this account for shutoff or if water is shutoff, a charge will be assessed to the account according to the current resolution of fees and rates. Any insufficient checks received as payment for a past due account will be an immediate disconnect. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.080 - Shutoff ordered. 
    Whenever shutoff is ordered the days of Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday will be utilized as much as possible. This is intended to not shutoff on Mondays, Fridays, weekends or holidays. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.090 - Payment after shutoff ordered. 
    Payment of the entire amount due including reconnect fee will be made prior to turning the service back on. 
(Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
3.01.100 - Curb stop box inoperative. 
    Should it become necessary to dig out the curb stop box for turning the water on or off, the city shall be required to stand the expense of it. 
(Ord. 855 (part), 2003: Ord. 765 (part), 1992) 
Chapter 3.04 - CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Referred to proper departments. 
    All demands, claims or accounts against the city shall be referred to the proper departments and shall by such departments be reported to the city auditor with recommendations thereon, and when so reported the city auditor shall present the same to the board of city commissioners with his recommendations. 
(Prior code § 7) 
Chapter 3.08 - SALES, USE, AND GROSS RECEIPTS TAX 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Definitions. 
    All terms defined in Chapters 40.05.1, 57-39.2, 57-39.4, 57-39.5, 57-39.6 and 57-40.2 of the North Dakota Century Code (N.D.C.C.), including any future amendments, are adopted by reference. All references to the N.D.C.C. include amendments adopted by the North Dakota Legislative Assembly. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.020 - Collection and administration. 
    Where not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of N.D.C.C. chapters 40.05.1, 57-39.2, 57-39.4, 57-39.5, 57-39.6, and 57-40.2, and all administrative rules adopted by the tax commissioner, pertaining to the collection and administration of the retail sales, use, and gross receipts tax, including provisions for liability, refund, penalty, interest or credit, govern the administration by the North Dakota Office of State Tax Commissioner (hereinafter "tax commissioner") of the taxes imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.030 - Sales tax imposed. 
    Subject to the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 40.05.1-06, and except as otherwise provided by this chapter, or the sales and use tax laws of the State of North Dakota, a tax of two and one quarter percent is imposed upon the gross receipts of retailers from all sales at retail, including the leasing or renting of tangible personal property, within the corporate limits of the City of Devils Lake, North Dakota. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.040 - Use tax imposed. 
    Subject to the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 40-05.1-06, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or the sales and use tax laws of the State of North Dakota, an excise tax is imposed upon the storage, use, or consumption within the corporate limits of the City of Devils Lake, North Dakota, of tangible personal property purchased at retail for storage, use, or consumption in this city, at the rate of two and one quarter percent of the purchase price of the property. An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use, or consumption within the corporate limits of the City of Devils Lake, North Dakota, of tangible personal property not originally purchased for storage, use, or consumption in this city at the rate of two and one quarter percent of the fair market value of the property at the time it was brought into this city. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.050 - Gross receipts of alcoholic beverages. 
    Subject to the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 40-05.1-06, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a gross receipts tax of two and one quarter percent is imposed upon all gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city. A person who receives alcoholic beverages for storage, use, or consumption in this state is subject to tax on storage, use, or consumption of those alcoholic beverages at the rate of two and one quarter percent. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.060 - Exemptions. 
    In addition to the exemptions provided by state law, this chapter provides exemptions from imposition and computation of the city sales or use tax for sales of the following: 
A.  Sales of natural gas; 
B.  Gross receipts from coin-operated amusement devices; 
C.  New farm machinery; 
D.  New farm irrigation equipment. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.070 - Contractors. 
    Sales to contractors that are exempt pursuant to subsection 15 of N.D.C.C. § 57-39.2-04 shall be exempt from any city sales tax, but contractors shall be subject to the city use tax on those items used within the city that would be taxed pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 57-40.2-03.3 on which the city sales tax has not previously been paid. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.080 - Maximum tax imposed. 
    Any patron or user paying a tax imposed by this chapter in excess of twenty five dollars upon any single transaction of one or more items may obtain a refund of the excess tax payment by filing a request for refund upon the forms provided by the tax commissioner. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.090 - Contract with tax commissioner. 
    The Devils Lake city auditor is hereby authorized to contract with the tax commissioner for administration and collection of taxes imposed by this chapter. The city auditor has all powers granted to the tax commissioner, and in the absence of a valid contract with the tax commissioner or failure of the tax commissioner to perform the delegated duties, shall perform these duties in place of the tax commissioner. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.100 - Dedication of tax proceeds. 
    The proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter are hereby dedicated as follows: 
A.  Debt reduction for sewage treatment system, property tax relief, infrastructure improvements, economic development, and debt reserve shall receive forty five percent of the tax. 
B.  Financing of the construction of Flood Protection District No. 1-96 (dike system) shall receive twenty-two percent of the tax. When the debt to finance the city's share of the construction of Flood Protection District No. 1-96 (dike system) has been retired, this twenty-two percent of the tax shall be extended and will be designated by the city commission for the following purposes: funding for water treatment, water source, storm water, infrastructure improvement, community development, library, and other public facilities. 
C.  Infrastructure improvements shall receive thirty-three percent of the tax. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.110 - Compensation. 
    City sales, use, and gross receipts tax permit holders are allowed to retain a portion of tax collected under this chapter to help recover administrative expenses. This compensation shall equal three percent of the city tax due; however, the deduction is limited to 83.33 per month or two hundred fifty per quarter. A tax return must be filed and paid in full by the scheduled due date or the compensation will be disallowed and the tax obligation will be subject to penalty and interest. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
3.08.120 - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect after its passage, approval, and publication, but not prior to October 1, 2018. 
(Ord. 874 (part), 2006) 
(Ord. No. 952, 4-16-18) 
Chapter 3.09 - RESTAURANT TAX 
Sections: 

3.09.010 - Restaurant tax-Imposition-Amount-Disposition. 
    There is imposed a tax of one percent upon the gross receipts of retailers on the leasing or renting of a hotel, motel, or tourist court accommodations within the city for periods of less than thirty consecutive calendar days or one month and upon the gross receipts of a restaurant from any sales of prepared food or beverages, not including alcoholic beverage, which are subject to state sales tax. For purposes of this section, "restaurant" means any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portion service for consumption on or off the premises and "prepared" includes heating prepackaged food. Accommodations, food and beverages may all, each, or in any combination be subjected to the tax under this section, if all items in any category which are taxable under state law are taxable, except as otherwise provided by Chapter 40-57.3, North Dakota Century Code. The tax imposed under this section is in addition to state sales taxes on rental accommodations and restaurant sales which the city imposes under this section and the proceeds shall be deposited in the city visitors' promotion capital construction fund. Moneys deposited in the city visitors' promotion capital construction fund shall be spent only as provided in Chapter 40-57.3 of the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 863, 2004: Ord. 854, 2003: Ord. 797 (part), 1995) 
3.09.020 - City visitors' promotion fund-City visitors' promotion capital construction fund-Visitors' committee-Establishment-Purpose. 
    There are established a city visitors' promotion fund, a city visitors' promotion capital construction fund and a visitors' committee. The visitors' committee shall serve as an advisory committee to the city commission in administering the proceeds from the taxes available to the city under this chapter. The moneys in the visitors' promotion fund must be used generally to promote, encourage and attract visitors to come to the city and use the travel and tourism facilities within the city. The moneys in the visitors' promotion capital construction fund must be used generally for tourism or the purchase, equipping, improving, construction, maintenance, repair and acquisition of buildings or property consistent with the visitor attraction or promotion. The committee shall consist of seven members appointed by the city commission. These appointees shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for necessary expenses. Committee members shall serve for a term of four years, except that three of those initially appointed must be appointed for an initial term of two years. Vacancies must be filled in the same manner as the initial appointment. The committee shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members to serve for a term of two years. 
(Ord. 810, 1997; Ord. 797 (part), 1995) 
3.09.030 - Budget-Contracts-Bonds-Capital construction. 
    The city commission shall annually set the budget, if any, under which the committee shall operate. The city commission may contract with any person, firm, association, corporation or limited liability company to carry out the purposes of the city visitors' promotion fund or the city visitors' promotion capital construction fund created under Section 3.09.020. The city commission may irrevocably dedicate any portion of revenues from the tax authorized under Section 3.09.010 and may authorize and issue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness in a manner prescribed by Section 40-35-08 of the North Dakota Century Code to be paid by those revenues for any purpose that moneys in the city visitors' promotion capital construction fund may be used; and such tax upon being pledged to payment of bonds or evidences of indebtedness issued pursuant to this section may not be reduced or repealed by the city commission or by the electors of the city by any initiated amendment to or referendum of the ordinance establishing Section 3.09.010, so long as any of such bonds or evidences of indebtedness remain outstanding. The proceeds from the tax imposed under Section 3.09.010 may be used only for payment of bonds issued, and the costs of issuance related thereto, under this section or capital construction, maintenance and repair or acquisition of property consistent with the purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. 797 (part), 1995) 
3.09.040 - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall become effective sixty days from the date of its adoption by the Devils Lake city commission. 
(Ord. 797 (part), 1995) 
3.09.050 - Minimum tax. 
    The tax imposed under this chapter shall at no time exceed one percent. 
(Ord. 797 (part), 1995) 
Chapter 3.10 - LAKE REGION HERITAGE CENTER, INC. FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 
Sections: 

3.10.010 - Intention. 
    Historical promotion and historical work of the city of Devils Lake is declared an enterprise as provided in Article X, Section 18 of the North Dakota State Constitution. 
(Ord. 849 (part), 2001) 
3.10.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this enterprise is the preservation and promotion of our past the benefit of the public. 
(Ord. 849 (part), 2001) 
3.10.030 - Assistance to engage in enterprises. 
    The city of Devils Lake is not able to engage in this enterprise without the assistance of the Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc., and Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. is not able to engage in this enterprise without the financial assistance of the city of Devils Lake. 
(Ord. 849 (part), 2001) 
3.10.040 - Findings for financial assistance. 
    The city of Devils Lake will provide financial assistance to Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. subject to the terms and provisions of this chapter. In providing financial assistance, the Devils Lake city commission makes the following findings: 
A.  Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. is a non-profit corporation in good standing and authorized to do business in the state of North Dakota. 
B.  Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. has been determined to be exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
C.  The historical preservation commission is created by Ordinance No. 743, which is codified as Chapter 2.28 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code. The purposes of Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. and the historical preservation committee are separate and distinct. 
(Ord. 849 (part), 2001) 
3.10.050 - Procedure to obtain financial assistance. 
    The city commission may authorize a grant to Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. to carry out the purposes of this enterprises as set out in this chapter by the following procedure: 
A.  Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. shall request from the city of Devils Lake an amount of funding. 
B.  The request shall include Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. providing written information as to how the money will be spent. This information will address how the spending of this funding will implement the purposes of this enterprise. 
C.  Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. shall provide to the city of Devils Lake any information, including financial, requested by the Devils Lake city commission. 
D.  Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. will provide the city of Devils Lake with an accounting which shows how these funds were spent. 
E.  Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. will report to the Devils Lake city commission on the activities of Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc., which address how the purposes of Section 3.10.020 are implemented. 
(Ord. 849 (part), 2001) 
3.10.060 - Qualifications for funding. 
    In order for Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. to qualify for funding from the city of Devils Lake, the following must be met: 
A.  The purpose of this enterprise as set out in this Section 3.10.020 must be met, as determined by the Devils Lake city commission. 
B.  The findings for financial assistance, as set out in Section 3.10.040, must continue to be met, as determined by the Devils Lake city commission. 
(Ord. 849 (part), 2001) 
3.10.070 - Compliance with law. 
    Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. agrees that it will at all times be in compliance with and shall in no way violate federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. 849 (part), 2001) 
Chapter 3.11 - IMPROVEMENT BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENT 
Sections: 

3.11.010 - Additional powers of the city to defray expense of improvement by special assessment. 
    In addition to the power to defray the expenses of improvement by special assessment in Section 40-22-01, N.D.C.C., and subsequent amendments, the city of Devils Lake shall have the following powers: 
A.  Upon complying with the provisions of Chapter 40-22, N.D.C.C., and subsequent amendments, the city of Devils Lake may defray, by special assessment, the cost of beautification of the city. This is intended to include the purchase and maintenance of banners, garbage cans, decorative or seasonal lighting, and flower baskets. 
(Ord. 850, 2001) 
Chapter 3.12 - MOTOR VEHICLE RENTAL TAX 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - City motor vehicle rental tax. 
    There is imposed a tax of one percent upon the gross receipts of a retailer on the rental of any motor vehicle for fewer than thirty days if that motor vehicle is either delivered to a renter at the Devils Lake municipal airport or delivered to a renter who is picked up by the retailer at the Devils Lake municipal airport. The tax imposed under the section is in addition to the state sales taxes on the rental of motor vehicles for fewer than thirty days. 
(Ord. 868 (part), 2005) 
3.12.020 - Deposit of proceeds. 
    The proceeds from the tax imposed under this chapter shall be deposited in the city visitors' promotion fund as enacted by Chapter 3.09 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 868 (part), 2005) 
3.12.030 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions do apply: 
    "Motor vehicle" means a motorized passenger vehicle designed to be operated on highways. 
    "Retailer" means a company for which the primary business is the renting of motor vehicles for periods of fewer than thirty days. 
(Ord. 868 (part), 2005) 
3.12.040 - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective January 1, 2006. 
(Ord. 868 (part), 2005) 
Chapter 3.13 - WATER SOURCE 
Sections: 

3.13.010 - Definitions. 
    The city in this chapter is the city of Devils Lake, North Dakota. 
(Ord. 870 (part), 2006) 
3.13.020 - Findings. 
    The adoption of this chapter is supported and based upon the following findings: 
A.  The city is subject to a mandate from the federal government to have the arsenic level of its water in compliance with amounts acceptable to the federal government. 
B.  The present water supply system of the city presently exceeds the normal life of a water supply system. 
C.  The city has acquired the title to real property for the location of wells to provide a new water source for the city. 
D.  The city has acquired the permits needed to use the water from these new well sites. 
E.  The city has requested financial assistance from various sources to finance the acquisition, construction and operation of a new water source. 
F.  Regional flooding has caused the present water supply line to be covered by significant amounts of lake water, making rerouting, routine maintenance and repairs extremely difficult and costly. 
(Ord. 870 (part), 2006) 
3.13.030 - Enabling provision. 
    The city does operate under a Home Rule Charter approved by the voters of the city at a special election held on June 1, 1977. Article 3(b) of the Home Rule Charter gives the city certain power, provided as follows: 
A.  To control its finances and fiscal affairs; to appropriate money for its purposes and make payment of its debts and expenses; to levy and collect taxes, excises, fees, charges and special assessments for benefits conferred, for its public and proprietary functions, activities, operations, undertakings and improvements; to contract debts, borrow money, issue bonds, warrants and other evidences of indebtedness; to establish charges for any city or other services, and to establish debt and mill levy limitations; provided that all real and personal property in order to be subject to the assessment provisions of this subsection shall be assessed in a uniform manner and; provided further that the mill levies ordered imposed by the governing body on taxable property subject to ad valorem taxation shall not exceed in total the sum of levies authorized by state statutes and the constitution for cities of similar classification to that of the city of Devils Lake, however, same may be budgeted for any city purposes. The governing body shall be permitted to promulgate the city budget without regard to the specific dedications of mill levies to specific purposes as long as the total budget is not more than the total amount of mills authorized to be levied by a city. 
(Ord. 870 (part), 2006) 
3.13.040 - Funding. 
    The city will fund the purchase of the well sites, the construction of the pumps, water lines, treatment plant, and any other necessary equipment for providing water, and the acquisition of any necessary permits or easements as follows: 
A.  The city will levy taxes to retire any debt incurred by the city for these purposes from any combination levies allowed under the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 870 (part), 2006) 
3.13.050 - Purchase of water. 
    The city may purchase water from another entity, subject to the conditions as set forth in this section: 
A.  The water needs of the city must exceed the amount of water which the city's supply and treatment system can efficiently deliver; 
B.  The purchase of additional water must be agreed to in a written agreement between the city and the entity providing the additional water; 
C.  The water owned by the city, or which the city has the right to use, shall be the first water used for city purposes, and the secondary water used shall be the water purchased by the city from the other entity; 
D.  In the event of an emergency caused by the failure or problems to the city's supply and treatment system. 
(Ord. 870 (part), 2006) 
3.13.060 - Voter approval. 
    Any provision of Section 40-33-02 or 40-33-16, N.D.C.C., which may require voter approval of any provision of this chapter, are rejected, and the provisions of this chapter shall supercede any provision which may require voter approval. 
(Ord. 870 (part), 2006) 
3.13.070 - Severability. 
    Should any section, provision, or part of this chapter be adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication should not affect the validity of the ordinance codified in this chapter as a whole or any section, provision or part thereof not ad-judged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 870 (part), 2006) 
3.13.080 - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective upon its adoption. 
(Ord. 870 (part), 2006) 
Chapter 3.14 - SALES TAX REVENUE BONDS 
Section: 

3.14.010 - Sales tax revenue bonds. 
    The city of Devils Lake is hereby authorized, by resolution or resolutions of its board of city commissioners, to issue revenue bonds of the city in an amount not exceeding three million dollars for the purpose of improving the city's embankment and flood protection facilities. The resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds may provide that the principal and interest on the bonds shall be payable from the Sales and Use Tax imposed by Chapter 3.08 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code. 
    Pursuant to Article 5, Section 1 of the Home Rule Charter and Section 1.17.020 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code, the provisions of Chapter 3.08 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code shall not be subject to referral by the citizens of Devils Lake during such time as the sales and use tax collections are required to meet the obligations of bonded indebtedness authorized by the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 885, 1-19-10) 
3.14.020 - Sales tax revenue bonds-[Water, sewer and street improvements]. 
    The city of Devils Lake is hereby authorized, by resolution or resolutions of its board of city commissioners, to issue revenue bonds of the city in an amount not exceeding three million dollars for the purpose of financing infrastructure including water, sewer and street improvements within the city. The resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds may provide that the principal and interest on the bonds shall be payable from the sales and use tax imposed by Chapter 3.08 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code. 
    Pursuant to Article 5, Section 1 of the Home Rule Charter and Section 1.17.020 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code, the provisions of Chapter 3.08 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code shall not be subject to referral by the citizens of Devils Lake during such time as the sales and use tax collections are required to meet the obligations of bonded indebtedness authorized by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 926, 7-20-15) 
Chapter 3.15 - VOLUNTEER ACTIVITIES FOR SENIORS 
Sections: 

3.15.010 - Intention. 
    Providing volunteer activities for seniors in the City of Devils Lake are declared to be an enterprise as provided in Article X, Section 18 of the North Dakota State Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 886, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 948, 10-16-17) 
3.15.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this enterprise is providing volunteer services by seniors for the benefit of the citizens of the City of Devils Lake. 
(Ord. No. 886, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 948, 10-16-17) 
3.15.030 - Assistance to engage in enterprise. 
    The City of Devils Lake is not able to provide volunteer services by seniors without the assistance of midwest state volunteer. Midwest state volunteer is not able to provide its services without the financial assistance of the City of Devils Lake. 
(Ord. No. 886, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 948, 10-16-17) 
3.15.040 - Findings for financial assistance. 
    The City of Devils Lake will provide financial assistance to midwest state volunteer subject to the terms and provisions of this ordinance and Chapter 3.10 of this Code. In providing financial assistance, the Devils Lake city commission makes the following findings: 
A.  Midwest state volunteer is a non-profit corporation in good standing and authorized to do business in the State of North Dakota. 
B.  Midwest state volunteer has been determined to be exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
C.  The services provided by midwest state volunteer do not compete with private businesses in the City of Devils Lake. The services provided by midwest state volunteer are needed in the City of Devils Lake to make available volunteer services by seniors. 
(Ord. No. 886, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 948, 10-16-17) 
3.15.050 - Procedure to obtain financial assistance. 
    The city commission may authorize a grant to midwest state volunteer to carry out the purposes of midwest state volunteer's enterprise as set out in the ordinance and codified in this chapter of this Code by the following procedure: 
A.  Midwest state volunteer shall request from the City of Devils Lake an amount of funding. 
B.  The request shall include midwest state volunteer providing written information as to how the money will be spent. This information will address how the spending of this funding will implement the purposes of this enterprise. 
C.  Midwest state volunteer shall provide to the City of Devils Lake any information, including financial, requested by the Devils Lake City Commission. 
D.  Midwest state volunteer will provide the City of Devils Lake with an accounting which shows how these funds were spent. 
E.  Midwest state volunteer will report to the Devils Lake City Commission on the activities of midwest state volunteer, which address how the purposes of the ordinance codified as Section 3.15.020 are implemented. 
(Ord. No. 886, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 948, 10-16-17) 
3.15.060 - Qualifications for funding. 
    In order for midwest state volunteer to qualify for funding from the City of Devils Lake, the following must be met: 
A.  The purpose of this enterprise as set out in this chapter and codified as Section 3.15.020 must be met, as determined by the Devils Lake City Commission. 
B.  The findings for financial assistance, as set out in this chapter and codified as Section 3.15.040, must continue to be met, as determined by the Devils Lake City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 886, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 948, 10-16-17) 
3.15.070 - Compliance with law. 
    Midwest state volunteer agrees that it will at all times be in compliance with and shall in no way violate federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 886, 5-17-10; Ord. No. 948, 10-16-17) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapter 5.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

5.04.005 - Food store employees. 
    Subject to the authorization of North Dakota Century Code, Section 12.1-30-03 (30) (1989), the following businesses are authorized to operate on Sunday: 
    Food stores operated by an owner or manager in addition to not more than thirty-five employees working in the store at one time on a Sunday. 
(Ord. 733, 1989) 
5.04.010 - License-Issued by auditor. 
    All licenses provided for by this title shall be issued by the city auditor, upon the filing with him of the authorized application and its approval by the person authorized to act thereon, and upon the payment to the city treasurer of the proper license fee. 
(Prior code § 397) 
5.04.020 - License-Recordation. 
    It shall be the duty of the city auditor to make a record of all licenses issued in a book for that purpose, including the date issued, the name of the person to whom issued, the purpose for which it is issued, the amount of the license tax received therefor, and the length of time for which issued. 
(Prior code § 398) 
5.04.030 - License-Application of fees. 
    All money paid into the city treasury under the provisions of this chapter shall be credited to and become a part of the contingent fund of this city, and shall be used for the payment of such liabilities and necessary expenses of the city as are not otherwise specially provided for in the annual appropriation bill. 
(Prior code § 399) 
5.04.040 - License-Revocation. 
    When any person to whom a license has been granted pursuant to this chapter or any other ordinance shall be convicted of violating any provisions of the ordinance relating to his business, his license may be revoked by the board of city commissioners. 
(Prior code § 400) 
5.04.050 - License-Expiration. 
A.  After June 24, 1940, all annual licenses required under any and all of the ordinances of the city, shall expire on the thirtieth day of June of each and every year following their issuance; provided, however, that this chapter shall have no application to any expiration date which may be established by state law. 
B.  Any licenses issued and in existence on June 24, 1940 and bearing a different date shall not be affected by this chapter, but upon the expiration of such licenses a new license shall expire on the thirtieth day of June following, as provided in subsection A of this section, and that the license fee for the license as provided in the ordinance which under such license issued shall be prorated according to the time from the expiration until the thirtieth day of June following. 
C.  Any provision of any ordinance of the city relating to the date of expiration of licenses which may be in conflict with this chapter is expressly repealed, and the expiration of all licenses under the ordinances of the city shall be as provided for in this section. 
(Ord. 278 §§ 1,2, 1940) 
5.04.060 - Penalty. 
    Any license not renewed by June 30th of each year shall incur a penalty on a daily basis. Such penalty shall be established by resolution of the city commission and revised as it may see fit. 
(Ord. 677(part), 1984: Ord. 635 § 3, 1979) 
Chapter 5.08 - CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND STREET SHOWS 

5.08.010 - License-Required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation within the city to exhibit any carnival, circus, menagerie, tent show or similar show, without first obtaining a license as provided in Section 5.08.020 and paying the fee prescribed by Section 5.08.020. 
(Ord. 381 § 1(part), 1956: Ord. 238(part), 1934: prior code § 401) 
5.08.020 - License-Application requirements. 
A.  All applications for license shall be in writing and must be made by the owner or operator to the city auditor and the city auditor, with the advice and consent of the city commission, may grant a license upon the payment of the fee prescribed. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission, and revised as it may see fit. 
B.  All license fees must be paid on or before the first day of showing. 
C.  Each carnival, circus, menagerie or other type of show must, at the time of making application, furnish information as to number of railroad cars, trucks, trailers, semitrailers, rides, shows and concessions, and such other information as the city auditor requires to determine the proper classification of the applicant. 
D.  Any person, firm, corporation or organization sponsoring any of the carnivals, circus exhibitions and shows mentioned in subsections A through C of this section shall provide proof of liability insurance in a minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars per person and one million dollars per occurrence prior to the issuance of any license or permit. 
(Ord. 677(part), 1984; Ord. 651, 1982: Ord. 381 § 1(part), 1956: Ord. 238(part), 1934: prior code § 402) 
Chapter 5.10 - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 884, adopted August 3, 2009, in effect, repealed the former Chapter 5.10, §§ 5.10.010-5.10.110, and enacted a new Chapter 5.10 as set out herein. The former Chapter 5.10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 761, 1991 and Ord. No. 792, 1995. 

5.10.010 - Definitions. 
    In this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires: 
    "Merchandise" does not include the sale of livestock or agricultural products for processing, or the sale of living livestock. 
    "Transient merchant" includes any person, individual, copartnership, or corporation, either as principal or agent, who engages in, does, or transacts any temporary or transient business in the city and who does not intend to become or does not become a permanent merchant of the city. The term "transient merchant" shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or selling agents in the usual course of business nor shall it apply to a person, firm or corporation exhibiting goods for sale concurrent with and as an adjunct to a group display, meeting, convention, or event held in or at a publicly-owned or operated building or facility or sales of merchandise damaged by smoke or fire, or of bankrupt condition where such stocks have been acquired from merchants of the city thereof engaged in business; provided, however, no stocks of merchandise shall be augmented by new goods. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.020 - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or for any agent, servant or employee of any person or entity to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale of merchandise as a transient merchant, without first obtaining a license to do so. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.030 - Application. 
    Any transient merchant desiring to engage in, do, or transact business, or the sale of merchandise, by auction or otherwise, in the city of Devils Lake, shall file an application for a license for that purpose with the city auditor which shall be in writing and include the following: 
A.  Applicant's name, present address, present home address, present business address, and date of birth. 
B.  Applicant's residence and business address for the prior two-year period, if different from the present residence and address. 
C.  Type of business in which applicant has been engaged in the previous two years. 
D.  Location of the business to be licensed. 
E.  Kind of business to be conducted. 
F.  The dates and hours when sales will be conducted in the city of Devils Lake. 
G.  An itemized list of merchandise to be offered for sale, reciting as to each type a description thereof including serial number, if any, the owner's actual cost thereof, and a designation by number corresponding with the number to be affixed to each item by a tag which shall be kept fastened to the item at all times until sold. 
H.  The location where the transient merchant will conduct business in the city. 
I.  The name and address of each political subdivision where the applicant has submitted an applicant for a transient merchant license in the past six months. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.040 - Fee. 
    The application in Section 5.10.040 shall be accompanied by a non-refundable license fee which is required of all transient merchants for the transaction of such business within the city of Devils Lake as is contemplated in and provided by NDCC Section 51-04-09 and any subsequent amendments. This fee is fixed at the sum of fifty dollars per day, for each and every day during which any such transient merchant shall transact business in the city of Devils Lake, or the sum of five hundred dollars for a permit for a period of ninety days. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.050 - Bond. 
    Any person desiring to transact business within the city of Devils Lake as a transient merchant shall, along with the application fee for a license, include with the application in Section 5.10.030 a surety bond or deposit of cash in lieu thereof, to the city auditor in the amount of five thousand dollars (the surety of which shall be a surety company authorized to transact business in the state of North Dakota). The contents and surety therein shall be subject to the approval of the city auditor, and be conditioned that the applicant will, in all things, conform to the laws relating to transient merchants and further conditioned upon full compliance with all material, oral or written statements and representations made by the applicant, the applicant's agents, representatives, or auctioneers with reference to merchandise sold or offered for sale, or faithful performance under all warranties made with reference thereto. The bond shall not be revocable nor terminate prior to the passage of two years' time after the expiration of the license issued pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.060 - Applicants license by attorney general. 
    No transient merchant's license shall be issued to any applicant unless the applicant provides written proof that such person has obtained a valid and current license as a transient merchant from the attorney general of the state of North Dakota as required by Chapter 51-04 of the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.070 - Location. 
    The holder of a transient merchant license shall conduct business in one location, but may go to other locations upon invitation. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.080 - Exemption. 
    An organization which is a bona fide nonprofit veterans, charitable, educational, religious, fraternal, civic and service club organization, or other public spirited organization as defined by the provisions of Chapter 53-06.1 of the North Dakota Century Code, and any bona fide school, service club or youth organization is not required to have a transient merchant license in order to conduct sales which would otherwise require such a license under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.090 - Sales in public facilities exempted. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to sales conducted in or at a publicly owned or operated building, park, or facilities as part of a civic event provided such sales are approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.100 - License display. 
    Any transient merchant licensed hereunder shall prominently display the license at the licensed location. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
5.10.120 - Penalty. 
    Any person who engages in business within the city of Devils Lake as a transient merchant without first obtaining a license to do so as herein provided shall be subject to a penalty of up to five hundred dollars. Each day a person conducts business in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be a separate offense and shall be punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 884, 8-3-09) 
Chapter 5.12 - CONTRACTORS 

5.12.010 - Definitions. 
    In this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires: 
A.  "Contractor" means any person, as defined in subsection B of this section, who engages in construction work for consideration, including builders, carpenters, painters, plasterers, electricians, plumbers, heating contractors and any other person engaged in similar type work for others; however, any such person engaged in such work solely for himself or his neighbor and without compensation shall not be included in this definition. 
B.  "Person" includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association, corporation, or other group or combination thereof acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number, unless the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed clearly by the context thereof. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 1, 1974) 
5.12.020 - License-Required. 
    It is unlawful to do business in the city as a contractor as defined in subsection A of Section 5.12.010 without having first secured a license therefor as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 2, 1974) 
5.12.030 - License-Exemption. 
    Any contractor as defined in subsection A of Section 5.12.010 who has a state contractors license pursuant to Chapter 43-07 of the North Dakota Century Code shall not be required to obtain a license from the city pursuant to this chapter to engage in business within the city limits. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 3, 1974) 
5.12.040 - License-Fee. 
    The license fee to be required of all contractors as defined in subsection A of Section 5.12.010 to engage in business within the city is fixed at the sum of one hundred fifty dollars per year or for any portion of a year. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 4, 1974) 
5.12.050 - License-Application. 
    Applicants for license under this chapter, when an individual, copartnership or corporation, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation, with the city auditor, showing: 
A.  Applicant's name, present address, present home address, present business address, and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated; 
B.  The name, present residence, present home address, and present business address of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's business during the time that is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; 
C.  The residence, business address, and type of business in which applicant has been engaged in the previous two years; 
D.  The residence, business address, and type of business in which the person having the management or supervision of applicant's business has been engaged in the previous two years; 
E.  The place or places in the city, where it is proposed to carry on applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that the business shall be conducted; 
F.  The kind of business to be conducted. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 5, 1974) 
5.12.060 - License-Bond. 
    Before any license is issued to a contractor for engaging in business in this city, the applicant therefor shall file with the city auditor a bond running to the city the sum of five thousand dollars executed by the applicant, as principal, and a responsible surety upon which service of process may be made in the state; the bond not to be revocable nor to terminate prior to passage of two years' time after the expiration of the license issued pursuant thereto nor until due notice that the terms of the bond are to be canceled has been given to the city auditor; the bond to be approved by the city attorney, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state, regulating contractors and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of the ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person or persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception practiced on any person transacting such business with the applicant, whether the misrepresentation or deceptions were made or practiced by the owners or by their servants, agents or employees. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city to the use of the aggrieved person. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 6, 1974) 
5.12.070 - License-Posted. 
    The license issued under this chapter shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named in the license. In the event that the person or persons applying for the license desire to do business in more than one place within the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 7, 1974) 
5.12.080 - License-Transfer. 
    No license issued to a contractor in the city shall be transferred. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 8, 1974) 
5.12.090 - License-Enforcement by city engineer. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer to examine all places of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the provisions of this chapter, to determine if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 9, 1974) 
5.12.100 - License-Revocation. 
A.  Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the governing body of the city, after notice and hearing for the following causes: 
1.  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; 
2.  Any violation of this chapter; 
3.  Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
4.  Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
B.  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 10, 1974) 
5.12.110 - License-Expiration. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire at the expiration of the period for which application has been made and prepaid, to be renewable by the city auditor upon application and payment therefor. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 5 § 11, 1974) 
Chapter 5.16 - GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES 

5.16.010 - Application for license. 
    Any person, firm or corporation desiring to go out of business and conduct a going out of business sale shall first apply to the office of the city auditor for a license for the purpose of conducting the going out of business sale. 
(Ord. 558 § 1, 1974) 
5.16.020 - Cost of license. 
    The cost of obtaining the license for the purpose of conducting a going out of business sale shall be established by resolution of the city commission, and revised as it may see fit. Such fee shall be payable to the city auditor. 
(Ord. 677(part), 1984: Ord. 558 § 2, 1974) 
5.16.025 - Documents describing merchandise required-Sale restrictions. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation that shall apply for a going-out-of-business license shall furnish, at the time of application for the sale, a copy of all orders for merchandise made prior to the application which have not yet been received by the applicant. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation which shall engage in a going-out-of-business sale shall, during the time of the going-out-of-business sale, offer for sale only lines of merchandise that were sold on the premises prior to issuance of the license by the city. 
(Ord. 672A, 1984) 
5.16.030 - Length of sale. 
    No such person, firm or corporation engaged in business in the city shall conduct any such going out of business sale for a period of not to exceed ninety days; however, the length of the going out of business sale may be restricted to sixty days or thirty days and the length of any such going out of business sale shall be determined by the city commission, taking into consideration such factors as the type of business involved, the type of merchandise to be sold at the sale, and all other conditions then existing. 
(Ord. 558 § 3, 1974) 
5.16.040 - Procuring of merchandise prohibited. 
    No such person, firm or corporation which engages in the conducting of a going out of business sale shall procure, order or obtain from any source any merchandise to be sold at the going out of business sale, which merchandise is obtained by such person, firm or corporation after the application for a going out of business sale is submitted to the city auditor pursuant to the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. 558 § 4, 1974) 
5.16.050 - Advertisement to include license number. 
    Any advertisement by any person, firm or corporation of any going out of business sale shall include the license number of the license obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 558 § 5, 1974) 
Chapter 5.24 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

5.24.010 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed herein: 
    "Alcoholic beverages" means any liquid intended for drinking by humans which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which is fit or intended for use for beverage purposes. 
    "Beer" means any alcoholic beverages that is of the alcohol content provided by the laws of the state in defining the word "beer." 
    "Food and beverage specialty license" means a license which permits the sale of beer and/or wine at retail, subject to the following: 
1.  Beer and wine only. 
2.  Beer only. 
    "Habitual drunkard" is a person who is habitually addicted to the use of any or all intoxicating liquors, regularly becomes intoxicated, or who, by reason of habitual intemperance drinking of intoxicating liquor is at times dangerous to himself or herself or others, or is incapable of managing himself or herself and his or her affairs. 
1.  Any person who has been incarcerated for the purpose of detoxification, or any person who has been arrested for any offense against the peace while under the influence of intoxicating liquor, or a combination of such offenses more than five times in a twelve-month period, shall be deemed to be a habitual drunkard for the purpose of this chapter. 
2.  It is not necessary that such person be intoxicated most of the time, or have lost the will power to resist alcoholic drinks. 
3.  For the purposes of this definition, it is not necessary to prove the means of the intoxication is by drinking alcoholic beverages as defined herein, but only that the person was intoxicated by alcohol introduced into the person's system in some form regardless of the intended use of the alcohol. 
    "Hotel-motel license" means a special license that permits the sale of all alcoholic beverages on an on-sale and off-sale basis. 
    "Intoxicated person" means a person who displays signs and symptoms commonly associated with over consumption of alcoholic beverages. These signs and symptoms include, but are not limited to, any of the following: Strong odor of alcohol, poor balance, staggering, swaying, slurred speech, loud or obnoxious behavior, blood shot or watery eyes, vomiting, grogginess, poor hand-eye coordination, fighting behavior, or any combination thereof. 
    "Licensed premises" means that premises on which alcoholic beverages are normally sold or dispensed and shall be delineated by diagram or blueprint which shall be included with the license application or the license renewal application. Licensed premises includes all areas where alcoholic beverages are routinely stored, displayed, opened or mixed, and all lounges, bars and restaurants where alcoholic beverages are dispensed. Meeting rooms, banquet rooms or other rooms not part of the licensed premises may be leased by groups or individuals for private events, such as receptions, banquets and similar events at which alcoholic beverages may be consumed provided that the licensee does not open, mix or dispense alcoholic beverages in those areas not licensed. 
    "Licensee" means the person to whom a license has been issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Liquor" means any alcoholic beverage other than beer. 
    "Lodge" or "club" means any corporation or association organized for civic, fraternal, social or business purposes, or for the promotion of sports, which has at least two hundred members at the time a license is applied for pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Off-sale" means the sale of alcoholic beverages in original packages for consumption off or away from the premises where sold. Off-sale is restricted to businesses with a Class I, II, III, IV, or V license. 
    "On-sale" means the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises where sold. 
    "Packages" and "original package" means any container or receptacle holding alcoholic beverages which is corked or sealed by the manufacturer and which cork or seal has not been removed or broken prior to the sale of such package to the purchaser. 
    "Person" means persons, partnerships, other unincorporated associations and corporations. 
    "Sale" means any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration, and includes all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. 
    "Sell at retail" or "sale at retail" means a sale to a consumer for use consumption and not for the purpose of resale in any form. 
    "Supper club license" means a special license to sell alcoholic beverages on an on-sale and off-sale basis, which may be issued to steak, seafood or similarly menued supper clubs having a seating capacity of one hundred or more seats arranged in supper club style (i.e. adequate room to safely accommodate the number of tables required to have people seated two to eight persons to a table. 
    "Transfer" means any assignment, sale, exchange or other conveyance of any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A transfer shall be deemed to have occurred upon the assignment, sale, exchange or other conveyance of fifty percent or more of the interest in a licensee partnership or stock in a licensee corporation, whether such assignment, sale, exchange or other conveyance occurred in one single transaction or multiple transactions. However, the term "transfer" shall not apply to the following described conveyances: 
1.  When an individual holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has become deceased, the license may, upon application of the personal representative of the decedent, be transferred to another individual, partnership, firm or corporation; 
2.  When a corporation holding a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter voluntarily dissolves, a license may be issued to an individual shareholder in such corporation who held said stock at the time of the issuance or last renewal of the license and whose application is approved by the holders owning a majority of the outstanding shares of stock in the corporation prior to the time of dissolution; provided, however, that such shareholder shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter relating to the application for a license and to the qualifications of a licensee; 
3.  When an individual licensee desires to transfer a license to a corporation in which the licensee is the owner of at least a majority of the outstanding shares of stock in said corporation; provided, however, that such licensee may not permit his stock ownership in the transferee corporation to fall below the majority of the outstanding stock in said corporation without the prior approval of the commission and reapplication for license by the transferee corporation. The transferee corporation shall be subject to all the requirements of this chapter relating to the application for a license and the qualifications of a license; 
4.  When a licensee is a corporation or partnership which desires to transfer a license to another corporation or partnership having substantially the same partners or stockholders; provided, however, that such transferee corporation or partnership shall be subject to all the requirements of this chapter relating to the application for a license and the qualifications of a licensee; 
5.  When an individual licensee desires to transfer a license to a blood relative of the first degree, as defined by the North Dakota Century Code, or to a grandchild of the individual licensee if the grandchild's parents are deceased. For purposes of this subsection only conveyance of shares of stock in a licensee corporation shall not be considered a transfer if the person seeking to convey shares of stock owns at least a majority of the outstanding shares of stock in said corporation; 
6.  When a majority of the entire commission adopts a resolution and declares the conveyance not to be a transfer for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 905, 10-15-12) 
5.24.020 - Applicability of chapter-Exceptions. 
    This chapter is declared to be an exercise of the police power directly affecting and designed to promote the peace, safety, good order, health, and well-being of the people of the city. This chapter shall apply to all territory within the city and to such outlying contiguous territory without the corporate limits within which the city may exercise police jurisdiction as defined by law, provided, however, that the following exceptions shall be noted to the applicability hereof: 
A.  This chapter shall not apply to wines delivered to priests, rabbis and ministers for sacramental use. 
B.  This chapter shall not be construed to apply to the following articles, when they are unfit for beverage purposes: 
1.  Denatured alcohol produced and used pursuant to acts of Congress, and the regulations thereunder; 
2.  Patent, proprietary, medical, pharmaceutical, antiseptic, and toilet preparations; 
3.  Flavoring extracts, syrups and food products; 
4.  Scientific, chemical and industrial products, nor to the manufacture or sale of said articles containing alcohol. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.030 - License-Required. 
A.  A person may not sell at retail within the city limits of Devils Lake any alcoholic beverages without first having obtained a license therefor as herein provided. This section does not apply to public carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
B.  A license may not be issued to any person engaged in business as the representative or agent of another. A license may be issued only to the owner or owners of the business being conducted at the location sought to be licensed. 
C.  The individual to be responsible for compliance with all city ordinances who is named in the license application must be the owner if the licensee is an individual, a partner or manager if the licensee is a partnership or other unincorporated association, and an officer of the corporation or manager if the licensee is a corporation. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.040 - License-Term. 
A.  All licenses issued hereunder shall be for a period of not more than one year and shall expire on the thirtieth day of June in each year. Where a license is granted for a period less than a year any subsequent renewal thereof must be made for the full annual term. 
B.  When the application is made for the transfer of an existing retail liquor and beer license, permitting the retail sales of alcoholic beverages during the license year for the unexpired portion of such year for said license, the proposed transferee for said license shall pay a transfer fee to the city in the amount of one hundred dollars for administrative processing purposes. Said license, if allowed to be transferred, shall then remain in full force and effect until the expiration of the term for which it was issued without payment of any additional fee by either party thereto. 
(Ord. 781, 1993: Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.050 - Classes of licenses, fees and limitation of number issued. 
A.  The board finds that in order to ensure compliance by all licensees with all applicable federal, state and city laws, ordinances and regulations, and in order to adequately police all licensed establishments and to promote the public welfare, it is necessary and proper to limit the number of licenses issued pursuant to the city's police powers and authority granted by Title 5, NDCC. 
B.  Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the number of Class IV and V retail licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city shall be based upon the population of the city itself. Such population figures will hereafter be determined according to the official census last taken. All other license classifications hereunder shall not be limited by number or included in any population-license ration if any application therefore otherwise meets and satisfies the other provisions and requirements for the issuance hereof. 
C.  The city commission does further acknowledge that twenty-three retail licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages are in full force and effect in the city upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    Each license is given a number by the city auditor. With each number the city auditor shall include the class, holder of the license, and business name if different than the holder of the license. 
    To insure that said licenses remain in full force and effect and otherwise are in compliance herewith upon the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city commission does deem it necessary and reasonable to classify all existing licenses in the following manner by each license number: 
1.  Class I license and Sunday Special Permit; 
2.  Class I license and Sunday Special Permit; 
3.  Class I license and Sunday Special Permit; 
4.  Class I license; 
5.  Class III license and Sunday Special Permit; 
6.  Class IV license; 
7.  Class II license and Sunday Special Permit; 
8.  Class VI license and Sunday Special Permit; 
9.  Class VI license and Sunday Special Permit; 
10.  Class VI license and Sunday Special Permit; 
11.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
12.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
13.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
14.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
15.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
16.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
17.  Class IV license; 
18.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
19.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
20.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
21.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit; 
22.  Class VI license and Sunday Special Permit; and 
23.  Class IV license and Sunday Special Permit. 
    Each of the foregoing licenses has been designated in accordance with the provisions hereof and assigned the above permanent license which shall identify said license until such time as the license terminates through revocation or cancellation. The transfer of any such license shall not change the number so assigned. In the event, however, that any of the foregoing Class IV or V licenses are subsequently revoked or cancelled through voluntary action of the licensee or involuntarily through the action of the city commission, such license(s) may be reissued to any eligible application without regard to the population-license ratio as otherwise applicable herein. 
D.  The city commission shall at its discretion, hereafter issue only one additional Class IV or Class V retail license for the sale of alcoholic beverages, notwithstanding the licenses already issued in such classification, for each one thousand population increase for the city which exceeds the city's present population of seven thousand four hundred forty-two. 
E.  Provided further, that in the event any area is annexed into the city pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 40.51.2, NDCC and said area contains licensed retail liquor establishments thereon, the city commission shall be empowered at its discretion and upon proper application by said annexed licensee to issue a retail license within the designated classification as deemed appropriate to sell alcoholic beverages within the city without limitation to the population-license ration otherwise applicable herein. 
F.  Licenses for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages are divided into the following classes for the purpose of determining the number of licenses to be issued and outstanding: 
1.  Class I License. To any nationally organized fraternal order, club or any nationally organized service or veteran's organization which is under the control and supervision of a national organization of officers. A Class I license shall authorize the license to sell alcoholic beverages on-sale or off-sale. 
2.  Class II License. To the operator of a supper club food and beverage establishment. The license may not be transferred and must be held only by the operator who has been awarded the license and be held only for the period of the operator's license and shall terminate with the termination of the food and beverage establishment. A Class II license shall authorize the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages on-sale and off-sale. 
3.  Class III License. To a hotel or motel that provides at least fifty rooms for transient guests with continuous service and dining facilities with a seating capacity of at least fifty seats as a part of the hotel or motel operations and a full menu normally provided by a restaurant, and maintained and open seven days a week. The fifty seats for dining facilities are in addition to seating facilities for customers of the liquor facilities. A Class III license authorizes the licensee to sell on-sale and off-sale. However, this restriction does not preclude customary room service to registered guests of the licensee. 
4.  Class IV License. To any applicant for the on-sale and off-sale of alcoholic beverages other than applicants in other classifications hereof. 
5.  Class V License. To any applicant for the sale at retail for off-sale. 
6.  Class VI License. To any applicant for a specialty restaurant license to sell beer and/or wine in conjunction with food sales at retail, subject, however, to the following: 
a.  Gross sales of alcoholic beverages may not be greater than forty percent of total gross sales of food and alcoholic beverages. All Class VI license holders shall file with the application for license renewal a statement certifying gross food sales and liquor sales for the previous calendar year. The board of city commissioners may, in its discretion, require certification of any statement by a certified public accountant, retained by the licensee. All sales of alcoholic beverages by Class VI licensees must be separately receipted to the customer by cash register receipt and clearly identified as sales of beer or wine on all receipts. 
b.  The license is for on-sale only, and off-sale is not permitted. A cessation of business at a licensed location for a period of ninety days or longer shall constitute cause to revoke such license pursuant to Section 5.24.110(A)(2). 
c.  Once a license has been established at a particular location, the license may not be transferred to another location without prior approval of the city commission. 
d.  The licensee may not permit public dances or dancing of any kind on said premises. 
e.  Specialty restaurant licenses shall only be issued to specialty restaurants having a seating capacity of seventy-five or more people. 
f.  Specialty restaurants must be constructed so that minors not accompanied by adults are seated in an area separate from the area where tap beer and/or wine is served. 
g.  Any specialty license issued under this section shall be cancelled if for any reason the licensee ceases to be qualified as the specialty for which the license was issued. 
7.  Class VII License. To any organization, corporation or association that functions on less than a daily basis and is operational less than one hundred days in a calendar year. These special occasion clubs primarily cater to members and their guests. 
a.  The license is for on-sale only, and off-sale is not permitted. 
b.  Once a license has been established at a certain location, the license may not be transferred to another location without prior approval of the city commission. 
c.  Special occasion clubs must be constructed so that minors will not have access to the area where liquor is served. 
d.  Section 5.24.110(A)(2), requiring suspension or revocation of a license if licensee ceases business at the location for a period of ninety days or more, does not apply to the Class VII license. 
e.  Any license issued under this section shall be cancelled if for any reason the licensee ceases to be qualified as the entity for which the license was issued. 
8.  Class VIII License. To the owner or licensee of any hotel in the city, containing twenty or more rooms. A license issued pursuant to this paragraph, however, may not be used for the off-sale of alcoholic beverages, except to registered guests thereof. 
9.  Class IX License. To an applicant for the sale of retail on-sale or off-sale, wine and beer only. A Class IX license will be issued in the sole discretion of the Devils Lake City Commission. The annual license fee for a Class IX license shall be set each year by the city commission, in the fees and rates. A Class IX license is subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The sale, dispensing, or consumption of wine and beer is allowed in only the licensed premises of the retail establishment. 
b.  The only alcohol sold, dispensed or consumed is wine and beer. 
c.  On-sale or off-sale of wine and beer on the licensed premises is permitted. 
d.  Gross sale of alcoholic beverages may not be greater than thirty percent of the total gross sales of all other items sold at retail and alcoholic beverages. All Class IX license holders shall file with the application for license renewal a statement certifying gross retail sales and wine and beer sales for the previous calendar year. The board of city commissioners may, in its discretion, require certification of any statement by a certified public accountant, retained by the licensee. 
e.  A partition dividing the licensed premises from the remainder of the retail store shall be installed. This partition shall allow customers and employees of the retail store access between the licensed premises and non-licensed premises, subject to the restrictions of minors in the licensed premises. 
f.  Minors are not allowed in the licensed premises, except as permitted by NDCC §5-02-06. 
g.  A retail store containing the licensed premises must be operational and open during regular business hours. The retail store must be open for business for wine and beer to be sold, dispensed, or consumed. 
h.  The maximum number of seats for the licensed premises shall not exceed twenty-five. 
i.  The square footage of the licensed premises shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the total square footage of the retail store, including the licensed premises. 
j.  Once a license has been established at a particular location, the license may not be transferred to another location without prior approval of the city commission. 
G.  The board of city commissioners may further provide in any license issued pursuant to this chapter the right of an eating establishment to dispense and sell beer and wine in conjunction with the sale of prepared meals on Sunday between the hours of twelve noon and nine p.m. for consumption only in the part of the eating establishment habitually used for the servicing or prepared meals. As used in this section, "eating establishment" means a restaurant, lodge, club or other commercial establishment that is licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail pursuant to this chapter, and which derives fifty percent or more of its annual gross receipts from the sale of prepared meals and not alcoholic beverages. Whenever this provision for Sunday beer and wine sales is requested, commissioners shall require the licensee to pay an additional annual fee of seventy-five dollars. 
(Ord. 787, 1994: Ord. 775, 1992: Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 896, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 932, 2-16-16; Ord. No. 944, 12-5-16; Ord. No. 960, 2-22-19) 
5.24.060 - License qualifications for any applicant. 
A.  A license may not be issued or transferred under this chapter except to persons possessing the following qualifications: 
1.  Applicant, if an individual, must be a legal resident of the United States and a resident of the state and be a person of good moral character; 
2.  If applicant is a partnership or a corporation, the manager of the licensed premises must be a resident of the state and person of good moral character and the partners or officers, directors and stockholders must be legal residents of the United States and persons of good moral character. Corporate applicants must be properly registered with the Secretary of State. The manager must possess all of the qualifications required of an applicant; 
3.  Applicant cannot have had revoked, in the previous five years, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
4.  Applicant must be the owner or lessee of the licensed premises during the entire period licensed; 
5.  The building in which the business is conducted must meet all local and state requirements regarding sanitation and safety; 
6.  Property taxes for the building in which the licensed premises are located may not be delinquent. 
B.  A license may not be issued to an applicant if the applicant or manager has been convicted of any of the following offenses within the previous five years, and it is determined that the applicant or manager has not been rehabilitated within the meaning of Section 12.1-33-02.1, NDCC, or that the offense has a direct bearing on the person's ability to serve the public in the liquor business: 
1.  Any felony; 
2.  Any offense involving the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages; 
3.  Any offense involving the sale of drugs or felony possession of drugs; 
4.  Prostitution; 
5.  Obsenity; 
6.  Two or more convictions for driving under the influence of alcohol or actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol; 
7.  Any other offense determined by the board of city commissioners to have a direct bearing on the applicant's or manager's ability to serve the public as an alcoholic beverage retailer. 
    In the application of this section, it shall be presumed that a violation of subdivisions 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6 of subsection B of this section has a direct bearing on the person's ability to serve the public. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.070 - License application-Investigation of applicant's fitness. 
    Any person desiring a license to sell alcoholic beverages at retail as described in this chapter shall make and present a written verified application to the city commission of the city of Devils Lake, North Dakota, and file the same with the city auditor, containing the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a copartnership, the name and address and place of residence of each member of said copartnership; if the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the officers of the corporation and the manager of the licensed premises. 
2.  Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States, and if a naturalized citizen, the date and place of naturalization and the place of residence of the applicant for a period of one year last preceding the date of application; if the applicant is a copartnership the same preceding information of each member of said copartnership; and if the applicant is a corporation, the date of incorporation, the state where incorporated, and if such corporation is a subsidiary of any corporation, the name of the parent corporation. 
3.  The legal description and the address of the premises for which license is sought. 
4.  The date on which the applicant acquired title to the premises sought to be licensed, and if the applicant does not have title to said premises, the name and address of the owner of the premises together with a copy of the applicant's lease under which he holds possession of said premises. 
5.  Whether there are any delinquent taxes against the premises sought to be licensed. 
6.  Whether the applicant has ever engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages prior to this application, and if so, the date and type of business and place where so engaged, whether within or without the state, and if the application is for a renewal license, the date the applicant first began to operate. 
7.  Whether the applicant has ever had a license revoked or canceled by any municipal, state or federal authority, and if so, the date of such cancellation, the place and authority canceling same, and the reason for such cancellation. 
8.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the violation of any law of the United States or of any state, or of the violation of any local ordinance, with regard to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of alcoholic beverages, and if so, the dates, name of places, and courts in which said convictions were had. 
9.  Whether the applicant has ever had a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages revoked for any violation of state laws or local ordinances, of if so, the names of the bodies revoking such license, the dates of such revocation, and the reasons assigned therefor. 
10.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any other crime than stated in subsections 8 and 9 of this section, in this state or any other state, or under any federal law, and if so, the date of such conviction, the name of the crime for which convicted, the amount and terms of sentence passed, and the court in which convicted. 
11.  The name and address and the place of residence for a period of one year prior to the date of application of any person who will have charge, management, or control of the establishment for which license is sought. 
12.  Whether any other person than the applicant has any right, title, estate or interest in the leasehold or in the furniture, fixtures, or equipment in the premises for which license is sought, and if so, the name and address of such person, together with a statement of the interest so held. 
13.  Whether the applicant has any interest whatsoever, directly or indirectly, in any other establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages, either at wholesale or retail, within or without the state, and if so, the names and addresses of such establishments. This provision is meant to include the holders of capital stock in any corporation dealing in alcoholic beverages, either at wholesale or retail, and within the borders of the United States. 
14.  The occupations which the applicant has followed during the past five years. 
15.  The names and addresses of at least three business references. 
16.  Whether the applicant is rated by any commercial agency, and if so, the name and address of said agency. 
17.  Whether the applicant is engaged in any other business or intends to be engaged in any other business than the sale of alcoholic beverages under the license for which application is made, and if so, the type of business, and if any employee, the name and address of the employer. 
18.  The classification of license applied for. 
19.  If the applicant is a lodge or a club, the date of organization, the number of members, the purpose for which organized, and the purpose for which profits to be derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages are to be applied and whenever required by the city commission, a list of the members belonging to such lodge or club. 
20.  Whether or not the property taxes of the applicant are delinquent, and if a copartnership, whether or not the property taxes of each member or the copartnership are delinquent, and whether or not the property taxes levied against the property to be used in conducting the business are delinquent. 
21.  A statement by the applicant that he consents to entry and inspection of the premises for which license is sought or any part thereof at any time by any police officer, sheriff, or any peace officer of the city or of the state, and that said applicant waives all rights, constitutional or otherwise, against unreasonable searches or seizures, and further consents that any alcoholic beverages or any other property found upon said premises which is held therein in violation of the laws of the state or in violation of this chapter may be seized and taken away by such officer, and that such alcoholic beverages or other property so seized may be received in evidence against him in any procedure brought pursuant to the laws of the state or pursuant to this chapter. 
22.  The chief of police or such other person or officer as may be designated by the city commission shall, upon the filing of an application, investigate the facts as stated in the application and the character, reputation and fitness of the applicant, and shall report on said matters to the city commission. In addition to the facts and information that is requested on the application forms, the designated investigator is authorized by the licensing authority to request from the applicant any other information the investigator considers necessary to make a determination of the fitness of the applicant, including but not limited to information pertaining to financing of the proposed establishment and other business interests of the applicant, or of the appli-cant's stockholders in the case of a corporate applicant. It shall be a requirement of any applicant to furnish the designated investigator with the information that he may request, and denial of such a request by any applicant shall be considered a violation of the alcoholic beverage license ordinances of the city and thereby disqualify the applicant from any further consideration. The provisions of this section shall apply equally to applicants for new licenses and applicants for license renewals. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.080 - License transfers and site locations-Restrictions. 
A.  A license may not be issued and/or transferred to engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverages within the city, or any license transferred to a new or different location, without license application and site approval by the board of city commissioners. 
B.  The hearing for license application and site location approval must be within twenty days of the filing of the license application. Public notice of the hearing must be published in the official newspaper one time, the publication being at least seven days prior to the hearing date. 
C.  At the hearing the board of city commissioners shall take the following factors into account to determine if the proposed site for the licensed business is proper: 
1.  Public convenience and necessity; 
2.  The proposed location to any church, public or parochial school, public library, hospital, college or university building used for academic purposes; 
3.  Compliance of proposed site with the applicable building code requirements; 
4.  Compliance of proposed site with the applicable health and sanitation ordinance; 
5.  A license application must be approved upon determination of the board that the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 786, 1994: Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.090 - Licenses-Limitation of number issued to license holder. 
A.  Not more than two licenses of a specific classification shall be issued or granted to any applicant who is already a license holder in the city, and each license shall be valid only for the specific premises licensed. 
B.  Not more than two licenses of a specific classification shall be issued or granted to any partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, corporation, limited liability corporation, or other entity existing under North Dakota law. No license may be issued to any entity authorized to exist under North Dakota law if any person having an interest in the applicant entity holds or has an interest in an entity holding more than two licenses of the same classification sought by the applicant entity. 
C.  No license shall be issued or granted to any applicant who is employed in any capacity in connection with two or more licenses of the same classification. 
D.  No license shall be issued to any member of the immediate family or household of any person who holds two or more licenses of the same classification within the city or within a one-half mile radius of the city. 
(Ord. 848, 2001; Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.100 - Posting of licenses. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises for which issued. 
(Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 1988) 
5.24.110 - License termination, suspension, revocation and hearing provisions. 
A.  Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked or suspended temporarily for any one or more of the following reasons: 
1.  The death of the licensee, unless upon application to the commission by the personal representative of the deceased, the board consents to the carrying on of such business by the personal representative. 
2.  When the licensee ceases business at the location licensed for a period of ninety days or more, or does not commence operations within nine months of the issuance of a new license or approval of a transfer to a new location. 
3.  When the licensee is convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  When the licensee ceases to be a bona fide legal resident and citizen of the state as required. 
5.  When the license or permit of the licensee from the state is suspended or revoked. 
6.  When the licensee is convicted of a crime or crimes such that the licensee would not, pursuant to Section 5-01-05, be qualified to be issued a license. 
7.  When the business of the licensee at the location licensed is conducted in violation of the health and sanitary regulations or other ordinances of the city. 
8.  When the licensee ceases to meet any of the qualifications required for issuance of a license. 
9.  When the licensee permits drunken, inebriate or disorderly persons to frequent the place of business. 
10.  When the licensee fails to pay when due property taxes or license fees. 
11.  When the licensee fails to pay the designated annual license fee for said license and more than ten days from its due date has elapsed. 
    The causes enumerated above are not all inclusive and the board of city commissioners retains and reserves the right to suspend or revoke the license for any cause which it may deem sufficient. 
B.  Hearing for Revocation or Suspension. 
1.  Before any license may be revoked or suspended for cause, the board shall notify the licensee of the proposed action and the right to a hearing on the action. The notice shall specify the action proposed to be taken, the reason for it, the time and place of the hearing, and the right of the licensee to appear. The notice must be mailed to the licensee by certified return receipt mail, not less than five days nor more than fifteen days before the hearing. A record of the hearing must be made as specified by Section 5-02-10, NDCC. 
2.  If after the hearing the board finds the violation charged has been proved by the evidence, the board shall issue its findings of fact, conclusions and order, which shall be served on the licensee. The order is appealable to the district court as specified in Chapter 28-32, NDCC. The order is stayed while the appeal is pending. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.120 - Restrictions on sale, service and dispensing of alcoholic beverages. 
A.  Sale or Use in Street Prohibited. The sale, serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon any street, alley, public way or area used principally for public parking is prohibited without prior approval of the city commission. No person shall have in his or her possession or control in any such public place any intoxicating beverage in any package, bottle or container, unless the package, bottle or container is sealed and stamped as required by the laws of the state and that such package, bottle or container has not been opened or the seal broken. 
B.  Solicitation of Drinks. No person shall frequent or loiter in any tavern, cabaret, bar or night club, with the purpose of soliciting persons to purchase drinks. No proprietor or operator of any such establishment shall allow the presence in the establishment of any person who solicits other persons to purchase drinks. 
C.  Acts Prohibited on Licensed Premises. A licensee at all times shall maintain good order in and about the premises licensed; he shall not permit, nor suffer, any carousing, boisterous conduct or behavior within or on such licensed premises. Nor shall any such licensed premises have or suffer others to have or maintain in such licensed premises, any slot machines, other gambling devices, or games of chance, except as permitted by state law and city ordinance pertaining to charitable gambling in any room or place in any building wherein any intoxicating beverages are retailed, and which room or place may be occupied by the license holder. It is unlawful for any licensee, or his agents, servants, employees, or any other persons whosoever, to permit any minor or any other person under the age of twenty-one years to sell or aid or assist in the sale of or in the delivery of intoxicating beverages on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 731, 1989; Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.130 - Limitation on hours and days of sale. 
    No licensee shall dispense or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises or permit other persons to remain on such licensed premises after two a.m. on Sundays, before eleven a.m. on Sundays, or between the hours of two a.m. and eight a.m. on all other days of the week, nor shall licensee dispense alcoholic beverages or permit consumption thereof on the licensed premises on Christmas Day, after two a.m. on Thanksgiving Day, or after six p.m. on Christmas Eve. 
(Ord. 869, 2005: Ord. 780, 1993) 
(Ord. No. 931, 9-21-15) 
5.24.140 - Employment of minors prohibited. 
    No person under twenty-one years of age shall be employed in any room or rooms constituting the place in which alcoholic beverages are sold, except as is permitted by state statute. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.150 - Sale to minors and certain persons prohibited. 
A.  Persons Under Twenty-one Years Prohibited. In accord with NDCC 5-02-06, no licensee shall dispense alcoholic beverages to a person under twenty-one years of age or permit such a person to remain on the licensed premises while alcoholic beverages are being sold or displayed; provided, however, that any person under twenty-one years of age may remain in a restaurant where alcoholic beverages are being sold if accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or if employed by the restaurant as a food waiter, food waitress, busboy under the direct supervision of a person over twenty-one years of age, and not engaged in the sale, disposition, delivery or consumption of alcoholic beverages. Any establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold may employ persons from eighteen to twenty-one years of age to work in a capacity of musicians under the direct supervision of a person over twenty-one years of age. 
B.  Liability of Persons Under Twenty-one Years. It is unlawful for any persons under twenty-one years of age to purchase, or to consume, or be in possession of alcoholic beverages, or to furnish money to any person for such purpose, or to enter any licensed premises where such beverages are being sold or displayed except under the conditions permitted as set out in subsection A of this section. 
C.  Misrepresentation of Age. It is unlawful for any person to misrepresent or misstate his age or that of any other person, or to misrepresent his age through presentation of any document purporting to show such person to be of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. Every licensee shall be required to keep a book which such licensee and his employees shall require anyone who has shown documentary proof of his age, which substantiates his age, to allow the purchase of alcoholic beverages, to sign such book if the age of such person is in question. Such book shall show the date of the purchase, the identification used in making the purchase, and the appropriate numbers of such identification, the address of the purchaser, and his signature. 
D.  Presumption of Licensee's Innocence When Certain Facts Established. The establishment of the following facts by a person making a sale of alcoholic beverages to a person not of legal age shall constitute prima facie evidence of innocence in a defense to any prosecution thereof: 
1.  That the purchaser falsely represented in writing, and supported with other documentary proof, that he was of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages; 
2.  That the appearance of such purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent person would believe him to be of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages; 
3.  That the sale was made in good faith and in reliance upon the written representation and appearance of the purchaser in the belief that the purchaser was of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages; 
4.  Any person who is convicted of misrepresenting his age with the intention of purchasing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars and thirty hours of public service as the same may be prescribed by the municipal court. 
E.  Delivery to Certain Persons Unlawful. It is unlawful for any person to deliver alcoholic beverages to a person under twenty-one years of age, a habitual drunkard, an incompetent, or an intoxicated person. 
1.  The chief of police shall maintain a list containing the name(s) of any persons deemed to be a "habitual drunkard" according to the definition in Section 5.24.010. If available, this list shall include a photograph of any person on the list. This list, and any information which identifies those contained on the list, will be provided by the city police department to all licensed liquor establishments in the city of Devils Lake. 
2.  Any person who is identified as a habitual drunkard shall be prohibited from being in any licensed premises in the city of Devils Lake. 
(Ord. 732, 1989; Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
(Ord. No. 906, 10-15-12) 
5.24.160 - Responsibility for conduct on premises-Gambling devices prohibited-Sale of other items restricted. 
A.  Every licensee is made responsible for the conduct of his place of business and is required to maintain order and sobriety in such place of business. No intoxicated person or persons shall be permitted to remain upon the premises or to be sold intoxicating liquor by any person or his employees holding any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  No licensee under this chapter shall be permitted to own or have in his possession and located on the premises for which a license is obtained pursuant to this chapter any slot machine, punchboard, pinball or other gambling device, except as provided by state statute. The possession of such device upon the premises licensed shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of the license issued under this chapter. 
C.  It is unlawful to sell any item on the licensed premises other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, tobacco products, drink mixing supplies, prepacked preserved sandwiches or pizzas approved by the State Laboratories Department, which shall be delivered to the purchaser with the packaging intact, dry packaged preserved snacks, and preserved pickled products served to the purchaser from the original container; except an on-sale liquor licensee and an on-sale beer licensee may sell alcoholic beverages in a restaurant separated from the room in which alcoholic beverages are opened or mixed if gross sales of food are at least equal to gross sales of alcoholic beverages which are consumed in the dining area, and except that anyone who operates a restaurant in conjunction with his on-sale liquor license or on-sale beer license under this chapter may serve food in the licensed premises; provided, however: 
1.  Other prepared foods may be served upon licensed premises so long as food is prepared by a person or business licensed to serve and prepare food and the preparer delivers and serves the food and, after consumption, returns all utensils used and uneaten food to the business or location at which the food was prepared. If the license holder obtains such food from a caterer and serves the food himself, the license holder must possess a restaurant license and meet the minimum requirements for a restaurant as set forth by the North Dakota State Laboratories and Consumer Affairs. 
2.  Before a city off-sale alcoholic beverage license may be issued to a person whose business to be licensed is located in a building that is primarily a gas station, grocery story or convenience store, the area to be licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages must be clearly set out in a blueprint or diagram. The area licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages must be separated from the nonlicensed portion of the business by a wall designed to allow sales personnel to serve customers and make sales in both the licensed and unlicensed portion of the premises, and that may allow customers in either portion of the premises access to the other portion. 
(Ord. 793, 1995; Ord. 754, 1991; Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.170 - Inspection of premises by police officers permitted. 
    In addition to the requirements as stated in Section 5.24.070 to be set forth in the application made by a person seeking the license for the sale of intoxicating liquor and alcoholic beverages, such person, copartnership, corporation, club or lodge seeking the license shall state therein that he consents to any city official, sheriff or any peace officer of the city or the state entering upon the premises for which license is sought for the purpose of inspecting the premises and any part thereof at any time, and that the persons making the application waive all rights, constitutional or otherwise, against unreasonable searches or seizures and further agrees that any liquor found upon the premises or any property found therein in violation of the laws of the state or of this chapter may be seized and taken away by the officer, and that such intoxicating liquor, alcoholic beverage or other property so seized may be received in evidence against him in any procedure pursuant to the laws of the state or this chapter. 
(Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 1988) 
5.24.180 - Closed booths and windows prohibited. 
    No licensee for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall maintain or suffer to be constructed, maintained or placed in the premises licensed any side room, closed booth or other enclosure. All booths located in such premises shall not be over forty inches high and open into the main part of the premises and shall be accessible from the aisles therein and shall not have thereon any kind preventing clear view into the booths from the main room or aisle of the premises. No licensee for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted to place in the windows or door of the licensed premises any sign, advertising matter, paper cards or any other material which shall in any manner obstruct the view into the premises above a line drawn parallel across the windows or door at a point six feet above the sidewalk level immediately in front of the windows or doors. 
(Ord. 711 § 2 (part), 1988) 
5.24.190 - Possession of unstamped and untaxed liquor unlawful. 
    No intoxicating liquor shall be permitted to be owned, held or possessed upon any licensed premises or by any person to whom a license for the retail sale of liquor has been issued unless the stamp tax as provided by the Liquor Control Act of the state has been properly affixed to the containers thereof and unless the taxes on such intoxicating liquor have been paid. The possession of any container of intoxicating liquor, which container does not bear the proper stamps issued by the state pursuant to the Liquor Control Act of the state shall be deemed to be illegal and a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.200 - Delivery of intoxicating liquor by nonlicensed persons unlawful. 
A.  It is found and determined by the board of city commissioners that the delivery of intoxicating liquor to homes in the city by nonlicensed persons facilitates the procuring of such liquors by juveniles and thereby contributes to breach of law and juvenile delinquency. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person not holding a liquor or beer license from the city to deliver or cause to be delivered within the city any intoxicating liquor to any private residence or to any person either for profit or in furtherance of any sale of such liquor. 
C.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the delivery of such liquor by a dealer licensed by the city or a person hired by the licensed dealer; provided, that the delivery is made only after the liquor has been purchased in a duly licensed place of business and delivery is made only to an adult person, nor shall this chapter apply to deliveries made to the place of business of licensed liquor dealers. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.210 - Hearing on alleged violations. 
    Any person having information that a retailer of alcoholic beverages licensed by the city has violated any provisions of this chapter may file with the city attorney an affidavit specifically setting forth such violation. Upon receipt of such affidavit the city attorney shall file a complaint in the municipal court or cause the matter to be set on for hearing not later than the next regular meeting of the city commission. A copy of the affidavit and notice of hearing shall be mailed the licensee by registered or certified mail not less than five days before such hearing, and in the event the date of receipt of such affidavit does not permit said required five days' notice, then such hearing before the city commission will be held at its next following regular meeting. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.220 - Severance clause. 
    The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.230 - Violations-Penalties stated. 
    Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a violation, or whenever in this chapter the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, any person upon conviction for the violation of any such provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, by imprisonment not to exceed thirty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each such offense. In the construction and interpretation of this chapter, the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered as a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. 
(Ord. 711 § 2(part), 1988) 
5.24.240 - Special permit. 
    The holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter may request the city commission to authorize the license holder to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages at a special event, subject, however, to the following: 
A.  The holder of the license must file with the city auditor an application on a form provided by the city auditor, no later than thirty days prior to the special event, which application shall contain the following: 
1.  The date of the special event and any alternate date in the event of inclement weather; 
2.  The hours of the special event; 
a.  As provided in Chapter 8.28, outdoor events shall not proceed past midnight and indoor events shall not proceed past one a.m., unless permission has been granted by the city commission as set out in that chapter. 
3.  The location of the special event; 
4.  The name, address and license number of the holder of the license; 
5.  A description of the special event, including reasons why the city commission should determine that it is a special event and issue a permit allowing the license holder to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
6.  A diagram which sets out the following: 
a.  Where the alcoholic beverages are to be dispensed; 
i.  If alcoholic beverages, other than beer, wine or sparkling wine are being dispensed, the location of the barrier which persons twenty-one years of age are prohibited from entering. 
b.  Where alcoholic beverages are to be consumed; 
c.  All entrances and exits; 
d.  The area set aside for those under twenty-one years of age, if there will be persons under twenty-one years of age present; 
e.  If persons twenty-one years of age are allowed to comingle with persons twenty-one years of age or older, whether alcoholic beverages, other than beer, wine, or sparkling wine will be dispensed; 
7.  Whether the special event will include a public dance, as defined in Chapter 8.28 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code, or a private dance as provided in Section 8.28.100 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code, and if so, an application for a public dance must accompany this application; 
8.  That the application has been reviewed and is approved by the chief of police; 
9.  If the chief of police recommends that police officers be present at the special event, the license holder will be responsible for the cost of hiring those police officers to be present; 
10.  The type of alcohol to be sold and the method of the sale of the alcohol. 
B.  The city commission may impose whatever restrictions or conditions it deems appropriate in granting a permit to authorize the license holder to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages at a special event. 
C.  In order to authorize the license holder to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages at a special event, the holder of the license must obtain a permit under this section. 
D.  Any conditions imposed by NDCC 5-02-01.1 are incorporated by reference. Any future amendments to NDCC 5-02-01.1 shall be incorporated by reference to this section. 
E.  The license holder must hold the class of license which allows for alcohol to be sold as requested in the application in this section. 
F.  The fee for a special permit to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be set out by the city commission and included in the adoption of its fees and rates. 
(Ord. 815, 1997) 
(Ord. No. 905, 10-15-12) 
5.24.250 - Consumption of alcoholic beverages adjacent to licensed premises. 
    The holder of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may not allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages outside of its licensed premises unless the following conditions are met: 
A.  The area where the alcoholic beverages are consumed is adjacent to and contiguous to the licensed premises. 
B.  No minors are present. 
C.  The area where the alcoholic beverages are consumed is enclosed, which enclosure shall be approved, in writing, by the chief of police. 
D.  The only alcohol consumed in the area is alcohol which has been dispensed from the licensed premises. 
E.  The area where alcoholic beverages are consumed shall be open only when the licensed premises is open. 
F.  The diagram of the licensed premises shall include in that diagram the area where the alcohol will be consumed and shall be so designated as such an area. 
G.  The laws of the state of North Dakota and ordinances of the City of Devils Lake are in no way violated. 
H.  The class of license of the licensed premises shall include allowing on sale, and the only alcohol consumed in this area is that alcohol sold by the licensed premises on sale. 
(Ord. 816, 1997) 
5.24.260 - Server training. 
    The terms and provisions of server training are as follows: 
A.  Server training shall be mandatory within the City of Devils Lake. 
B.  Server training classes shall be provided to those who own, manage, or are engaged in the sale of or service of alcohol. 
C.  Server training shall be required of any person that works in any premises licensed under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages, whether on or off sale, as a manager, bartender, waiter, waitress, or in any other capacity where such person may sell, serve, or deliver alcoholic beverages in or from premises licensed under this chapter or whose job description entails the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages or admittance into the licensed premises. 
D.  All server certificates will be valid for three years from the date of issuance. The certificate of training must be renewed prior to its expiration. 
E.  Each establishment having an alcohol license under this chapter shall maintain on file, at its licensed premises, a list of all employees and the certification status of each employee. Such list shall be made available to Lake Region District Health Unit upon request. 
F.  The Lake Region District Health Unit will coordinate the dates and times of server training classes with the training provider, and make that information known to the public. Applications for server training shall be submitted to the Lake Region District Health Unit. Applications will be verified and shall contain such information as determined by the training provider to be reasonably required for the purposes of determining competency and eligibility. 
G.  All server training programs shall be pre-approved by the Devils Lake Police Department. 
H.  An approved training program shall include, but not be limited to the following topics: 
1.  Reducing accessibility of alcohol to minors. 
2.  How to handle over consumption of alcohol. 
3.  Over serving of alcohol. 
4.  Server liability. 
5.  Local ordinances pertaining to the sale, dispensation, and delivery of alcoholic beverages. 
I.  A new employee will obtain a server certificate within seventy-five days from starting employment. 
J.  Any establishment holding a license, as provided in this chapter, which does not comply with this section shall have its license subject to the provisions of Section 5.24.210 of the Devils Lake City Code. 
(Ord. No. 935, 3-7-16; Ord. No. 951, 3-19-18) 
Chapter 5.36 - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 938, adopted May 2, 2016, amended Chapter 5.36 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 5.36, §§ 5.36.010-5.36.090, pertained to similar material, and derived from Ord. No. 436, 1962; Ord. No. 534, 1973; Ord. No. 644, 1981; Ord. No. 677, 1984; Ord. No. 728, 1989; Ord. No. 828, 1999; Ord. No. 842, 2001 and Ord. No. 929, adopted August 17, 2015. 

5.36.010 - License-Required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab business, nor shall any entity offer or make available its technologies or services to dispatch or in any way directly connect potential passengers with limousines or taxicabs, including electronic demand response or mobile application within the city without first having obtained a taxicab license as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.020 - License-Application. 
    Any person desiring to engage in the taxicab or limousine business, and any person desiring to drive a taxicab or limousine within the city shall make written application therefor to the city auditor and shall deposit with the city auditor the license fee required in Section 5.36.040. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.025 - Definitions. 
A.  Taxicab: As used in this chapter, the term "taxicab" means and includes any vehicle used to carry passengers for hire, which does not operate on a fixed route. 
1.  This definition shall include any of the following: 
a.  Taxi services. 
b.  Shuttle services. 
c.  Limousine services. 
2.  This definition does not apply to the following: 
a.  Any nonprofit corporation. 
b.  Any transportation provided to employees by their employer. 
B.  Rideshare: Shall mean the traveling of two or more persons by any mode of private passenger vehicle, including but not limited to; carpooling, van pooling, bus pooling, to any location incidental to another purpose of the driver, without charge, fee, or payment, for which a gratuity is neither accepted, collected, encouraged, promoted and/or requested, and for which the primary purpose of the driver cannot be profit or revenue based. Gratuity herein shall not include reimbursement for fuel usage. 
C.  Electronic Demand Response: The use of any electronic device in any manner, including internet pages, email, text message, push notification or application for the connection of or communication between a passenger and driver, or agents thereof, irrespective of whether such communication is from a portable or handheld device, monitor, smart phone or other electronic device or unit, for the demand response booking of transportation services. 
D.  Mobile Application: Any third party application installed onto a mobile device including smart phones, tablets, iPods or iPads used to arrange or coordinate limousine or taxicab transportation. 
E.  Limousine: A motor vehicle used for transporting passengers for a prearranged fare based on time, flat, or zone rates, but shall be prohibited from setting or collecting any charges passed upon time and distance combined or distance or through the use of any device or instrument. 
F.  Passenger(s): Any person or group of persons engaging a taxicab or limousine under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.030 - License-Conditions for granting. 
    The application for license shall be presented to the board of city commissioners and if the applicant has: 
A.  Procured and filed with the city auditor an indemnity insurance policy, written by a company licensed to do business in the state, or, in lieu thereof, a satisfactory surety bond, indemnifying those using the taxicab line and the public in general against loss to person, or property, as follows: 
1.  Indemnity against property damage for which the taxicab proprietor is legally liable in the sum of not less than fifteen thousand dollars, 
2.  Indemnity against death or personal injury for which the taxicab proprietor is legally liable, in the sum of not less than one hundred thousand dollars to any one person and/or three hundred thousand dollars to more than one person involved in any accident or three hundred thousand dollars combined single limit, 
3.  The policy or bond shall contain a provision that the insurance company shall give the city auditor fifteen days' notice of cancellation by registered mail, 
4.  The form of, the sufficiency of, the policy or bond, and the surety thereon, shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney and the board of city commissioners; 
B.  Shown that the applicant is a person of good moral character; 
C.  Shown a reasonable need of the taxicab service; the license may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.040 - License-Fee. 
    The annual license fee for the operation of a taxicab business in the city shall be established by resolution of the city commission and revised as it may see fit. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.050 - License-Requirements. 
A.  No person shall drive a taxi cab, and no owner of a taxi cab shall permit any person to drive a taxi cab, unless the driver has a taxi cab license issued by the city auditor. 
B.  Any person desiring to obtain a license to drive a taxi cab shall file an application for a taxi cab license with the city auditor who shall collect an initial fee for the processing of the background check. The auditor shall forward the application to the chief of police. The application shall contain the information requested by the chief of police needed by the chief of police to determine whether the applicant meets the criteria to hold a taxi cab driver's license. 
C.  The criteria to determine whether the applicant may hold a taxi cab driver's license are all of the following: 
1.  The applicant is over eighteen years of age. 
2.  The chief of police determines the applicant is a careful and competent driver. 
3.  The chief of police has determined the applicant has no criminal violation which would cause the applicant to be an improper taxi cab driver. 
4.  The applicant is not a registered offender. 
5.  The applicant has submitted to a drug screening test. The results of such screening shall be submitted with the application to the chief of police. 
a.  Screening tests shall be administered by a person certified to conduct screening tests of urine or saliva for the purpose of determining the presence of illicit substances prohibited by law, or the presence of legal substances requiring a subscription that has not been prescribed to the applicant. 
b.  Any positive result for illicit substances or other substances requiring a prescription for which the applicant is unable to prove that has been properly prescribed shall be grounds for denial. 
c.  Any applicant receiving a positive result on a screening test who believes the results to be incorrect (false positive) may submit to an enhanced laboratory test with a SAMHSA certified testing laboratory. 
d.  Fees for any such testing(s) are the responsibility of the applicant or the company for which the applicant is applying. 
6.  Shown that the applicant is a person of good moral character; 
7.  False or misrepresented information on the application shall be grounds for denial. 
D.  If the chief of police finds the criteria in subsection C to have been met, the application shall be approved by the chief of police and forwarded to the city auditor. 
E.  The license shall be issued by the city auditor for the term or remainder of the term set forth herein. The fee for the license shall be collected prior to a license being issued. The license shall be renewable thereafter from year to year upon payment of the license renewal fee and by applying for renewal of the license by the same methods set out in subsections B, C and D above. The license shall be renewed by approval of the chief of police. The city auditor shall provide a list of all licensed taxi cab drivers to the chief of police. 
F.  The license fee, application/background check fee, and license renewal fee shall be set by resolution of the board of city commissioners, and the fees may be changed from time to time. All fees shall be collected by the city auditor or designee. 
G.  The term of the license shall commence on the first day of July of each year, and shall expire on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
H.  Should the holder of any taxi cab driver's license fail to meet any of the criteria set forth in subsection C, the license may be revoked by the board of city commissioners. The procedure for revocation of a taxi cab driver's license is set forth as follows: 
1.  The board of city commissioners shall direct the city auditor to send written notification by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the holder of the taxi cab driver's license and the holder of the taxi cab license for whom the driver is employed, if known, which notice shall set forth the following: 
a.  The grounds for the revocation; 
b.  Whether the revocation is effective immediately. The temporary revocation of a taxi cab driver's license may be taken if the board of city commissioners determines such action is in the best interest of the public; 
c.  The date, time and location of the hearing on whether to revoke the taxi cab driver's license or to make the revocation permanent if there has been an immediate temporary revocation. 
2.  The hearing on the license revocation will be before the board of city commissioners no earlier than ten days and not more than thirty days from when the city auditor is directed to send the notice as provided in subsection (H)(1) above. 
I.  Any applicant for a taxi cab driver's license whose application is denied by the chief of police may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the board of city commissioners by proceeding as follows: 
1.  The applicant shall file a written request for a hearing with the city auditor within ten days from when a notice of denial is sent to the applicant. Notice of denial may be sent by regular mail, email, telephonic, or personal contact. If notification is made by telephone, the time and date of notification shall be noted on the application form. 
2.  The city auditor shall set the hearing before the board of city commissioners no earlier than ten days, but no later than thirty days from when the request for a hearing is filed with the city auditor. 
3.  The board of city commissioners shall either affirm the decision of the chief of police or reverse the decision of the chief of police with any conditions placed on the license which the board of city commissioners deems appropriate. 
J.  Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the requirements for issuance of a license and payment of the fees established by resolution of the city commission, there shall be issued to the applicant a license which shall be in such form as to contain the photograph and signature of the licensee and the license number issued thereto. Any licensee who defaces, removes, or obliterates any official entry made upon their license shall be punished by the revocation of their license. 
1.  Any taxicab driver shall constantly and conspicuously display their taxicab driver's license when he/she is engaged in employment. The identification shall not be displayed after expiration of the license. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.060 - License-Revocation. 
    Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be revocable by the board of city commissioners for due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.070 - Street stands. 
    The police may designate places upon the public streets where licensed vehicles may stand while waiting for employment and no such vehicle shall stand upon any of the public streets of the city at any other place than so designated. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.080 - Assault and profanity prohibited. 
    No owner or driver of any licensed vehicle shall assault, threaten, abuse or use profane, violent or improper language toward any passenger or other person employing such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.090 - Schedule of fees. 
    The owner or operator of every taxicab or other vehicle for conveyance of passengers for hire shall file with the city auditor a schedule of the fees to be charged for transportation, which schedule may be changed from time to time by filing amended schedules, but no driver or operator shall charge a greater fare than that shown upon the schedule. Such charges shall at all times be subject to approval by the board of city commissioners and if the board considers any charge excessive it may require the licensee to revise the same. Refusal to revise the rate schedule in accordance with such directions within twenty-four hours after notice so to do shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.100 - Front seat occupants limited. 
    Under no circumstances and at no time shall more than one person, other than the driver of a taxicab be permitted to be carried or to ride in the driver's compartment of the taxicab or on the same seat with the driver. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.110 - Guest passengers prohibited. 
A.  No driver of any taxicab shall at any time while offering service to the public carry or have riding with him/her in the taxicab any guest or visitor while transporting any passenger(s). 
B.  Exemption: 
1.  An employee of the taxicab company may accompany a driver for the purpose of training, supervision, or security. Any such employee must meet the same criteria and be a licensed taxicab driver in accordance with Section 5.36.050. 
2.  This section shall not apply to additional persons who are a part of a group of passengers for whom a fare is charged in whole or in portion to another party or passenger. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.120 - Overloading prohibited. 
    No driver of any taxicab in the city shall at any time overload the taxicab or carry more people than the vehicle is designed to carry. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.130 - Accommodations and attention. 
    All drivers of taxicabs in the city must give passengers accommodations as are usual and reasonable, and must treat them with civility and give them a reasonable degree of attention and must assist all weak, sick, or a person with a known disability in and out of the taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.140 - Record of calls. 
    All taxicab operators and proprietors shall at all times keep a record of all calls, showing the date, the name of the driver, the time of the call and the address of the party calling, which records shall at all times be open to the inspection of the police department. Call logs shall be maintained for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.150 - Safety inspection required. 
    As a prerequisite for the issuance or renewal of a license, any vehicle to be licensed as a taxicab must undergo a vehicle safety inspection within thirty days prior to the issuance of the license. This vehicle safety inspection shall be conducted by a certified mechanic and found to provide safe transportation and to comply with state and city laws. Every motor vehicle operating under this chapter must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. A report of every required inspection must be kept on file and furnished to the chief of police upon request. 
A.  The police department may require additional safety inspections in response to a complaint or observation of defective equipment. 
B.  A police officer observing a safety defect that cannot be immediately rectified may place a taxicab out of service subject to a safety inspection. 
C.  Any safety inspection deficiencies must be corrected before the taxicab can be placed back in service. A report of the correction of deficiencies shall be furnished to the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.160 - Identification of vehicle. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensee, before operating any taxicab within the city, to paint, stamp, or otherwise mark upon the body of the taxicab in reasonably large print, the name of the taxicab business name, and the license number issued by the city. Each vehicle shall have and display a unique number issued by the city auditor. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.170 - Interference with other taxi drivers 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab or other vehicle for hire to scuffle or crowd about or interfere with any other driver with whom any person is negotiating or inquiring about the transportation of persons or baggage. No driver shall interfere with or engage in conduct that harasses another taxicab or vehicle for hire or their passengers. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
5.36.180 - Advertising on taxicabs. 
    Any licensed taxicab may carry an advertisement on the cab if it is carried in a neat frame so located on the cab as not to interfere or cover the name of the cab company, the license number, or telephone number thereon. No advertisement for intoxicating liquors or tobacco products of any kind shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 938, 5-2-16) 
Chapter 5.44 - PAWNBROKERS* 

5.44.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Applicant" means any person or business entity which attempts to carry on or conduct the business of pawnbroker. 
B.  "Firearms" means any weapon which will, or is designed to or restored to, expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosive; the frame or receiver of any such device; or any firearm muffler or silencer. 
C.  "Pawnbroker" means any person who loans money on deposit or pledges of personal property, choses in action, or wages, or who deals in purchasing of personal property, choses in action, or wages, on condition of selling or transferring the same, or returning the same back again to the pledger or depositor, or to their agents, or assigns, at a stipulated price, shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker. 
D.  "Personal property" means all goods which are movable at the time of identification to the contract for sale are personal property. For purposes of this chapter, personal property does not include money; investment securities; alcoholic beverages, beer or liquor as defined in Chapter 5.24 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code; or firearms, except as provided herein. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.020 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons to carry on or conduct the business or calling of pawnbroker within the city without first having obtained a license to do so. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.025 - License classification. 
    The following classes of pawnbroker licenses are hereby established in the city: 
A.  Class 1-Special Pawnbroker's License. A Class 1, special pawnbroker's license issued in accordance with this chapter may engage in the purchase, sale, and transfer of personal property, including firearms. 
B.  Class 2-General Pawnbroker's License. A Class 2, general pawnbroker's license issued in accordance with this chapter may engage in the purchase, sale, and transfer of personal property, not including firearms. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.030 - License fee. 
    In order to pursue or carry on the business of pawnbroker in the city, there shall be taxed and collected a fee which shall be set by resolution of the city commission. Each class of license may require a different fee for that class. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.040 - Background investigation. 
    Before a license shall be issued to any person or persons to carry on or conduct the business of pawnbroker, the chief of police, or any other police officer as the chief shall designate, shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report back to the board of city commissioners whether or not such applicant is a person of good character. The background information to be provided by the applicant to the city shall contain the following: 
A.  The applicant's name and legal place or residence; 
B.  If the applicant is a partnership, the name and legal residence of the partnership, together with the name and place of legal residence of all partners; 
C.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name and place of legal residence of the corporation. Applicant corporations must also provide evidence of proper registration with the Secretary of State. Applicant corporations must also provide the name and place of residence of all officers, board of directors, and stockholders; 
D.  Licenses currently held or previously held by applicant in the preceding ten years and the entity issuing that license. Applicant must provide information regarding the status of each license held in the preceding ten year period, including the revocation, sale, suspension, limitation, or disposition of any license held by the applicant in the last ten years, including the nature of any change in status; 
E.  Name and legal residence of all parties having a financial interest in the pawnbroker business; 
F.  Whether the applicant if an individual, any partners if the applicant is a partnership, or any promoters, officers, members of the board of directors, or stockholders if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of the following offenses in the past five years: 
1.  Any felony, 
2.  Any offense involving the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages, 
3.  Any offense involving the sale of drugs or felony possession of drugs, 
4.  Prostitution, 
5.  Obscenity, 
6.  Theft, 
7.  Any other offense determined by the board of city commissioners to have a direct bearing on the applicant's ability to serve the public as a pawnbroker; 
G.  The name and legal residence of any manager of the pawnbroker business, and whether the manager has been convicted of any of the offenses listed in subsection F of this section; 
H.  Proposed location of the pawnbroker business; 
I.  Any other information requested by either the city or the chief of police. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.045 - License transfers and site locations. 
A.  A license may not be issued and/or transferred to engage in the pawnbroker business within the city or any license transferred to a new or different location without license application and site approval by the board of city commissioners. 
B.  A hearing for license application and site location approval must be within twenty days of the filing of the license application. Public notice of the hearing must be published in the official newspaper one time, the publication being at least seven days prior to the hearing date. 
C.  At the hearing, the board of city commissioners shall take the following factors into account to determine if the proposed site as a pawnbroker business is proper: 
1.  Public convenience and necessity; 
2.  The proposed location to any church, public or parochial school, public library, hospital, college or university building used for academic purposes, and any premises licensed to allow the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to Chapter 5.24 of the city code; 
3.  Compliance of the proposed site with the applicable building code requirements; 
4.  Compliance of the proposed site with the applicable health and sanitation ordinance; 
5.  Class of pawnbroker license; 
6.  Any other factors deemed reasonable by the city commission. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.050 - License term. 
    Each license issued under this chapter shall expire on the thirtieth day of June succeeding the date of its issuance, unless sooner revoked as herein provided. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.060 - Licensee-To keep record of goods pawned. 
    Every person so licensed as aforesaid shall keep at his place of business a book or register, in which he shall enter in writing a detailed description of all personal property or choses in action received on deposit, pledge, or purchase, as set forth in this chapter, the date and time when they were so received and particularly mentioning any prominent or descriptive mark that may be on such property or choses in action, together with the name of the person or persons by whom they were left, deposited, or pledged, which shall be kept clean and legible and no entry therein shall be erased, obliterated, or defaced during the period of such license. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.070 - Same-To furnish copy to chief of police. 
    It is the duty of every pawnbroker or leader in secondhand goods to make out and deliver to the chief of police, on or before the fifth day of each month, a legible and correct copy, from the book required in Section 5.44.060, of all personal property or other valuable things received, deposited, or purchased during the preceding month, together with the time when received or purchased, and a description of the person or persons by whom left in pledge or from whom the same were purchased. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.080 - Inspection of register by peace officers. 
    Every person so licensed as set out in this chapter, shall, during the ordinary hours of business, when required by any peace officer of the city, submit and exhibit such books in this chapter provided for, to said officers and shall also exhibit any goods, personal property, or choses in action that may be so left, deposited, pledged, or purchased, as herein provided, to such officers. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.090 - Sale of unredeemed pledges. 
    No sale or disposition of an unredeemed pledge shall or can be effected by a pawnbroker unless fifteen or more days have elapsed from the date any item is initially pledged. However, the sale of an unredeemed item, if done in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall work a complete forfeiture of the right of redemption by the original owner thereof, and the proceeds from said sale, after deduction of expenses, shall absolutely be the property of the pawnbroker. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.100 - Transactions with minors. 
    No person or persons granted a license under the provisions of this chapter shall purchase or receive any article or thing of value, or sell any dangerous weapon to any person who has not reached the age of eighteen years, without the written consent of such minor's parents or guardian. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.110 - Violation-Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to the penalty which may include a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and a jail term not to exceed thirty days or both may be imposed. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.120 - Revocation of license. 
A.  Pawnbrokers' licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the board of city commissioners after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
1.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a license; 
2.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the pawnbroker business; 
3.  Any violation of this chapter; 
4.  Conviction of any crime involving theft or dishonesty; 
5.  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace, or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; 
6.  Any violation of the laws of the state or the ordinances of the city. 
B.  A notice of the hearing for revocation must be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice must be mailed, registered mail, to the holder of the license at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing, which address will be that on file in the city offices. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
5.44.130 - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be effective July 1, 1999, and is intended to apply to all licenses which expired June 30, 1999, and are effective July 1, 1999. 
(Ord. 826 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 5.45 - SITE AUTHORIZATION 

5.45.010 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the definitions adopted by Chapter 53-06.1 of the North Dakota Century Code are adopted by reference, and as those definitions contained in Chapter 53-06.1 of the North Dakota Century Code amend, the definitions on this chapter of the municipal code shall be amended. 
(Ord. 801(part), 1996) 
5.45.020 - Limit on number of sites per licensed organization. 
    No licensed organization which receives its license from the city shall hold more than one-third of the total site permits for gaming issued by the city in one year. In determining whether any licensed organization holds more than the allowed one-third of the total site permit, any fractional amount shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
(Ord. 801(part), 1996) 
5.45.030 - Waiver of limit on authorized sites held by one licensed organization. 
    The limitation on the number of sites authorized by the city and held by one licensed organization as restricted by Section 5.45.020 may be waived by the city commission upon one or more of the following: 
A.  That no other organization which would qualify as a licensed organization has expressed any interest in applying for the site authorization which would create more than the allowed number of sites authorized to be held by one licensed organization by Section 5.45.020; 
B.  It is determined by the city commission that the issuance of the site authorization to the licensed organization which would give that licensed organization more than one-third of the site authorizations issued by the city is in the best interests of the city, the licensed organization, the site and the intention of gaming as allowed by North Dakota law and the laws of the city; 
C.  Other factors exist, as determined by the city commission, for allowing a waiver from the restrictions of Section 5.45.020. 
(Ord. 801(part), 1996) 
5.45.040 - Procedure to obtain waiver. 
    Any licensed organization may petition the city commission for a waiver of the restrictions of Section 5.45.020 pursuant to Section 5.45.030 by the following procedure: 
A.  The licensed organization seeking the waiver must petition the city commission, in writing, of its request for a waiver by filing a petition with the city auditor. 
B.  Within thirty days from receipt of the written request, the city commission will set a day and time for a public hearing on the petition. 
C.  Public notice of the hearing must be published in the official newspaper one time, the publication being at least seven days prior to the hearing date. 
D.  At the hearing, the city commission will then determine whether the waiver should be allowed under Section 5.45.030. 
(Ord. 801(part), 1996) 
5.45.050 - Exception to limitation. 
    The restrictions in Section 5.45.020 do not apply to the following: 
A.  Licensed organization which, on the enactment of this section to the municipal code, hold more site authorizations than allowed by Section 5.45.020. This exception shall continue, however, only until the licensed organization holds less than the number of site authorizations allowed by Section 5.45.020; 
B.  A licensed organization which obtained a waiver of the restriction on the number of sites as allowed in this chapter. This exception shall continue, however, only until that licensed organization holds less than the site authorizations allowed by Section 5.45.020; 
C.  A licensed organization which is managing the site for another licensed organization and is not the actual holder of the site authorization. 
(Ord. 801(part), 1996) 
5.45.060 - City may require licensed organization to provide information. 
    Prior to issuing a site authorization in the city to a licensed organization, the city may request the licensed organization to provide certain information which must be provided: 
A.  A list of the organizations which will benefit from the gaming operations on this site; 
B.  On an annual basis, and prior to the city issuing the site authorization for the upcoming year, the licensed organization shall provide documentation of the total income received from that gaming site, the name and address of each organization which received any benefits from the gaming operation on that authorized site, and the amount of benefit each organization received from that gaming site; 
C.  A list of three references, including the name, address and phone number, regarding the licensed organi-zation's gaming operations. 
(Ord. 801(part), 1996) 
5.45.070 - Denial of request for site authorizations. 
    Upon determination by the city commission, a request for a site authorization may be denied to a licensed organization by any of the following: 
A.  That the proceeds from the gaming site have not been and are not expected to benefit organizations in the city entitled to receive the benefits from gaming; 
B.  That it is not in the best interests of the city, the gaming site, and the intention of gaming as allowed by North Dakota law and the laws of the city, for the licensed organization to conduct gaming at that site; 
C.  That the licensed organization or any of its officers or manager have had violations of the gaming laws or have been convicted of any criminal violations; 
D.  That the property taxes or special assessments for the building in which the site authorization would be located are delinquent; 
E.  That any utility bills or amounts owned to the city for services supplied to the building where the site authorization would be located are delinquent, or the licensed organization is delinquent in any amount it owes to the city; 
F.  That there are other factors which the city commission determines constitute good cause for denying the site authorization to the licensed organization. 
(Ord. 801(part), 1996) 
5.45.080 - Revocation or suspension of site authorization. 
    Any site authorization or the operation of games by a licensed organization in the city may be revoked or suspended for good cause, as determined by the city commission, subject to the following: 
A.  Before any revocation or suspension, the city auditor shall notify the licensed organization of its right to a hearing. The notice shall specify the action proposed to be taken, the reason for it, time and place of the hearing, and the right of the licensed organization to appear. The notice must be mailed to the licensed organization by certified mail, return receipt, not less than five days nor more than fifteen days before the hearing. 
B.  If after the hearing the city commission finds the violation charge has been proved by the evidence, the city commission shall issue its findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order, which shall be served upon the licensed organization. 
(Ord. 801(part), 1996) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapter 6.04 - ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER 

6.04.010 - Office created. 
    There shall be employed by the city an animal control officer who shall be under the supervision and control of the chief of police as an employee of the police department. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.04.020 - General duties. 
    The animal control officer shall have the following general duties: 
A.  He shall perform the services customarily done by animal control officers, including the destruction of impounded animals. 
B.  He shall also serve as city poundmaster and receive into his custody any animal to be impounded under the provisions of city ordinances, and shall be responsible for providing sufficient and suitable food and drink for the animals so impounded. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.04.030 - Authority. 
    The animal control officer shall have the authority to carry out all the provisions of and enforce all city ordinances relating to animals, except that he is not authorized to make arrests to individuals as is a regular police officer. He shall, however, have full authority to take all action pertaining to animals as provided in the ordinances, including the issuance of citations for violations of the provisions therein. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
Chapter 6.08 - DOG LICENSING AND CONTROL 

6.08.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words will have the following meanings: 
A.  "At large" means any dog not in an enclosure or under control of the owner or person authorized by the owner, either by leash, cord, chain or other physical restraint of a maximum of six feet in length. 
B.  "Dog" means either a male or female dog. 
C.  "Owner" means any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.020 - License requirements and fees. 
A.  Dog License Required. No person, firm, association or corporation shall own, keep, or harbor a dog which is over six months of age without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in this section; provided, however, the city shall not be required to obtain a license for any dogs used for law enforcement purposes. 
B.  Dog License Fee. The owner, keeper or harborer of any dog required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter shall pay a license fee thereon to the city at its police department, for each male, female, altered or neutered male dog and each spayed female dog, in such amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. The burden of establishing that any male dog has been altered or neutered or that any female dog has been spayed shall be upon the owner thereof and the owner shall furnish evidence to the chief of police in the form of a certificate of a veterinarian at the time the application is applied for. 
C.  Disposition of Fees. All money collected by the chief of police for dog licenses, penalties, delinquencies and duplicate tags shall be paid by him to the city treasurer, as part of the general fund of the city. 
D.  Rabies Vaccination Required. Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of rabies vaccination issued by a veterinarian, licensed to practice within this state, evidencing vaccination of the dog for which the license is desired; and, that such vaccination will be good for the license year(s). 
E.  Term of Dog License. The license provided for in this chapter shall be in force until the expiration date of the certificate of rabies vaccination that is valid at the time of the license application. Licenses shall be issued for periods of one, two or three years, or portion thereof depending on the expiration date of the certificate of rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.030 - Tag and collar. 
A.  Upon payment of the license fee to the city at its police department and compliance with the provisions in this chapter, the chief of police shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. 
B.  Each owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the chief of police upon presentation of a receipt showing payment of a fee for such license fee for the current year and the payment of a fee for such duplicate. Tags shall not be transferable from one animal to another and no refunds shall be made on any license fee because of death of the animal or the owner's leaving the city before expiration of the license period. The metal rabies inoculation tag shall also be affixed to the animal's collar at all times. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.040 - Running at large prohibited. 
    No owner or keeper of a dog shall knowingly or unknowingly allow the dog to run at large at any time upon the streets, public places, public ways, schoolgrounds or upon the private premises of any person other than the owner or keeper of the dog without being effectively restrained by chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length and under the control of a competent person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog used for law enforcement purposes under the command and control of a peace officer. 
(Ord. 725, 1989: Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.050 - Nuisances. 
    Any person who owns, keeps or maintains any animal shall be responsible for the behavior of the animal and shall not permit the animal to become a nuisance as defined in this section. 
    Any animal is considered a nuisance which: 
A.  Frightens, annoys, barks at or chases any person, domestic animal, or vehicle; or 
B.  By loud and frequent yelping, barking, howling, or otherwise creating substantial noise, annoys any person; or 
C.  Damages or destroys any property not the property of the owner or keeper of the animal; or 
D.  Has not been inoculated against rabies, or other diseases as required, if over six months of age; or 
E.  Creates an offensive odor; or 
F.  Creates an alarming or offensive condition against the peace and dignity of the city of Devils Lake or its citizens; or 
G.  Shall not have a collar with license and rabies tags attached as required under Section 6.08.030. 
H.  It defecates on property, other than the property of the owner of the animal, and the owner of the animal fails to clean up after the animal. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 897, 6-20-11; Ord. No. 913, 5-6-13) 
6.08.060 - Impoundment. 
    It shall be the duty of every police officer to apprehend any dog found running at large contrary to the provisions of Section 6.08.040, or any dog found to be a public nuisance as provided in Section 6.08.050 and to impound the dog in the city pound or other suitable place. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.070 - Notice to owner and redemption. 
    Not later than two days after the impounding of any dog, the owner if known, shall be notified. The owner of any dog so impounded may reclaim such animal upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid, the costs of impoundment and maintenance, all costs incurred in giving any needed rabies inoculations, together with an administrative penalty in the amount approved by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.080 - Disposition of unclaimed dogs. 
    If a dog which is impounded is not redeemed by the owner within three days after placing the dog in the dog pound, the city animal control officer shall offer the dog up for adoption to any other person, who, upon complying with the provisions of this chapter, will become the lawful owner of such dog thereafter. If the dog is not adopted, the city animal control officer shall cause the dog to be destroyed in as painless and humane a manner as possible. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.090 - Breeding kennels prohibited. 
    A kennel for breeding dogs shall be construed to mean any place where a female dog is kept for breeding purposes where the enterprise of breeding dogs is carried on for commercial purposes or profit, and the maintaining within the city of a kennel is prohibited. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.100 - Dangerous animals. 
A.  Definitions. 
1.  "Dangerous animal" as the term is used in this section means: 
a.  Any animal known to its owner or harborer to have a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, bite, cause injury to or to otherwise endanger the safety of or menace human beings or domestic animals; or 
b.  Any animal which attacks, bites, or injures a human being or another domestic animal one or more times without provocation; or 
c.  Any animal which, when unprovoked, in a malicious, vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places; or any place where such person may lawfully be, public or private; or 
d.  Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for purposes of fighting or attacking or any animal trained for fighting or attacking; or 
e.  Any animal not licensed according to state and/or city law; or 
f.  Any animal certified by a doctor of veterinary medicine licensed within the state of North Dakota, after observation thereof, as posing a danger to human life or property if not kept in the manner required by this section; or 
g.  Any animal which has been determined to be dangerous by the city commission or municipal court pursuant to any state statute or the ordinance codified in this section; or 
h.  Any animal which has been deemed dangerous or vicious by any government agency or entity; or 
i.  Any animal which is owned, harbored, or trained primarily or in part for the purposes of fighting or making unprovoked attacks. 
2.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no animal may be found or declared dangerous if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a wilful trespass or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or was teasing, abusing, or assaulting the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
3.  No animal may be found or declared dangerous if an injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which at the time such injury or damage was sustained was taunting, abusing or assaulting the animal. No animal may be declared dangerous if the animal was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an illegal or nonconsensual attack or assault. No animal may be deemed dangerous if the animal was protecting or defending its young offspring. 
B.  Prohibition and Control of Dangerous Animals. Except as permitted hereinafter, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor a dangerous animal within the city limits and no person shall own or harbor any animal for the purpose of attacking, fighting, or training, tormenting, badgering, baiting, or use any animal for the purpose of causing or encouraging said animal to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals except as hereinafter provided. 
1.  The police department and animal warden are empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section, and any such animal warden is empowered to seize and impound any dangerous animal whose owner or keeper fails to comply with the provisions hereof. 
2.  Upon such attack or assault, the animal warden or the police department is empowered to confiscate and destroy such dangerous animal if the conduct of such dangerous animal or its owner or keeper constitutes a violation of the provisions of this article, punishable by the confiscation and destruction of the animal. However, notwithstanding the foregoing, no animal shall be destroyed within five days of being impounded, exclusive of Sundays and holidays. 
3.  If the owner or keeper of an animal impounded for an alleged violation of this section believes that there has not been a violation of this section, the owner or keeper may petition the municipal court that the impounded animal not be destroyed. The impounded animal shall not be destroyed pending resolution of such owner's or keeper's petition, if the petition shall have been filed within five days of impoundment of such animal and notice shall have been served within five days of impoundment of such animal upon the police department. 
4.  In the event that the animal warden or police department has a reasonable and articulable suspicion to believe that an animal is dangerous, the animal warden or police or the designee, shall be empowered to issue a citation in order to appear before the municipal court for the purposes of determining whether or not the animal in question shall be declared dangerous. The animal warden or chief of police shall conduct or cause to be conducted an investigation and shall notify the owner or keeper of the animal that a hearing will be held, at which time he or she may have the opportunity to present evidence why the animal shall not be declared dangerous. 
5.  In the event that the animal warden or police department has probable cause to believe that the animal in question is dangerous and may pose a threat of serious harm to human beings or other domestic animals, the animal warden or police department may seize and impound the animal pending the aforesaid hearings. The owner or keeper of the animal shall be liable to the city for the costs and expenses of impounding such animal. 
6.  It is unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous animal to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this section. Any animal found to be the subject of the violation of this section shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment as hereinbefore provided. In addition, failure to comply shall be an offense punishable with a fine as hereinafter provided. 
7.  In addition to those persons specified herein, any person may file a petition with the city commission or a complaint with the municipal court to determine, declare, or find an animal dangerous as defined herein. 
C.  Exemptions. The provision of this section shall not apply to K-9 or other dogs owned by any police department or any law enforcement agency or officer which are used in the performance of police work. 
D.  Violations. 
1.  Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this section shall, upon conviction in municipal court, be found guilty of an infraction and fined a sum not more than five hundred dollars. In addition to the foregoing penalty, any person who violates this section shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this article. 
2.  If any animal shall previously have been declared dangerous pursuant to any of the provisions above, and after having been ordered removed from city limits; if such animal shall at any time be brought back into the city limits in violation of court order or the provisions of this section, such animal shall immediately be taken by the animal control officer and destroyed. A separate penalty including fine shall be assessed as indicated in the paragraph above against the violator. 
3.  At any time, if a dangerous animal cannot be taken up and caught by an animal control officer or police officer without exposing such officer to danger of personal injury from such animal, or without exposing other persons to danger of personal injury from such animal, it shall be lawful for the animal control or police officer to forthwith destroy such animal. 
4.  If any person is found to be in violation of this section three times, said person may be prevented from owning animals within the city limits for a reasonable amount of time as determined by a municipal judge. 
(Ord. 774, 1992: Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.110 - Disposition of infected dogs. 
    Any impounded dog which appears to be suffering from rabies or infected with hydrophobia, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease shall not be released, but may be forthwith destroyed. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.120 - Solid waste. 
    Every person having custody or control of a leashed dog on property other than his own shall be equipped to, and collect the dog's solid waste when eliminated. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.130 - Setting of dogs at large-Prohibited when. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to open any door or gate of any private premises for the purpose of setting any dog or dogs at large, or otherwise enticing or enabling any dog to leave any private premises, within which the same may be, for the purpose of setting such dog at large. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.08.140 - Breaking into dog pound-Hindering officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to break upon the city dog pound or any other enclosure in which the police department has impounded any dog or dogs or to attempt to do so, or to take or let out any dog therefrom, or to take or attempt to take from any animal control officer or police officer any dog taken up by him in compliance with this title or in any manner to interfere with or hinder such officer in the discharge of his duties under this title. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
Chapter 6.12 - CAT LICENSING AND CONTROL 
Sections: 

6.12.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context otherwise indicates: 
A.  "At large" means off the premises of the owner, and not in the immediate presence and under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise. 
B.  "Cat" means either a male or a female cat. 
C.  "Owner" means any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a cat. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.12.020 - License requirements and fees. 
A.  Cat License Required. No person, firm, association or corporation shall own, keep or harbor a cat which is over six months of age without first having obtained a license therefor as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Cat License Fee. The owner, keeper or harborer of any cat required to be licensed pursuant to this chapter shall pay a license fee thereon to the city at its police department, for each male, female, altered or neutered male cat and each spayed female cat, in such amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. The burden of establishing that any male cat has been altered or neutered or that any female cat has been spayed shall be upon the owner thereof and the owner shall furnish evidence to the chief of police in the form of a certificate of a veterinarian at the time the application is applied for. 
C.  Disposition of Fees. All money collected by the chief of police for cat licenses, penalties, delinquencies and duplicate tags shall be paid by him to the city treasurer as part of the general fund of the city. 
D.  Rabies Vaccination Required. Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall furnish a certificate of rabies vaccination issued by a veterinarian, licensed to practice within this state, evidencing vaccination of the cat for which the license is desired; and, that such vaccination will be good for the license year(s). 
E.  Term of Cat Licenses. The license provided for in this chapter shall be in force until the expiration date of the certificate of rabies vaccination that is valid at the time of the license application. Licenses shall be issued for periods of one, two or three years, or portion thereof depending on the expiration date of the certificate of rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.12.030 - Tag and collar. 
A.  Upon payment of the license fee to the city at its police department and compliance with the provisions in this chapter, the chief of police shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each cat so licensed. The tag shall have stamped thereon the number corresponding with the number of the certificate. 
B.  Each owner shall be required to provide each cat with a collar to which the license tag must be affixed and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. In case a tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the chief of police upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year and the payment of a fee for such duplicate. Tags shall not be transferable from one animal to another and no refunds shall be made on any license fee because of death of the cat or the owner's leaving the city before expiration of the license period. The metal rabies inoculation tag shall also be affixed to the cat's collar at all times. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.12.040 - Cats running at large. 
    It shall be the duty of each police officer or animal control officer to apprehend each and every cat running or being at large without the required license tag attached as provided in Section 6.12.030, and to cause such cat to be impounded for a period of three days, after which, if it remains unclaimed, the city animal control officer shall offer the cat up for adoption to any other person, who, upon complying with the provisions of this chapter, will become the lawful owner of such cat thereafter. If the cat is not adopted, the city animal control officer shall cause the cat to be destroyed in as painless and humane a manner as possible. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.12.050 - Vicious cats. 
    It is declared unlawful for the owner or keeper of any vicious cat within the city to refuse to deliver it up to any police officer or city animal control officer, whenever requested by the police officer or city animal control officer for the purpose of being destroyed. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.12.060 - Interfering with policeman or city animal control officer. 
    It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to break open any enclosure in which the police department has impounded any cat or cats or to attempt to do so, or to take from any police officer or city animal control officer any cat taken up by him in compliance with this chapter, or in any manner to interfere with or hinder the officer in the discharge of his duties under this chapter. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
Chapter 6.16 - GENERAL ANIMAL CONTROL 
Sections: 

6.16.010 - Keeping of certain animals prohibited-Exceptions. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to keep, own or possess within the platted portion of the city, any horses, mules, cattle, sheep, goats or swine. However saddle/ driven horses may be ridden/driven during hours of daylight, within the platted portion of the city, with the exception of the following areas: 
1.  Downtown area which borders between College Drive and 6th Avenue and on the south by Railroad Avenue and North by 7th Street. 
2.  Holiday Mall Shopping Center. 
3.  Liquor establishments within the platted portion of the city. 
B.  The excepted areas shall not apply when ceremonial or theatrical productions are being held which have approval from the board of city commissioners. 
C.  Any horse being ridden within the platted portions of the city will not be ridden on boulevards or sidewalks, but on city streets and alleys. These animals shall be under the control of the rider/driver at all times. 
D.  Riders/drivers of horses shall obey all traffic regulations affecting the movement of traffic and will not engage in such activities which might cause damage to private/city owned property. (NDCC 39-07-01 and 39-10-02.1) 
E.  Any horse left unattended for a period of two hours shall be considered abandoned and shall be impounded by the police department, with assistance provided by the North Dakota brand inspector, located in this region. Owners of such horses shall be responsible for all costs incurred due to the impoundment process (Chapter 6.20). 
F.  The city commission may issue a permit to allow in the city of Devils Lake pets which are prohibited from being in the city in subsection A above, upon the following: 
1.  The application for a permit will be on a form approved by the city commission. 
2.  The permit application will be available in the office of the city auditor. 
3.  The fee for the permit application will be set by the fees and rates of the city of Devils Lake. 
4.  In issuing a permit, the city commission may include any restrictions or conditions it deems appropriate. 
5.  The permit can be revoked, without cause, at any time by action of the city commission. The holder of the permit will be sent written notice of the hearing seven days prior to the hearing in which revocation of the permit will be heard by the city commission. The permit can be revoked by the city commission, without notice and a hearing, if the city commission determines the animal is causing a health and safety issue. 
6.  A permit issued under this section cannot be assigned or transferred by the holder of the permit. 
7.  The holder of the permit must be the owner of the pet. 
(Ord. 701, 1987: Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
(Ord. No. 894, 3-8-11) 
6.16.020 - Keeping of fowl prohibited-Exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, own, possess or have under their control, within the limits of the city, fowl of any kind, with the exception of commercial poultry hatcheries if otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.16.030 - Rabies control. 
    If any dog, cat or other animal is believed to have rabies, such animal shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian, at the expense of the owner, for a period of ten days. The owner shall notify the chief of police of the fact that his/her animal has been exposed to rabies and at his discretion the chief of police is empowered to have such animal removed from the owner's premises to a veterinary clinic and there placed under observation for a period of ten days at the expense of the owner. It shall be unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting that a dog, cat or other animal has rabies to allow such dog, cat or other animal to be taken off his/her premises or beyond the limits of the city (other than a veterinarian clinic) without the written permission of the chief of police. Every owner, or other person, upon ascertaining that a dog, cat or other animal is rabid shall immediately notify the animal control officer or a policeman who shall either remove the animal for observation or summarily destroy it. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.16.040 - Squirrels-Killing in city prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally kill or injure or attempt to kill or injure any squirrel within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.16.050 - Animals at large-Duties of police. 
    Any animal mentioned in Section 6.16.010 that is found at large within the city may be taken up by any police officer and he may dispose of it in the manner provided by state law for estrays or livestock running at large. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
Chapter 6.20 - HUMANE TREATMENT OF ANIMALS 
Sections: 

6.20.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words will have the following meanings: 
A.  "Animal" includes every living animal except the human race. 
B.  "Cruelty" or "torture" includes every act, omission, or neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable pain, suffering, or death shall be caused or permitted. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.20.020 - Mistreating animals. 
A.  No person shall torture, cruelly beat, neglect, or unjustifiably injure, maim, mutilate, or kill any animal. 
B.  No person shall deprive any animal over which he has charge or control of necessary food, water, or shelter. 
C.  No person shall keep any animal in any enclosure without exercise and wholesome change of air. 
D.  No person shall abandon any animal. 
E.  No person shall wilfully instigate, or in any way further, any act of cruelty to any animal or animals, or any act tending to produce such cruelty. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.20.030 - Cruelty in transportation. 
    No person shall carry, or cause to be carried, any live animals upon any vehicle or otherwise, without providing suitable racks, cars, crates, or cages, or other proper carrying container, nor shall he carry an animal, or cause an animal to be carried, in any other cruel manner. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.20.040 - Poisoning animals. 
    No person shall unjustifiably administer or expose any known poisonous substance or noxious drug, whether mixed with meat or other food or not, which may be eaten by any domestic animal. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.20.050 - Animal with infectious disease. 
    No person owning or having charge of any animal, knowing the animal to have any infectious or contagious disease, or to have recently been exposed thereto, shall knowingly permit such animal to run at large or come into contact with another animal, or with another person without his knowledge and permission. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.20.060 - Exposure of animals-Authority of officers. 
    Any animal control officer or police officer of the city may take custody of, and care for any animal found abandoned, unjustifiably exposed to cold or inclement weather, or not properly fed and watered. It shall be a responsibility of such animal control officer or police officer to care for the same until it is redeemed by the owner, and when necessary may deliver the animal to a licensed veterinarian to be sheltered, cared for, and furnished suitable food and drink at the expense of the owner. In all cases the owner, if known, shall be immediately notified that if the animal is not redeemed within three days after placing the animal in the city pound or veterinarian clinic, the city animal control officer shall offer the animal up for adoption to any other person, who, upon complying with the provisions of this chapter and paying all necessary expenses incurred, will become the lawful owner of such animal thereafter. If the animal is not adopted, the city animal control officer shall cause the animal to be destroyed in as painless and humane a manner as possible. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
Chapter 6.24 - POLICE DOGS 
Sections: 

6.24.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted: 
A.  "Bomb detection dog" means a dog trained to locate bombs or explosives by scent. 
B.  "Firearms detection dog" means a dog trained to locate firearms by scent. 
C.  "Narcotic detection dog" means a dog trained to locate narcotics by scent. 
D.  "Patrol dog" means a dog trained to protect a peace officer and to apprehend or hold a person in violation of the laws of this city, the state of North Dakota and the United States of America. 
E.  "Tracking dog" means a dog trained to track and locate people by scent. 
F.  "Police dog" means a bomb detection dog, a firearms detection dog, a narcotic detection dog, a patrol dog, or a tracking dog used by a law enforcement agency. 
G.  "Narcotics" means any controlled substance as defined in paragraph 15, Section 19-03.1-01 of the North Dakota Century Code and shall include marijuana as defined in paragraph fourteen Section 19-03.1-01 of the North Dakota Century Code. 
H.  "Harass" means to intentionally tease, excite, worry or annoy a police dog. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
6.24.020 - Prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, destroy or cause physical injury to a police dog whether on official duty or in the custody of its handler. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
Chapter 6.28 - PROCEDURE FOR COMPLAINT 
Sections: 

6.28.010 - Designated. 
    An individual who wishes to sign a complaint regarding violation of any section of this title must contact the police department and state his/her name, address, nature and circumstances of the violation. This individual must appear before the city attorney and sign the complaint. An order of impoundment pending trial may be issued at the discretion of the court and served upon the owner. 
(Ord. 680 (part), 1985) 
Chapter 6.32 - PIT BULL DOGS 
Sections: 

6.32.010 - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents and citizens of the city, the board of city commissioners of the city of Devils Lake does enact the provisions set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 709 (part), 1987) 
6.32.020 - Pit bull dogs-Keeping prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the corporate limits of the city any pit bull dog; provided, that pit bull dogs registered with the city on or before the 19th day of October, 1987, may be kept within the city subject to the standards and requirements set forth in this chapter. "Pit bull dog" is defined to mean: 
A.  The bull terrier breed of dog; 
B.  Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog; 
C.  The American pit bull terrier breed of dog; 
D.  The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog; 
E.  Dogs of mixed breed or of other breeds than above listed which breed or mixed breed is known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers; 
F.  Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being predominantly of the breeds of bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier, American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, or any other breed commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers, or a combination of any of these breeds. 
(Ord. 709 (part), 1987) 
6.32.030 - Keeping of registered pit bull dogs. 
    The provisions of Section 6.32.020 of this chapter are not applicable to owners, keepers or harborers of pit bull dogs registered with the city on or before the 19th day of October, 1987, the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. The keeping of such dogs, however, shall be subject to the following standards: 
A.  Leash and Muzzle. No person shall permit a registered pit bull dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length. No person shall permit a pit bull dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all pit bull dogs on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals. 
B.  Confinement. All registered pit bull dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as provided in this section. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. All structures used to confine registered pit bull dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in the ground no less than two feet. All structures erected to house pit bull dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
C.  Confinement Indoors. No pit bull dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
D.  Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit bull dogs within the city shall within ten days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." In addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal. 
E.  Insurance. All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit bull dogs must within ten days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter provide proof to the city auditor of public liability insurance in a single incident amount of fifty thousand dollars for bodily injury to or death of any person or persons or for damage to property owned by any persons which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no cancellation of the policy will be made unless ten days' written notice is first given to the city auditor. 
F.  Identification Photographs. All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit bull dogs must within ten days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter provide to the city auditor two color photographs of the registered animal clearly showing the color and approximate size of the animal. 
G.  Reporting Requirements. All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit bull dogs must within ten days of the incident, report the following information in writing to the city auditor as required hereinafter: 
1.  The removal from the city or death of a registered pit bull dog; 
2.  The birth of offspring of a registered pit bull dog; and 
3.  The new address of a registered pit bull dog owner should the owner move within the corporate city limits. 
H.  Sale or Transfer of Ownership Prohibited. No person shall sell, barter or in any other way dispose of a pit bull dog registered with the city to any person within the city unless the recipient person resides permanently in the same household and on the same premises as the registered owner of such dog; provided, that the registered owner of a pit bull dog may sell or otherwise dispose of a registered dog or the offspring of such dog to persons who do not reside within the city. 
I.  Animals Born of Registered Dogs. All offspring born of pit bull dogs registered with the city must be removed from the city within six weeks of the birth of such animal. 
J.  Irrebuttable Presumptions. There shall be an irrebuttable presumption that any dog registered with the city as a pit bull dog or any of those breeds prohibited by Section 6.32.020 of this chapter is in fact a dog subject to the requirements of this section. 
K.  Failure to Comply. It is unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of a pit bull dog registered with the city to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this chapter. Any dog found to be the subject of a violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In addition, failure to comply will result in the revocation of the license of such animal resulting in the immediate removal of the animal from the city. 
(Ord. 709 (part), 1987) 
6.32.040 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction in municipal court be fined a sum of not more than five hundred dollars. In addition to the fine imposed, the court may sentence the defendant to imprisonment to the county jail for a period not to exceed thirty days. In addition, the court shall order the registration of the subject pit bull revoked and the dog removed from the city. Should the defendant refuse to remove the dog from the city, the municipal court judge shall find the defendant owner in contempt and order the immediate confiscation and impoundment of the animal. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this chapter shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 709 (part), 1987) 
6.32.050 - Severability. 
    If any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 709 (part), 1987) 
Chapter 6.33 - ANIMAL RESCUE OPERATION(S) 

6.33.010 - Animal rescue operation(s). 
    Any facility used to house and distribute for adoption as pets any stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals shall be known as an animal rescue. 
A.  An animal rescue may be operated or maintained by: 
1.  A public body; 
2.  An established humane society; 
3.  Animal welfare organization; 
4.  Nonprofit organizations dedicated to the prevention of animal homelessness and/or cruelty; 
5.  A person or persons devoted to the welfare and protection of animals. 
B.  Any animal rescue shall first obtain a conditional use permit prior to beginning operations. 
C.  Rescues may only be operated on properties in which the underlying zoning allows such uses as a conditional use. 
D.  Facilities shall be inspected a minimum of two times per year or as deemed necessary for potential violation(s) in respect to the care and treatment of animals as spelled out in this chapter. Inspections will be conducted by the City of Devils Lake Police Department, who shall have the ability to inspect the property at any time. 
E.  Animal rescue(s) must comply with all regulations in this chapter relating to the care, treatment, and well-being of animals in their care. 
(Ord. No. 950, 12-18-17) 
Chapter 6.34 - NUMBER OF ALLOWABLE PETS 
Section: 

6.34.010 - Number of allowable pets. 
A.  The number of dogs and cats, six months of age or older, in one home is limited at six. This can be six dogs, six cats, or any combination of the two adding up to six. If there are more than six dogs or cats in one home a kennel permit for that home must be obtained, as provided below. 
B.  If any home has more than six dogs or cats at the time of the passage and adoption of this chapter, that home will be allowed to have dogs and/or cats exceeding six. All of these dogs and/or cats will need to have current licenses issued by the Devils Lake police department on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. As the number of dogs and/or cats decrease, the home will not replace those dogs and/or cats, until the number of dogs and/or cats in the home is six or less. 
C.  The city commission may issue a kennel permit to allow a home to have more than six dogs and/or cats in the city of Devils Lake upon the following, any of which may be waived by the city commission: 
1.  The application for a permit will be on a form approved by the city commission. 
2.  The permit application will be available in the office of the city auditor. 
3.  The fee for the permit application will be set by the fees and rates of the city of Devils Lake. 
4.  In issuing the permit, the city commission may include any restrictions or conditions it deems appropriate. 
5.  The application must be accompanied with documentation that all of the dogs and/or cats have current licenses issued by the city of Devils Lake police department. 
6.  The permit can be revoked, without cause, at any time by action of the city commission. The holder of the permit will be sent written notice of the hearing seven days prior to the hearing in which revocation of the permit will be heard by the city commission. The permit can be revoked by the city commission, without notice and a hearing, if the city commission determines a health and safety issue does exist. 
7.  A permit issued under this section cannot be assigned or transferred by the holder of the permit. 
8.  The applicant for the permit and holder of the permit must be the owner of the dogs and cats, and the owner of the home. 
D.  The application for a permit must be accompanied by written documentation that all residents and landowners within three hundred feet of the proposed kennel received notice of the day and time when the city commission will consider the application. 
E.  In determining whether to issue a kennel permit, the city commission will consider the following factors: 
1.  The area in square footage of the premises to which the permit relates. 
2.  The proposed facilities to house and exercise the animals. 
3.  The proposed sanitation measures to be used. 
4.  The size and customary habits of each type of breed of animal to be kept in the kennel. 
5.  The proximity, type, and configuration of residences surrounding the place where the animals will be housed. 
6.  The past history of the applicant with regard to animal violations, including providing sanitary and humane care for animals. 
7.  Responses of residents and landowners. 
8.  Any other factor reasonably likely to affect the persons who live, work, visit or transact business in close proximity to the proposed permit area. 
F.  This section does not revoke, modify, or amend Ordinance No. 680 which has been codified as Section 6.08.090 of this code. Breeding kennels are still prohibited in the city of Devils Lake. 
(Ord. No. 911, 5-6-13) 
Chapter 6.36 - ANIMAL CARE AND TREATMENT 
Section: 

6.36.010 - General requirements for animal care and treatment. 
    Every owner and keeper of an animal in the city of Devils Lake shall see that such animal: 
A.  Is kept in a clean, sanitary and healthy manner and is not confined so as to be forced to stand, sit or lie in its own excrement. The person(s) responsible for the animal shall regularly, and as often as necessary to prevent odor or health and sanitation problems, maintain all animal areas or areas of animal contact. 
B.  Has food that is appropriate for the species in adequate amounts to maintain good health, fresh potable drinking water where appropriate, shelter and ventilation, including quarters that are protected from excessive heat and cold and are of sufficient size to permit the animal to exercise and move about freely. 
C.  Shall not be tethered by use of a choke collar, or on any collar too small for the size and age of the animal, nor by any rope, chain or cord directly attached to the animal's neck, nor by a leash less than twelve feet in length or five times the body length of the animal, or of such unreasonable weight as to prevent the animal from moving about freely. 
D.  Is protected against abuse, cruelty, neglect, torment, torture, overload, overwork, or any other inhumane treatment. 
E.  Is provided the reasonably necessary medical care, in addition to the required rabies vaccination which shall include recommended vaccinations as required by accepted veterinary standards, and if diseased or injured, or exhibiting symptoms of disease, received proper care and is segregated from other animals so as to prevent transmittal of the disease, be kept free of flea infestations. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person to beat, starve or otherwise mistreat any animal in the city of Devils Lake, or fail to comply with subsections A through E above, including neglect, inhumane treatment, or torture of an animal. 
G.  No owner of or person in charge of an animal shall confine the animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that places the animal in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged period of extreme heat or cold, without proper ventilation or other protection from such heat or cold. In order to protect the health and safety of an animal, a law enforcement officer who has probable cause to believe that this subsection is being violated shall have authority to enter such motor vehicle by any reasonable means under the circumstances, after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person in charge of the animal. 
H.  A person who violates any provision of this section for the first time may be given written notice of the practice or conditions which constitute the violation and a period of not more than thirty days to correct the violation(s). The failure to correct the violation(s) within the time period shall constitute prima facie evidence of this section. 
I.  A law enforcement officer has the authority to remove the animal immediately if the animal is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 910, 5-6-13) 
Chapter 6.38 - VIOLATION-PENALTIES 

6.38.010 - Violation. 
    The penalty provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply to violations of the ordinances which have been codified as Sections 6.08.040, 6.08.050, 6.08.120, 6.12.040, 6.20.020, and 6.36.010 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 912, 5-6-13) 
6.38.020 - Penalties. 
    The penalty for violating any of the above provisions shall be the following: 
A.  A first and second offense within a two-year period of time shall be an infraction. 
B.  A third offense within a two year period of time shall be a misdemeanor with any of the penalties provided for in Chapter 1.16 of this code. 
C.  Any additional offenses within a two-year period, in the discretion of the Devils Lake Municipal Court, may include any of the following: 
1.  A misdemeanor with the penalties provided for in Chapter 1.16 of this code. 
2.  Removal of any animals of the person convicted of this offense. 
3.  An order prohibiting the person convicted of this offense from owning or caring for any animal in the city of Devils Lake. This prohibition, for good cause, may be removed by the Devils Lake Municipal Court, with any conditions the court deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 912, 5-6-13) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY*[] 
Chapters: 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* For provisions on smoke detectors, see Ch. 15.24. 

Chapter 8.04 - PUBLIC NUISANCES**[] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
** Prior history: Ord. 344. 

8.04.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted: 
    "Accessory buildings" mean buildings or structures incident to the main building or structure located on or adjacent to the property. 
    "Ashes" mean the residue from burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
    "Garbage" means the putrescible animal or vegetable wastes from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food or drink. 
    "Rank vegetation" means any unmanaged or unrestrained growth of grasses or weeds. 
    "Refuse" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, (except body wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, dead animals, solid market and industrial wastes, and discarded appliances, machines or parts. 
    "Rubbish" means all nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glasses, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 624 § 1, 1979: prior code § 864) 
8.04.020 - Designated. 
    The following are declared to be public nuisances affecting health and safety: 
A.  All buildings, walls or other structures which have been damaged by fire, natural disaster, decay or otherwise and which are situated as to endanger the safety of the public; 
B.  Dilapidated accessory buildings or structures which pose a threat to public health by virtue of being a rat harborage; 
C.  Unprotected excavations or holes; 
D.  Any structure, sign or vegetation which obstructs the view of oncoming traffic at intersections; 
E.  Limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk, street or alley less than nine feet above the surface; 
F.  Snow and/or ice not removed from public sidewalks within twenty-four hours of the snowfall; 
G.  Production of smoke, dust, noise or noxious fumes not confined within property lines; 
H.  Animal pens, runs or shelters not maintained properly and regularly; 
I.  Improper fence material, including barbed wire, electric fencing, or any other fencing that does not have a permit from the city building official; 
J.  All wires over streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds which are strung less than fifteen feet above the surface of the ground; 
K.  Accumulations of ashes, rubbish, refuse or garbage not kept in closed containers; 
L.  Any property in need of maintenance or mowing; and 
M.  Items left unsecured which can become a hazard. This includes, but is not limited to, refrigerators, freezers or other appliances. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 624 § 2, 1979: prior code § 65) 
8.04.030 - Abatement notice. 
    Property owners shall be notified by the enforcement officer, in writing, at their last known address, of the existence of any public nuisance listed in Section 8.04.020. The property owner shall be allowed eight calendar days from the date of the notice to abate the public nuisance. Should the owner fail to abate the public nuisance, the city may proceed to remedy or abate the public nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 624 § 3, 1979) 
8.04.040 - Weeds, long grass, and diseased and dead trees-Declared to be a nuisance. 
    All weeds, long grass, and diseased or dead trees within the limits of the city are declared to be a common nuisance, and it shall be the duty of every person owning, occupying, or in charge of any premises, lot or parcel of land in the city to keep such premises, lot, or parcel of land free from all weeds, long grass, and diseased or dead trees, and to cut and destroy the same at all times during the growing season. The following are to apply, if the weeds, long grass, and diseased or dead trees are not maintained: 
A.  Any grass higher than eight inches is to be considered a nuisance in the city of Devils Lake. 
B.  Any weed will be considered a nuisance in the city of Devils Lake. 
C.  Any diseased tree or dead tree is considered to be a nuisance in the city of Devils Lake. 
D.  The city will provide the owner of the property a notice as provided in Section 8.04.030 of the Municipal Code to cut or maintain the weeds, long grass, and diseased or dead trees which do constitute a nuisance. 
E.  If the owner fails to cut or maintain the weeds, long grass, diseased or dead trees within the time set in the notice, the work will be done by the city, and the property on which the work was done will be assessed the cost of that work. 
(Ord. 867, 2005) 
Chapter 8.08 - ACCUMULATION OF JUNK ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words or terms when used in this chapter shall be deemed to have the meaning set forth in this section: 
    "Abandoned vehicle" includes, without limitation, any vehicle which has remained on private property for a period of forty-eight continuous hours or more without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, or for a period of forty-eight continuous hours or more after the consent of the owner or occupant has been revoked. 
    "Blighted structure" includes, without limitation, any dwelling, garage or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, warehouse or any other store, structure which, because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling nor useful for the purpose for which it may have been intended. 
    "Building materials" includes, without limitation, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electric wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other materials used in constructing any structure. 
    "Junk" includes, without limitation, parts of machinery or motor vehicle, unused furniture, stoves, refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or any other castoff material of any kind whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
    "Junk automobiles" includes, without limitation, any motor vehicle which is not licensed or used upon the highways of the state for a period in excess of sixty days, and also includes, whether licensed or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of sixty days; provided that there is excepted from this definition unlicensed but operative vehicles which are kept as the stock in trade of a regularly licensed and established new or used automobile dealer. 
    "Person" includes all natural persons, firms, copartnerships, corporations and all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting by themselves, or by a servant, agent or employee. All persons who violate any of the provisions of this chapter, whether as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, servant or employee, shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be equally liable as principals. 
    "Trash or rubbish" includes any and all forms of debris not otherwise classified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 468 § 1, 1996) 
8.08.020 - Findings. 
    It is determined that the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles, abandoned vehicles, building materials and the maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the city tends to result in blighted and deteriorated neighborhoods, the increase in criminal activity, the spread of vermin and disease, and is contrary to the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 624 § 2, 1979: prior code § 65) 
8.08.030 - Storage unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to store, or permit the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles on any private property in the City except within a completely enclosed building or upon the business premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 468 § 3, 1966) 
8.08.040 - Dismantling automobiles unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to dismantle, cut up, remove parts from, or otherwise disassemble any automobile, whether or not it is a junk automobile, abandoned vehicle or otherwise, or any appliance or machinery except in a completely enclosed building, or upon the business premises of a duly licensed junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 468 § 4, 1966) 
8.08.050 - Maintenance of blighted structure unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store or warehouse unless it is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up, and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by unauthorized persons or unless the structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city and unless the construction is completed within a reasonable time as directed by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 468 § 5, 1966) 
8.08.060 - Building material storage. 
    It is unlawful for any person to store or permit the accumulation of building materials on any private property, except in a completely enclosed building or except where the building materials are part of the stock in trade of a business located on the property, or except when the materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the city; and provided further, that any debris resulting from a demolition, renovation, or other construction project must be removed from such premises within thirty calendar days unless the extended storage thereof is within an enclosed structure or being done with the written approval of the building official. 
(Ord. 705, 1987: Ord. 468 § 6, 1966) 
8.08.070 - Vehicle removal. 
    The police department may remove or cause to be removed any junk automobile or abandoned vehicle, or parts of either, from any unenclosed private property after having notified in writing the owner or occupant of the property of its intention to do so at least forty-eight hours prior to the removal. The notice shall be served personally upon the owner or occupant of the property if occupied, or may be posted in a conspicuous place upon vacant or unoccupied property. The junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles or parts of either, shall be removed to the automobile pound and disposed of in accordance with law. Such removal by the police department shall not excuse or relieve any person of the obligation imposed by this chapter to keep his property free from storage or accumulation of junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of junk automobiles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of either, nor from the penalties for violation thereof. 
(Ord. 468 § 7, 1966) 
Chapter 8.12 - GARBAGE, REFUSE AND RUBBISH* 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Service rights. 
    The service will have the right to use the streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in the city, and subsequent additions thereto, for the purpose of collection, handling and disposition of garbage, refuse and rubbish. 
(Ord. 782 (part), 1993) 
8.12.020 - Sanitation requirements. 
A.  All garbage, refuse and rubbish collected by the service shall be deposited at a landfill disposal site approved by the North Dakota Department of Health and the city. Any disposal on the site by any other person, organization or means other than by the aforesaid service shall be at a cost as set by resolution of the city commission. 
B.  It is the duty of the city to maintain in a sanitary condition the road or highway leading to the grounds maintained by the municipality for the disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish. The road shall be kept free from garbage, refuse and rubbish resulting from the transportation of the same by the municipality maintaining the grounds. Therefore, all vehicles traveling to and using the site described in subsection A of this section shall be covered and properly enclosed so that no debris or litter can be lost or escape from the vehicle. 
C.  The charges to the service for the use of the city landfill shall be negotiated between the service and the city. 
D.  All other charges for dumping by vehicles other than the service at the city sanitary landfill shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
E.  All collection of garbage, refuse and rubbish within the city shall be made solely by the service and all family units, dwellings, commercial establishments and other units shall be billed for the service by the city; that the billing and collection shall be mandatory for every family unit, dwelling, commercial establishment or other unit to maintain and preserve the health, welfare, cleanliness and good appearance of the community served by the sanitary collection and disposal facility owned and operated by the city. 
F.  All garbage and rubbish shall, by the person upon whose premises the same shall have been produced or accumulated, be placed in watertight containers to be not more than thirty-two-gallon net capacity, and weighing not more than seventy-five pounds when filled, which container shall be kept clean and continuously closed by a tight fitting cover and shall be protected against the access of flies and rodents. If bags are placed alone or outside a can or dumpster, the bag must be one with the special city logo provided by the city. If a sticker is posted, a bag (not to exceed thirty gallon) may be substituted in lieu of a can. The thirty-gallon bags may not weigh more than fifty pounds when filled and the fifteen-gallon bags may not weigh more than twenty-five pounds when filled. All perishable items must be enclosed in an airtight plastic bag before they are containerized as described above. 
G.  No person shall place, deposit or dump in any city recycling or compost receptacle or dumpster any material, thing, item or object other than that which is indicated as allowable on the receptacle or dumpster, or on an official sign posted on or in the vicinity of any such receptacles or dumpsters. Any person violating this section shall be punished by a penalty up to five hundred dollars per violation. 
(Ord. 790, 1994: Ord. 782 (part), 1993) 
8.12.030 - Collection dates. 
    All garbage, refuse and rubbish shall be collected by the service as frequently as necessary to maintain and preserve community cleanliness and sanitation. In residential areas, pickups shall not be less than once per week. For commercial establishments, the number of pickups per week shall be negotiated between the service and the consumer. 
(Ord. 782 (part), 1993) 
8.12.040 - Schedule of fees and charges. 
    For the collection of garbage, refuse and rubbish in the city by the service and the disposal thereof there shall be fixed and established a schedule of monthly fees and charges. Such fees and charges shall be established by resolution of the city commission, and revised as it may see fit. 
(Ord. 782 (part), 1993) 
8.12.045 - Procedure for billing. 
    The procedure for billing and assessing late charge payments shall be the same as those established in Chapter 13.20 as it applies to water and sewer rates and billings. 
(Ord. 782 (part), 1993) 
8.12.050 - Service agreement. 
    In consideration of the rights granted in Section 8.12.010 and 8.12.020, the service agrees and binds itself to serve any and all applicants for garbage, refuse and rubbish collection within the city limits and subsequent additions thereto, except for good cause. 
(Ord. 782 (part), 1993) 
8.12.060 - Indemnity and insurance against injury. 
A.  The service shall indemnity and hold the city harmless at all times during the term of this grant, from and against all claims for injury or damage to persons or property both real and personal caused by or as a result of the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish pursuant to the authority of this chapter. 
B.  The service shall carry insurance to protect the city and itself from and against any and all claims for injury or damage to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by or as a result of the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish, pursuant to this chapter, and the amount of insurance against liability due to damage to property shall not be less than ten thousand dollars; as to injury to any one person, one hundred thousand dollars; and as to any one accident three hundred thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 782 (part), 1993) 
Chapter 8.16 - SANITARY LANDFILL FEES 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Designated. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dump refuse, garbage or other waste materials on the sanitary landfill disposal site operated by the city, unless charges as shall be established by resolution of the city commission, and as may be revised as it may see fit, are first paid to the attendant at the sanitary landfill disposal site, prior to entrance thereto, by those using various equipment to haul thereon. 
(Ord. 677 (part), 1984: Ord. 521 §§ 1, 2, 1972; Ord. 469 § 1, 1966) 
8.16.020 - Commercial haulers exempt. 
    This chapter shall not apply to a commercial hauler duly licensed by the city as all fees with a commercial hauler will be negotiated with the city commission and whose license is in full force and effect and in good standing and who has entered into a separate fee agreement with the city commission, and is hauling garbage and other waste material from the city only. 
(Ord. 521 § 3, 1972: Ord. 469 § 2, 1966) 
8.16.030 - Remittance to city. 
    All fees collected by the attendant, as directed in Section 8.16.010, shall be by him remitted daily to the city auditor. 
(Ord. 469 § 3, 1966) 
Chapter 8.20 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Sale dates. 
    No person shall sell or offer for sale at retail within the city any fireworks on or before June 27th or after July 5th of the governing year, both dates inclusive, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 703, 1987: Ord. 691, 1986: Ord. 634 § 1, 1979: Ord. 425 § 1, 1960: Ord. 218 § 1, 1929: prior code § 284) 
8.20.020 - Use dates. 
    No person shall within the city set off, explode or detonate any fireworks before July 1st or after July 5th in any year, except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 634 § 2, 1979: Ord. 425 § 2, 1960: Ord. 218 § 1, 1929: prior code § 285) 
8.20.030 - Hours of use. 
    No person shall set off, explode or detonate any fireworks other than during the hours of eight a.m. and eleven p.m. during the dates listed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 634 § 3, 1979) 
8.20.031 - Sale and use of fireworks-New Year's Eve 2000. 
    Notwithstanding the date limitations relating to the sale and use of fireworks under Sections 8.20.010 and 8.20.020, a person otherwise able to sell and use fireworks may sell and use fireworks during the period December 26, 1999, through January 1, 2000. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999) 
8.20.040 - License application to sell fireworks. 
    Anyone selling fireworks in the city shall file with the city auditor an application on or before May 1st of each year (or December 1st, 1999 for the year of 1999). The application shall contain the following: 
A.  Name, address and phone number of the party being responsible for the sale of fireworks; 
B.  The location where the fireworks will be sold; 
C.  A diagram of the building where the fireworks will be sold, showing the location of all exits and fire extinguishers; 
D.  Whether the party responsible for the sale of the fireworks has ever made an application for the sale of fireworks to any other licensing authority, and the name and address of that licensing authority; 
E.  Whether the person responsible for the sale of the fireworks has, within the past five years, been convicted of a criminal offense; 
F.  Any other information deemed relevant by the city; and 
G.  A consent allowing the city to inspect the premises where the fireworks will be sold. 
    The application must be accompanied by the fee to be set in the fees and rates schedule of the city. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999) 
8.20.050 - Granting of license. 
    After a personal inspection of the premises where the fireworks will be sold, the license shall be granted or denied by the city commission upon recommendation of the fire chief. The city commission may condition the granting of any license upon any limitations it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999) 
8.20.060 - Display of license. 
    Any premises selling fireworks shall display the following on site: 
A.  The license issued by the city; 
B.  Any permits or licenses issued by Ramsey County; and 
C.  Any permits or licenses issued by the state, including the sales tax permit. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 8.24 - USE OF BLUE LIGHTS BY FIREFIGHTERS 
Sections: 

8.24.010 - Required. 
    All firefighters, whether probationary, call or active status, shall, when proceeding to the scene of an emergency, identify their vehicle by the use of an approved flashing blue light. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 607 § 1, 1977) 
8.24.020 - Purpose. 
    The use of the light does not in any way allow for preferential treatment. The light is to be for purpose of recognition only. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: 607 § 2, 1977) 
8.24.030 - Not indication of emergency vehicle. 
    The use of the light does not indicate an emergency vehicle. All laws regarding speed, stop or yield signs, and other rules of the road in regards to state and local traffic laws shall prevail. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 607 § 3, 1977) 
8.24.040 - Size and placement. 
    The size and placement need to be uniform in nature and acceptable to the officer in charge (OIC) who, when issuing the light, will explain proper placement. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999: Ord. 607 § 4, 1977) 
8.24.050 - Prior to issue of blue light. 
    A booklet will be issued by the OIC. After verifying with the firefighter their understanding of the proper use and placement of the blue light, they will be issued a card signed by the OIC and issued a blue light. 
(Ord. 829 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 8.28 - PUBLIC DANCES 
Sections: 

8.28.010 - Application of chapter. 
    This chapter applies only to public dances which are conducted outside of any building unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted: 
A.  "Lodge" or "club" means any corporation or association organized for civic, fraternal, social or business purposes, or for the promotion of sports, which has at least two hundred members. 
B.  "Private dance" means any dance to which the public generally may not gain admission, but which admission is by invitation only, which invitation is not to the general public. A dance sponsored and conducted by a lodge or club on premises owned or leased by the lodge or club which restricts the dance to its members is a private dance. 
C.  "Public dance" means any dance to which the public generally may gain admission with or without the payment of a fee. 
D.  "Sponsor" means the individual or entity promoting or conducting the dance. 
E.  "Street dance" means a public dance located upon any street, alley, public way or area used principally for public parking. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.030 - Restrictions on public dances. 
    Public dances may not be held in the city unless the provisions of this chapter are met, an application for the public dance is approved by the city commission and a permit for the public dance is issued by the city commission. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.040 - Application for public dances. 
    On or before May 1st of each year, the sponsor of the public dance shall file with the city auditor an application on a form provided by the city auditor which will contain the following: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the sponsor of the public dance; 
B.  If the public dance is not sponsored by an individual, the name, address and telephone number of an individual to contact regarding the public dance; 
C.  The date and hours of the public dance, and any alternate date in the event of inclement weather; 
D.  The location of the public dance; 
E.  A diagram showing the layout of the public dance, including entrances and exits; 
F.  That the application has been reviewed and approved by the chief of the Devils Lake police department; 
G.  A recommendation by the chief of the Devils Lake police department whether it is necessary to have police officers present at the public dance; 
H.  That the sponsor of the public dance agrees to be responsible for the costs of hiring any police officers determined by the chief of police to be required to be present at the public dance; 
I.  The number of public dances conducted by the sponsor of the public dance in the city in the last calendar year; 
J.  Whether or not the public dance will be a street dance, in which case the requirements of Section 8.28.080 must be met and addressed in the application; 
K.  Whether alcohol will be dispensed or consumed, in which case the application must contain what is required by Section 8.28.090. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.050 - Day and hours of public dance. 
    The dance shall be only on the day contained in the permit approved by the city commission. The dance may be held on the alternate date contained in the application in the event of only inclement weather, if that alternate date was included in the permit approved by the city commission. The public dance may not extend for more than four hours and shall not extend beyond twelve midnight. The hours may be either restricted or extended by action of the city commission in granting the permit. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.060 - Responsibility of sponsor. 
    The sponsor of a public dance is responsible for conducting the dance according to the laws of the state of North Dakota and the ordinances of the city of Devils Lake. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.070 - Limitation on number of public dances. 
    No sponsor may apply for more than one public dance in one calendar year without approval of the city commission. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.080 - Restriction on street dances. 
    Street dances are allowed in the city so long as any obstructions to the street do not jeopardize the orderly flow of traffic or prevent the appropriate officials from responding to any emergency requests. Any request for a street dance, in addition to what is required in Section 8.28.040, shall also set out any streets, alleys, public ways or public areas that will be obstructed, which obstruction shall be approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.090 - Consumption and dispensing of alcohol at public dances. 
    Alcohol can be dispensed and consumed at public dances provided the following conditions are met: 
A.  Alcohol is dispensed by the holder of an appropriate license for dispensing alcohol as required by the laws of the state of North Dakota and ordinances of the city. 
B.  The holder of the required license to dispense alcohol has applied for and received from the city a special permit as required by Section 5.24.240 of this code. 
C.  The sponsor has included in the diagram as required by Section 8.28.040(E) the location where alcohol will be dispensed and consumed. 
D.  No minors may be present, unless the diagram required by Section 8.28.040(E) sets out an area where alcohol is not dispensed or consumed and minors are not allowed in the area where alcohol is dispensed or consumed. 
E.  The chief of police has approved the dispensing and sale of alcohol at the public dance. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.100 - Application to private dances. 
    This chapter does not apply to a private dance, except a private dance conducted on the following premises must not be between the hours of one a.m. and eight a.m. Those premises are the following: 
A.  Any premises where a license to dispense alcohol has been issued pursuant to Chapter 5.24 of this code. "Premises" is defined herein to mean not just the licensed premises, but the entire premises; 
B.  Any premises that has been open and accessible to the public on previous occasions. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.110 - Waiver of provisions. 
    Any of the provisions of this chapter can be waived by the city commission. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.120 - Additional restrictions on dances. 
    In addition to what is set out in this chapter, the city commission may impose additional restrictions or conditions before issuing a permit for a public dance. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.130 - Fee for permit. 
    The fee for a permit for a public dance shall be set by the city commission and included in the adoption of its fees and rates. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
8.28.140 - Penalty provision. 
    Any violation of this chapter shall be a penalty as provided in Section 1.16.010 of this code. 
(Ord 814 (part), 1997) 
Chapter 8.30 - SMOKING IN PUBLIC INDOOR WORKPLACES 
Sections: 

8.30.010 - Smoking in public indoor workplaces prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of Sections 23-12-09 through 23-12-11 of the North Dakota Century Code as now enacted, are hereby adopted, except as provided in subsection B of this section, and shall govern the regulation of smoking in public places and places of employment as if set out in this chapter. 
B.  The exemptions from the prohibition of smoking in public places set forth in Section 23-12-10(2)f, g, and h, as set out below, are deleted, and smoking is also prohibited in those places within the city limits: 
1.  Bars; 
2.  Any place of public access rented or leased for private functions from which the general public and children are excluded and arrangements for the function are under the control of the function sponsor; 
3.  Separately enclosed areas in truck stops which are accessible only to adults. 
C.  Any business in which smoking is not permitted may construct a smoking shelter for customers or employees to smoke outside the enclosed premises for which smoking is prohibited. Provided, if the smoking shelter has a roof, at least three walls of the smoking shelter must provide an opening of at least twenty-five percent of the surface area of each such wall. No other wall, fence, roof overhang or other obstruction of any kind may be located within five feet of the openings if they have the effect of blocking the free flow of air through the required openings. The percentage of the opening is calculated based on the surface area below the ceiling. Combination glass/screen windows or doors that may be "open" or "closed" will not be counted toward the open space of a shelter. If one wall of the shelter is also a wall for the business, that wall must be a solid wall with no openings other than a solid door, which door must be closed at all times except for people entering or exiting the shelter. In addition, if the shelter has a roof and is attached to the business, a power ventilator must be installed in the shelter at its highest point and used whenever smoking is occurring in the shelter. A proper building permit must be obtained for each shelter. If the smoking shelter area is added to the licensed liquor premises, customers may bring alcoholic beverages and food into the shelter, but no service of alcoholic beverages or food will be allowed in the smoking shelter. At least one entrance of a licensed liquor premises must not require a customer to go through a smoking shelter to enter the licensed premises. 
D.  Smoking is permitted on outdoor patios, terraces, decks, courtyards, sidewalks, or porches of a bar, provided it is not on public property or right of way, and smoke does not enter any area where smoking is prohibited. The outdoor patio, terrace, deck, courtyard, sidewalk, or porch must comply with all building codes. Alcoholic beverages or food are allowed to be consumed, but not served, on the outdoor patio, terrace, deck, courtyard, sidewalk, or porch, provided it is included as part of the licensed premises of the bar. 
(Ord. No. 892, 12-20-10) 
8.30.020 - Penalty. 
A.  An individual who smokes in an area in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter is guilty of an infraction. 
B.  An owner or other person with the general supervisory responsibility over a public place or place of employment who willfully fails to comply with this chapter is guilty of an infraction, subject to a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars for the first violation, to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars for the second violation within one year, and a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year of a preceding violation. 
(Ord. No. 892, 12-20-10) 
Chapter 8.32 - SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 

8.32.010 - Designation of nuisance control officer. 
    The city commission will designate or appoint a nuisance control officer who shall exercise the powers set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.020 - Definition of substandard buildings or structures. 
    All buildings and structures which have any of the following shall be deemed "substandard buildings or structures": 
A.  Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members lean, list or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
B.  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three per cent or more damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or fifty percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
C.  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
D.  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
E.  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein. 
F.  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic, or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
G.  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
H.  Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.030 - Standards for repair, vacation, or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed by the nuisance control officer in determining repair, vacation, or demolition: 
A.  If the substandard building or structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this chapter it shall be ordered repaired. 
B.  If the substandard building or structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety, or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
C.  If the substandard building or structure is fifty percent or more damaged or decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article it shall be demolished. In all cases where a substandard building or structure is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or any ordinance of the city or statue of the state of North Dakota, it shall be demolished. The term "fifty percent or more damaged or decayed or deteriorated from its original value," as used in this section, shall mean that the reasonable value of all services, labor and materials necessary to restore the structure to building code standards exceeds fifty percent of the current value of the structure. The term "original value" as used in this section, shall mean the best available information utilizing; the current true and full value as shown in the assessment records, and appraisal of less than one year old or an average of the two. "Original value" should also reflect the pre-damaged or neglect, condition or value of the structure. 
D.  The nuisance control officer will notify the owner of the building or structure determined to be substandard whether the building is to be repaired, vacated, or demolished. The notice will include a reasonable deadline for the owner to comply with the notice of the nuisance control officer. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.040 - Procedure. 
    If a notice issued by the nuisance control officer pursuant to Section 8.32.030 is not complied with by the deadline in the notice, the nuisance control officer shall proceed as follows: 
A.  A petition can be filed with the city of Devils Lake by the nuisance control officer or by at least five residents of the city of Devils Lake charging that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation or whenever it appears to the nuisance control officer on the nuisance control officer's own motion that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, the nuisance control officer shall, if the nuisance control officer's preliminary investigation discloses a basis for those charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner, every mortgagee of record and all parties in interest in the dwelling, including persons in possession, a complaint stating the charges in that respect. The complaint must contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the nuisance control officer or the nuisance control officer's designated agent at a place designated in the complaint not less than ten days nor more than thirty days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner, mortgagee, and parties in interest must be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time designated in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence are not controlling in hearings before the nuisance control officer. 
B.  If, after the notice and hearing the nuisance control officer determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, the nuisance control officer shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of the determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner of the dwelling an order which: 
1.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, the owner, within the time specified in the order, shall repair, alter, or improve the dwelling to render it fit for human habitation, or vacate and close the dwelling so it is not used for human habitation; or 
2.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, the owner, within the time specified in the order, shall remove or demolish the dwelling. 
C.  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, or improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the nuisance control officer may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed. 
D.  If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the dwelling, the nuisance control officer may cause the dwelling to be removed or demolished. 
E.  The amount of the cost of any repairs, alterations, or improvements, or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the nuisance control officer constitutes a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred and the lien, including an allowance of the nuisance control officer's costs and necessary attorney's fees, may be foreclosed in judicial proceedings in the manner provided by law for loans secured by liens on real property. If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the nuisance control officer, the nuisance control officer shall sell the materials of the dwelling and credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any balance remaining must be paid to the parties entitled to it as determined by proper judicial proceedings instituted by the nuisance control officer after deducting the costs of the judicial proceedings, including necessary attorney's fees incurred in those proceedings by the public officer, as determined by the court. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.050 - Determination. 
    The nuisance control officer may determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation if the nuisance control officer finds that conditions exist in the dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of the dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of the city of Devils Lake, or which have a blighting influence on properties in the area. Those conditions may include defects in the dwelling increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; uncleanliness; overcrowding; inadequate ingress and egress; inadequate drainage; or any violation of health, fire, building, or zoning regulations, or any other laws or regulations relating to the use of land and the use and occupancy of building and improvements. The nuisance control officer shall also consider the factors set out in Sections 8.32.020 and 8.32.030 in making the nuisance control officer's determination. 
    Complaints or orders issued by the nuisance control officer pursuant to this chapter must be served upon persons either personally or by registered or certified mail, but if the location of those persons in unknown and cannot be ascertained by the nuisance control officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the nuisance control officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon those persons may be made by publishing the complaint or order once each week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the city of Devils Lake. A copy of the complaint or order must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of the complaint or order must also be filed with the clerk of Ramsey County, where the dwelling is located, and the filing of the complaint or order has the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.060 - Injunctive relief. 
    Any person affected by an order issued by the nuisance control officer may petition the district court, in accordance with the procedure provided in N.D.C.C. Section 28-34-01, for an injunction restraining the nuisance control officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the court may, upon that petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the nuisance control officer pending the final disposition of the cause. Hearings must be held by the court on the petitions within twenty days, or as soon thereafter as possible, and must be given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and enter a final order or decree in the proceeding. In the proceeding, the findings of the nuisance control officer as to facts, if supported by evidence, are conclusive. The court may assess costs. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.070 - Exclusive remedies. 
    The remedies provided under this chapter are exclusive remedies and a person affected by an order of the public officer may not recover any damages for action taken pursuant to any order of the nuisance control officer, or because of compliance by that person with any order of the nuisance control officer. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.080 - Powers of the nuisance control officer. 
    This chapter authorizes the nuisance control officer to exercise those powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers in addition to other authority granted in this chapter: 
A.  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the municipality in order to determine which dwellings are unfit for human habitation, or substandard buildings or structures; 
B.  To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence; 
C.  To enter any premises for the purpose of making examination, provided that entry must be made in a manner that causes the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession, and to obtain an order for this purpose from a Court of competent jurisdiction in the event entry is denied or resisted; 
D.  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as the nuisance control officer deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the chapter; and 
E.  To delegate any of the public officer's functions and powers under this chapter to such officers, agents, and employees as the nuisance control officer may designate. The city commission shall designate who will conduct any hearings provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.090 - Estimate of expenses. 
    As soon as the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted by the city of Devils Lake, the city commission shall prepare an estimate, as soon as possible, of the annual expenses or costs to provide the equipment, personnel, and supplies necessary for periodic examinations and investigations of the dwellings in the municipality for the purpose of determining the fitness of the dwellings for human habitation, and for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
8.32.100 - Nonexclusive provisions. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter may not be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of any court or the City of Devils Lake to enforce any ordinances, laws, statutes, or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by the ordinance codified in this chapter are in addition and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other ordinance, law, statute, or regulation. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter may not be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city of Devils Lake to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
    The city of Devils Lake may adopt additional ordinances prescribing minimum standards for the use and occupancy of dwellings throughout the city of Devils Lake and to prevent the use or occupancy of any dwelling which is injurious to the public health, safety, morals, or welfare. 
(Ord. No. 901, 9-17-12) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
DIVISION I. - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT 
Chapter 9.01 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

9.01.010 - Generally. 
    Words and phrases used in this title of the municipal code shall have the meanings and be defined as provided in the North Dakota Century Code Title 12.1, and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title to the municipal code. 
    The provisions of this title of the municipal code are declared to be severable, and if any section, sentence, clause or phrase of this title shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this title, but they shall remain in effect, it being the legislative intent that this title shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any part. 
(Ord. 800, 1996) 
Chapter 9.02 - RESISTING POLICE 
Sections: 

9.02.010 - Unlawful to flee. 
    Any person, other than the driver of a motor vehicle under Section 39-10-71 of the North Dakota Century Code, who willfully fails or refuses to stop or who otherwise flees or attempts to elude, in any manner, a pursuing peace officer, when given a visual or audible signal to stop, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor for a first and second offense and a class A misdemeanor for a subsequent offense. A signal to stop complies with this section if the signal is perceptible to the person and: 
A.  If given from a vehicle, the signal is given by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren and the vehicle is appropriately marked showing it to be an official law enforcement vehicle; or 
B.  If not given from a vehicle, the signal is given by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren, and the officer is in uniform and prominently displays the officer's badge of office. 
(Ord. 564, 1974) 
(Ord. No. 893, § 1, 1-18-11) 
9.02.020 - Resisting an officer. 
    Any person who shall, after being advised by a police officer that he is under arrest, resist the police officer, and any person who interferes with or impedes a police officer in making any arrest or in taking any arrested person to the police station or before the police magistrate or who wilfully interferes with or impedes a police officer in the performance of his official duty shall be guilty of resisting an officer. 
(Ord. 371 § 1, 1954) 
9.02.030 - Escape. 
    Any person who escapes from a police officer after he has been arrested or who escapes from the city jail after having been placed therein or who escapes from the place where he may be working out his sentence after conviction shall be guilty of escape. 
(Ord. 371 § 2, 1954) 
9.02.040 - Assisting escape. 
    Any person who assists any person who has been arrested or imprisoned to escape from the officer having him in charge or from the city jail or from any place where he may be employed shall be guilty of assisting escape. 
(Ord. 371 § 3, 1954) 
Chapter 9.04 - OBSTRUCTING FIREMEN 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Resistance unlawful. 
    No person shall, at any fire, wilfully hinder, delay or resist, or obstruct any officer, fireman or other person in the discharge of his duty or shall neglect or refuse to obey or observe any lawful commands of any officer, or shall conduct himself in a riotous or disorderly manner. 
(Ord. 276(part), 1940) 
9.04.020 - Restrictions. 
A.  No automobile, truck or other vehicle shall follow any fire truck or any fire equipment being utilized by the fire department in the course of its duty, in going to or returning from any fire, within a distance of five hundred feet, nor stop within or traverse in any block in which the fire department may be operating in the performance of its duty. 
B.  Any automobile, truck or other vehicle of any kind or character which may be overtaken by any fire truck or equipment utilized in the performance of duty by members of the fire department in going to or returning from any fire, shall immediately pull to the curb and remain there until the fire truck or equipment has passed, and shall then as quickly as possible and as soon as convenient turn to a side street if the continuance of such street would bring them within the distances prohibited in this chapter. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not relate to any fireman in using his own or any other vehicle in the course of his duty, in attending to or returning from fires, and it shall be the duty of each member of the fire department to place upon his automobile, or such vehicle that he may use in the course of his duty, a sign plainly visible containing the word "Fireman," and it shall be the duty of the fire department to designate the color of the letters and the size of the sign to be so used by the members of the department as early as possible. 
(Ord. 276(part), 1940) 
Chapter 9.06 - FALSE INFORMATION TO OFFICERS 
Sections: 

9.06.010 - Unlawful. 
    No person shall give false information to any police officer relative to any violation of any of the ordinances of the city or relative to any violations of the state statutes. 
(Ord. 560 § 1, 1974) 
9.06.020 - Custody of person driving while intoxicated. 
    Any person charged with the offense of driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs upon posting of a bond on such charge, may be released from custody; provided, that the person shall not be allowed to drive a motor vehicle until his or her blood alcohol level is less than one-tenth of one percent. However, any third person who signs a form to the effect that he will be responsible for the person charged with this offense will take the person to his place of residence, and not allow the person to drive a motor vehicle, will be allowed to provide transportation to the person charged with this offense for the purpose of transporting him to his home. However, if any person charged with driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle is released to a responsible third person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the third person signs a written statement agreeing to be responsible as indicated in this section, the third person upon being found to have allowed the person charged to drive such vehicle, will be guilty of violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 560 § 2, 1974) 
DIVISION II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
Chapter 9.14 - GENERAL OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
Sections: 

9.14.010 - Assault and battery. 
    An individual is guilty of an offense of assault and battery if that individual: 
A.  Wilfully causes bodily injury to another human being; or 
B.  Negligently causes bodily harm to another human being by means of a firearm, destructive device or other weapon, the use of which against a human being is likely to cause death or serious bodily injury. 
C.  In addition to other sentencing alternatives given at the discretion of the court, an individual convicted of assault and battery as described in this section must be sentenced as follows: 
1.  For a first offense a court must impose a fine of at least three hundred dollars or imprisonment for at least ten days or both. The court may not defer or stay the imposition of sentence or judgment provided herein. 
2.  For a second offense a court, must impose a fine of at least five hundred dollars or imprisonment for at least twenty days or both. The court may not defer, suspend or stay the imposition of sentence or judgment provided in this section. 
3.  For a third or subsequent offense a court, must impose a fine of at least one thousand dollars or imprisonment for at least thirty days or both. The court may not defer, suspend or stay the imposition of sentence or judgment provided in this section. 
(Ord. 831, 2000: Ord. 789 (part), 1994: prior code § 288) 
9.14.011 - Arrest without warrant. 
    A law enforcement officer may arrest a person without a warrant if from the time the officer determines there is probable cause to arrest for an assault of a family or household member as defined in Section 14-07.1-01 of the North Dakota Century Code, and all subsequent amendments, the officer has twelve hours in which to make a warrantless arrest, whether or not the assault took place in the presence of the officer. After twelve hours has elapsed, the officer must secure an arrest warrant before making an arrest. A law enforcement officer may not arrest a person pursuant to this subdivision without first observing that there has been recent physical injury to, or impairment of physical condition of the alleged victim. 
(Ord. 789 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 919, 3-17-14) 
9.14.020 - Unguarded or unsafe openings unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person in the city to leave or keep open, uncovered or unguarded, any cellar door, pit, grating or any vault or other subterranean passage opening from, into or upon any street, alley or sidewalk; nor is it lawful for any person to suffer any such cellar door or vault, grating or other opening or place of a like nature, connected with the premises owned or occupied by him or her to remain in an insecure or other unsafe condition, so that persons may fall into or be otherwise injured by it. 
(Prior code § 296) 
9.14.030 - Criminal trespass. 
    A person is guilty of criminal trespass in either of the following instances: 
A.  If, knowing that person is not licensed or privileged to do so, that person enters or remains in any place as to which notice against trespass is given by actual communication to the actor by the person in charge of the premises or other authorized person or by posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders. The name of the person posting the premises must appear on either sign in legible characters; 
B.  If that person remains upon the property of another after being requested to leave the property by a duly authorized person. 
    This section of the Devils Lake Municipal Code is adopted from North Dakota Century Code Section 12.1-22-03(3) and (4), and as those sections of North Dakota law are amended or modified, this section of the Devils Lake Municipal Code shall by reference likewise be amended and modified. 
(Ord. 805, 1997) 
Chapter 9.16 - STEALING AND RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY 
Sections: 

9.16.010 - Theft of property or services. 
    No person shall commit theft of property or services anywhere in the city. For the purpose of this section, a person commits theft when he or she, with intent to deprive the owner thereof, knowingly: 
A.  Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of another; or 
B.  Obtains by deception control over property of another; or 
C.  Obtains by fraud, stealth or deception the services of another. 
(Ord. 799, 1996: Ord. 736, 1989: Ord. 488 § 1, 1968) 
9.16.020 - Possession of stolen property. 
    Any person who is in possession of any personal property that has been stolen from another, knowing it to have been stolen, and with intent to deprive the owner thereof, shall be guilty of possession of stolen property; and, upon conviction thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 673 § 2, 1984) 
DIVISION III - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 
Chapter 9.24 - NUISANCES AND OFFENSES 
Sections: 

9.24.010 - Designated. 
    The following are public nuisances affecting public morals and decency: 
A.  All gambling devices, slot machines and punch-boards and all games of chance, gambling and betting; 
B.  All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse, gambling houses, houses of ill fame and bawdy houses and resorting to any such place or enticing others to resort thereto; 
C.  All domestic animals in the act of copulation exposed to public view; 
D.  All places where intoxicating liquors are manufactured, sold, bartered or given away in violation of law or where persons are permitted to resort for the purpose of drinking intoxicating liquors kept for sale, barter or distributed in violation of law and all liquors, bottles, kegs, pumps, bars and other property kept at and used for maintaining such a place; 
E.  Any vehicle used for any immoral or illegal purpose; 
F.  All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and newspapers; 
G.  The public use of profane or obscene language; 
H.  Betting, bookmaking and all apparatus used in such occupation; 
I.  Places used for the holding of public dances unless conducted as provided by law. 
(Prior code § 66) 
9.24.020 - Spitting or throwing litter. 
    No person shall spit or expectorate nor throw fruit, fruit parings or skins, nuts or nut shells upon the sidewalks or crossing of any street, avenue, alley or driveway, within the corporate limits of the city, nor in or upon the floors, stairs, or hallways within, or sidewalks leading to or from any public building, theater, public hall or any railway depot or platform, connected therewith, or leading thereto, whether the public building, theater, hall or depot belongs to the city or not, nor shall any person spit or expectorate in or upon the floor or platform of any public conveyance. 
(Prior code § 303) 
9.24.030 - Cruelty to animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the city to inhumanely, unnecessarily or cruelly beat, injure or otherwise abuse any dumb animal. 
(Prior code § 292) 
Chapter 9.26 - MARIJUANA 
Sections: 

9.26.010 - Possession unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person not authorized by law to possess marijuana in the city. 
(Ord. 649 § 1, 1982) 
Chapter 9.28 - PROSTITUTION 
Sections: 

9.28.010 - Prostitution-Unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to be an inmate of a house of prostitution or otherwise engaged in sexual activity as a business or to solicit another person with the intention of being hired to engage in sexual activity. 
(Ord. 707 (part), 1987) 
9.28.020 - Penalty-Violation. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter may receive a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars or a jail term not to exceed thirty days and/or both. 
(Ord. 707 (part), 1987) 
9.28.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
A.  A "house of prostitution" is any place where prostitution is regularly carried on by a person under the control, management, or supervision of another. 
B.  An "inmate" is a prostitute who acts as such in or through the agency of a house of prostitution. 
C.  A "prostitute" is a person who engages in sexual activity for hire. 
D.  "Sexual activity" means sexual act or sexual contact as those terms are hereby defined: 
1.  "Sexual act" means sexual contact between human beings consisting of contact between the penis and the vulva, the penis and the anus, the mouth and the penis, or the mouth and the vulva; or the use of an object which comes in contact with the victim's anus, vulva, or penis. For the purposes of this subsection, sexual contact between the penis and the anus or an object and the anus, vulva, or penis of the victim, occurs upon penetration however slight. Emission is not required. 
2.  "Sexual contact" means any touching of sexual or other intimate parts of the person for the person for the purpose of arousing or satisfying sexual or aggressive desires. 
(Ord. 707 (part), 1987) 
Chapter 9.30 - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 

9.30.010 - Unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia. 
    A person may not use or possess with intent to use drug paraphernalia to process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body marijuana or marijuana derivatives. Any person violating this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 928, 8-17-15) 
9.30.020 - Definitions-Drug paraphernalia. 
    Drug paraphernalia is defined as objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana derivatives into the human body, including but not limited to any of the following: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls. 
2.  Water pipes. 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
5.  Objects, sometimes commonly referred to as roach clips used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
6.  Chamber pipes. 
7.  Carburetor pipes. 
8.  Electric pipes. 
9.  Air-driven pipes. 
10.  Chillums. 
11.  Bongs. 
12.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(Ord. No. 928, 8-17-15) 
9.30.030 - Guidelines-Drug paraphernalia. 
    In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority shall consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, any of the following: 
A.  Statements by an owner or anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
B.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substance. 
C.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of NDCC Chapter 19-03.1 or equivalent ordinance. 
D.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
E.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances. 
F.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of any person in control of the object, to deliver the object to another person whom the owner or person in control of the object knows, or should reasonably know, intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of NDCC Chapter 19-03.1, or equivalent ordinance. The innocence of an owner, or of any person in control of the object, as to a direct violation of NDCC Chapter 19-03.1 or equivalent ordinance may not prevent a finding that the object is intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
G.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning the object's use. 
H.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict the object's use. 
I.  National or local advertising concerning the object's use. 
J.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
K.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
L.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
M.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
N.  Expert testimony concerning the object's use. 
O.  The actual or constructive possession by the owner or by a person in control of the object or the presence in a vehicle or structure where the object is located. 
P.  Written instructions, directions, or recipes to be used, or intended or designed to be used, in manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, or analyzing a controlled substance. 
(Ord. No. 928, 8-17-15) 
DIVISION IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
Chapter 9.34 - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE DESIGNATED 
Sections: 

9.34.010 - Begging prohibited. 
    No person shall within the city place himself upon any sidewalk or public street for the purpose of begging or receiving alms, or go about the city from place to place, begging alms without the written permission of the president of the board or city commissioners. 
(Prior code § 300) 
9.34.020 - Certain assemblies on streets unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any number of persons to assemble upon any sidewalk, bridge, street, alley or public way in the city, which may tend to hinder or impede free public travel thereon, or hinder or impede free egress to and from any place of business, public hall, church or other building, and any of the persons so assembled who shall refuse or neglect to move away, depart and give free passage, after being requested to do so by the chief of police or any police officer, or by the owner, occupant or manager, of any such place of business, hall or church, obstructed as aforesaid, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 286) 
9.34.030 - Setting up stand for sale of goods unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person upon any of the streets or public grounds within the city to set up any stand or wagon for the purpose of selling therefrom or exposing for sale any meat, provisions, refreshments, or any goods or merchandise, or to cry out or expose for sale any property without the written permission of the president of the board of city commissioners or the board of city commissioners. 
(Prior code §298) 
9.34.040 - Certain games in streets prohibited. 
    No person shall within the city, upon any street or alley, take part in any game of ball, nor shall any person upon any such street or alley take part in any game or play tending to frighten teams or to impede or endanger public travel thereon. 
(Prior code §301) 
9.34.050 - Throwing missiles unlawful. 
    No person shall throw or cast or encourage, aid or assist others in throwing or casting any stone or other missiles into, upon or against any building, erection or other public or private property, or at any person or persons within the city. 
(Prior code §280) 
Chapter 9.36 - DISORDERLY CONDUCT 
Sections: 

9.36.010 - Vandalism. 
    A person is guilty of an offense if he wilfully tampers with tangible property of another so as to endanger person or property; or if he wilfully damages tangible property of another. 
(Ord. 661 §2, 1983) 
9.36.020 - Disorderly conduct designated. 
    An individual is guilty of the offense of disorderly conduct if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person or in reckless disregard of the fact that another person is harassed, annoyed or alarmed by his behavior, the individual: 
A.  Engages in fighting, or in violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior; 
B.  Makes unreasonable noise, including, but not limited to, the illegal discharge of fireworks; 
C.  In a public place, uses obscene language or fighting words or makes an obscene gesture; 
D.  Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or the use of public facilities; 
E.  Persistently follows a person in or about a public place or places; 
F.  While loitering in a public place for the purpose of soliciting sexual contact, he solicits such contact; 
G.  Creates a hazardous, physically offensive or seriously alarming condition by any act which serves no legitimate purpose; 
H.  Engages in harassing conduct by means of intrusive or unwanted acts, words or gestures that are intended to adversely affect the safety, security or privacy of another person; 
I.  Knowingly allows or permits another individual to engage in any illegal conduct; 
J.  This section does not apply to constitutionally protected activity. If an individual claims to have been engaged in a constitutionally protected activity, the court shall determine the validity of the claim as a matter of law and, if found valid, shall exclude evidence of the activity. 
(Ord. 871 (part), 2006: Ord. 830 (part), 2000: Ord. 693, 1986; Ord. 692, 1986: Ord. 661 §3, 1983) 
9.36.025 - Disorderly house/disorderly vehicle. 
    An individual who knowingly permits disorderly conduct as described in Section 9.36.020 of this chapter to occur within or upon any premises, property or motor vehicle owned, possessed, or under the individual's control, is guilty of the offense of disorderly house/disorderly vehicle, which is an offense. 
(Ord. 871 (part), 2006: Ord. 830 (part), 2000) 
9.36.030 - Discharging firearms. 
    A person is guilty of an offense if he or she discharges any gun or firearm within the limits of the city, subject to the following exceptions: 
A.  Duly appointed law officers acting in the performance of their duty shall not be considered. 
B.  Indoor Shooting Ranges-License Required. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person, firm, association, group or corporation to operate or conduct a shooting range in this city without first having obtained a license to do so. The term "shooting range" as used in this section, means any public or private indoor place or range for shooting and discharging firearms at a target. 
2.  Any shooting range already operational prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall not be required, however, to obtain a license. 
C.  Qualifications of Applicant. No license shall be issued to any person unless the applicant shall file a sworn application, accompanied by the required fees, showing the following qualifications: 
1.  Applicant, if an individual, must be a citizen of the United States and be a person of good moral character and be at least twenty-one years of age. 
2.  Applicant or manager must not have been convicted of a felony involving violence or intimidation, or the use of firearms of any offense related to the use, control, possession or sale of firearms within ten years of the date of application; or to any person prohibited from possessing firearms as provided by North Dakota Century Code, Section 62.1-02-01. 
3.  Any building in which business is to be conducted must meet federal, state and local requirements regarding sanitation and safety. 
4.  If the applicant's place of business is to be conducted by a manager or agent, the manager or agent must possess the same qualifications of the licensee. 
D.  Application. Any person, firm, association, group or corporation desiring a license to operate or conduct any shooting range as hereinabove described, shall make and present a written verified application to the city commission of the city, filed with the city auditor containing the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each member of the partnership; if the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of the corporation and the manager of the licensed premises; 
2.  The legal description and the address of the premises for which a license is sought; 
3.  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any felony involving violence or intimidation, or the use of firearms or any offense related to the use, control, possession or sale of firearms within ten years of the date of application; 
4.  Whether the applicant is a person prohibited from possessing firearms as provided by North Dakota Century Code Section 62.1-02-01. 
E.  Fee. The fee for a license to conduct or operate a shooting range or gallery shall be ten dollars per year. 
F.  Ballistic Security. A professionally designed and commercially fabricated bullet trap and/or backstop shall be installed in all shooting areas. It shall be constructed of forged steel or other material capable of stopping the flight of any bullet and preventing penetration. Provisions shall be made to stop glancing bullets or particles of bullets at the sides of the target area. 
G.  Alcohol Prohibited. No alcoholic beverages shall be possessed or consumed on the premises and no person under the influence of alcohol, mind-altering drugs, or controlled substance as defined by Chapter 19.03.1 of the North Dakota Century Code shall be allowed on the premises. 
H.  Smoking Prohibited. Smoking is prohibited in any area of the premises where powder or primers are in storage. Smoking shall be allowed within the shooting range or gallery, at the discretion of the range officer. 
I.  Minors. Person under the age of eighteen utilizing the shooting range shall be accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or responsible adult. 
J.  Presence of Bystanders. Persons not shooting or coaching shooters shall not be permitted within the immediate area of the shooting range or gallery, unless a secure and separate viewing area is constructed. 
K.  Location of Persons Beyond Shooting Line. No person shall be allowed beyond a designated shooting line unless in the performance of normal maintenance in the absence of shooters. 
L.  Storage and Transportation of Firearms. All firearms shall be stored and/or transported in an unloaded condition and in a secured case holster, cabinet or vault. 
M.  Access Under Continuous Control. Access for entrance to the shooting range shall be continuous control, monitoring and supervision by the licensee, agent or employee. 
N.  Ammunition and Weapons Prohibited. 
1.  No person shall use or permit to be used any armor piercing, or other ammunition designed for penetrating metal, or tracers, incendiary, gas or explosive ammunition within any shooting range governed hereunder. Ammunition caliber shall be limited to .22 or less and firearms allowed are specifically limited to those firearms firing .22 short, long or long rifle and to spring and gas powered pellet guns. 
2.  No person shall use or permit to be used any machine gun, submachine gun, or fully automatic weapons within any shooting range governed hereunder. 
3.  Center fire ammunition and firearms may only be allowed at the discretion of the city commission in a premises that would provide the increased backstop security and fresh air ventilation that such ammunition requires. 
4.  As used in this section, unless a context otherwise requires, the terms "machine gun," "submachine gun," or "fully automatic weapon" mean a firearm, mechanism or instrument not requiring that the trigger be pressed for each shot, and having a reservoir, belt or other means of storing and carrying ammunition which can be loaded into the firearm, mechanism or instrument and fired therefrom at a rate of five or more shots to the second. 
O.  Compliance with Applicable Laws. The conduct and operation of any shooting range shall be in compliance with any and all federal, state and/or local laws, rules, codes and/or regulations. 
P.  Noise. Adequate noise baffling or buffering shall be installed to prevent injury to the hearing of unprotected persons outside of the area where firearms are actually being discharged and to prevent disturbance to the neighborhood surrounding the shooting area. Under no circumstances shall a license be granted for any firing range which is located within a residentially zoned area or in close proximity thereto. 
Q.  Ventilation. In any range in which a .22 caliber rimfire or center fire ammunition in being used, a positive flow ventilation system shall be installed prior to use. Such a system shall be adequate to remove contaminants in the air as not to endanger the health of users, coaches, spectators or employees. A positive flow ventilation system is not required, if the range is only to be used for spring or gas-powered pellet guns. 
R.  Revocation or Suspension of License. The chief of police and/or chief of the fire department shall revoke any license issued hereunder if the license has, since the granting of the same: 
1.  Ceased to possess the qualifications required for an applicant for a license as set out herein; 
2.  Been convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section; 
3.  Conducted the business in violation of health, sanitary or safety regulations or other ordinances of the city; 
4.  For any cause deemed by the city commission to be sufficient cause and justified by reason of public health or public safety. 
S.  Transfer of License. No license under the provisions of this section shall be transferable either as to licensee or as to premises without first making application to and receiving approval of the city commission. 
(Ord. 768, 1992: Ord. 661 § 4, 1983) 
Chapter 9.38 - PROWLING OR LOITERING* 
Sections: 

9.38.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this section, the following terms shall have the following meaning: 
A.  "Loitering" means remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concept of spending time loitering, loafing, wandering, standing or remaining idle, whether said loitering is done while an individual is in a motor vehicle or outside of a motor vehicle. 
B.  "Public" includes that which is open to common use and used by an individual, without restriction, permit or permission. 
(Ord. 785 (part), 1994) 
9.38.020 - Loitering prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to loiter either alone and/or in concert with others in a public place in such manner as to: 
A.  Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, public parking lot, or any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tend to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or pedestrians; 
B.  Commit in or about any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or public parking lot, or any other place or building, any act or thing which is an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public sidewalk, public parking lot or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress and regress, therein, thereon and thereto; 
C.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace, or create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
D.  The making of unsolicited remarks of any offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person whom, or in whose hearing, they are made. 
(Ord. 785 (part), 1994) 
9.38.030 - Refusal to disperse unlawful. 
    When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated in this chapter, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such order shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 785 (part), 1994) 
9.38.040 - Violations designated. 
    A person commits a violation if: 
A.  A person loiters or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself, or any object; 
B.  Unless flight by the actor or other circumstance makes it impractical, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under Section 9.38.040(A), afford the actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the actor identify themselves and explain their presence or conduct; 
C.  No person shall be convicted of an offense under subsection A of this section if the police officer did not comply with subsection B of this section, or if it appears at the trial that the explanation given by the actor was true, and if believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm; 
D.  An individual violates any of the provisions set out in Section 9.38.020, and refuses to disburse, upon request under Section 9.38.030. 
(Ord. 785 (part), 1994: Ord. 566 (part), 1974) 
9.38.050 - Loitering in parking lots. 
A.  Definitions. As used in this section: 
    "Loitering" means remaining idle in essentially one location and includes the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around," whether loitering is done while an individual is in a motor vehicle or outside of a motor vehicle. 
    "Parking lot" includes any areas within the city of Devils Lake which area would allow for the parking of four or more motor vehicles. 
B.  Types of Loitering Which Are Prohibited by This Section. No persons shall loiter in a parking lot in such manner as to: 
1.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
2.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
3.  Obstruct a free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; or 
4.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. 
    This section shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of any offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to whom, or in whose hearing, they are made. 
C.  Notice and Signs. 
1.  All parking lots which are owned by the city shall have posted signs stating this prohibition against loitering which signs shall contain the following language: 
"Loitering prohibited under Section 9.38.050 of the Municipal Code." 
2.  Any parking lot not owned by the city, which includes those parking lots owned by the Devils Lake parking authority, shall be subject to the same provisions of this section, if, the owner of that parking lot does place signs identical to those referred to in subsection (C)(1) of this section. These signs are to be placed on that parking lot by the owner of the parking lot, and the owner shall bear the expense of obtaining and placing those signs upon the parking lot. The city may provide assistance in obtaining and placing these signs in the parking lot, however, all cost is to be paid by the owner of the parking lot. 
D.  Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each time a violation does occur under this section. 
E.  Enforcement of Section. This section can be enforced by any person, including a law enforcement officer who has witnessed any violation of this section. 
F.  Inapplicability of Section and Permits. This section shall not apply to any activities which are conducted by and under the direction of an owner of a parking lot, which is owned by an entity other than the city. Additional activities can be conducted upon parking lots, however, it shall be necessary to file with the city auditor an application for a permit to conduct such activity, and it shall be within the discretion of the city commission whether or not to allow such activity and the city commission shall further set forth any rules or guidelines which govern that activity. 
(Ord. 821, 1998) 
Chapter 9.40 - ADVERTISING VEHICLES AND LOUDSPEAKERS 
Sections: 

9.40.010 - Permit required. 
    No person, copartnership, firm or corporation can use the streets of the city for advertising purposes without first filing an application with the city auditor stating generally the nature of the vehicle or the equipment sought to be used and the time and purpose of such use; and it shall be the duty of the city auditor to present the application to the chief of police, who shall examine it and ascertain if the purposes set forth violate any ordinance of the city. If approved by the chief of police, the city auditor shall issue a permit and such person, copartnership, firm or corporation shall pay a license fee as shall be established by resolution of the city commission, and revised as it may see fit. 
(Ord. 677 (part), 1984: Ord. 275 § 1, 1940) 
9.40.020 - Disturbing the peace unlawful. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to make any unseemly noises with loudspeakers or other equipment so as to unduly disturb the peace and quietude of the city. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, copartnership, firm or corporation to whom a permit has been granted to use such loudspeaker or other advertising apparatus while passing by a church, hospital or theater and no such loudspeaker or other advertising equipment shall be used on the streets of the city on a Sunday. 
(Ord. 275 § 2, 1940) 
9.40.030 - Obstruction of view unlawful. 
    No vehicle or other conveyance used for advertising purposes shall be so constructed as to unduly obstruct the view of pedestrians or persons driving or being conveyed in any vehicle of any kind or character. 
(Ord. 275 § 3, 1940) 
Chapter 9.42 - THEATERS, MOTION PICTURE SHOWS AND OTHER PLACES OF ENTERTAINMENT 
Sections: 

9.42.010 - Hours of use. 
    No theater, motion picture house, carnival or other place of amusement shall conduct any public show, picture, act, exhibition or theatrical performance of any kind between the hours of twelve-thirty a.m. and eight a.m.; provided, however, that for good cause shown, the commission may grant a special permit for any such performance when in its opinion it will not cause unreasonable disturbance of the peace of the city. 
(Ord. 347 § 1, 1952) 
Chapter 9.44 - ENGINE BRAKES AND COMPRESSION BRAKES 
Sections: 

9.44.010 - Unlawful use of engine brakes and compression brakes. 
A.  It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to use or operate or cause to be used or operated within the city limits of the city of Devils Lake, any engine brake, compression brake, or mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle that results in excessive, loud, unusual, or explosive noise from such vehicle. 
B.  The scheduled fine for a violation of this section shall be fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 866 (part), 2005) 
9.44.020 - Severability. 
    If any section, provision, or any part of this chapter shall be adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the ordinance codified in this chapter as a whole or any section, provision, or any part thereof, not adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 866 (part), 2005) 
9.44.030 - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be in effect after its final passage, approval and publication as provided by law. 
(Ord. 866 (part), 2005) 
DIVISION V - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
Chapter 9.50 - DAMAGING PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Sections: 

9.50.010 - Entry for unlawful purpose prohibited. 
    Any person who enters any store, residence, boxcar, automobile or other building, structure or vehicle for the purpose of committing any crime or breach of peace shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 659 § 2, 1983: prior code § 282) 
9.50.020 - Injuring streetlights unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons to mar, disfigure or in any way injure, break or destroy any street signpost or any ornamental street lightpost or any of the fixtures, globes or incandescent bulbs used in connection herewith, or to otherwise interfere with the street lighting system of the city. 
(Prior code § 276) 
9.50.030 - Setting fires while smoking unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person, who by smoking or attempting to light cigarettes, cigars, pipes or tobacco, or otherwise, to set fire to any fittings, furnishings, or part of any hotel, motel, roominghouse, lodginghouse or other place of public abode, so as to endanger life or property in any way, or to any extent. 
(Ord. 677 (part), 1984: Ord. 601, 1976) 
9.50.040 - Encroachment on public property. 
    It is unlawful to encroach upon any public street, right-of-way, alley, boulevard, or other public property by placing thereon any personal property; or erecting thereon any building or structure; except as may be specified by ordinance or approved by the city engineer. Any encroachment may be removed, obliterated or corrected by order of the city engineer and the total cost thereof shall be paid by the person responsible for the encroachment. 
(Ord. 684, 1986) 
Chapter 9.52 - LITTERING AND EXPECTORATING 
Sections: 

9.52.010 - Littering streets or alleys. 
    It is unlawful for any person or persons, firm or corporation, to throw, place or leave upon any street or alley within the city, any paper, cloth or waste material, or leave in any yard or place where it may blow, or be liable to blow upon any street or alley within the city, any paper, cloth or waste material. 
(Prior code § 295) 
9.52.020 - Littering or expectorating in public places. 
    No person shall spit nor expectorate nor throw fruit, fruit parings or skins, nuts or nut shells upon the sidewalks or crossing of any street, avenue, alley or driveway within the corporate limits of the city, nor in or upon the floors, stairs or hallways within, or sidewalks leading to or from any public building, theater, public hall or any railway depot or platform, connected therewith, or leading thereto, whether the public building, theater, hall or depot belongs to the city or not; nor shall any person spit or expectorate in or upon the floor or platform of any public conveyance. 
(Prior code § 303) 
Chapter 9.54 - HANDBILLS 
Sections: 

9.54.010 - Consent to post required. 
    No person shall, without first obtaining the consent of the owner or proprietor, paste up, stick up or post up handbills, placards or posters, or make, print or mark any word, letter or advertisement of any kind upon any private house, store or other building, or upon any fence, railing, wall or other property, or shall post up, stick up, nail up or paste any handbills, placards or posters of any kind, or make, print or mark any word, character or advertisement upon any public building, bridge, fence, railing, sidewalk, telegraph pole, telephone pole, electric light pole, or other public property within the city, except in compliance with the requirements of law in the posting of legal notices. 
(Prior code § 293) 
9.54.020 - Distribution restricted. 
    No person shall distribute any handbills, circulars, cards or other advertising matter by placing them in or upon any street, alley or other place where they are likely to be blown by the wind, or by placing them in automobiles. But such handbills or other matter may be distributed by placing them in business places or residences in such manner as not to be a nuisance. 
(Prior code § 294) 
Chapter 9.56 - BREAKING AND ENTERING 
Sections: 

9.56.010 - Designated. 
    Any person who enters any store, residence, boxcar, automobile or other building, structure or vehicle for the purpose of stealing, pilfering or damaging any property or for the purpose of committing any crime or breach of the peace or who steals or takes with intent to deprive the owner thereof of any personal property shall be guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 282) 
DIVISION VI - CONSUMER PROTECTION 
Chapter 9.64 - SOLICITATION WITHOUT INVITATION 
Sections: 

9.64.010 - Prohibited. 
    The practice of going in and upon private residences or privately owned property in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, transient vendors of merchandise, photographers and magazine and periodical subscription agents, not having been requested or invited to do so by the owner or owners, occupant or occupants of such private residences or private property, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and/or peddling or hawking them, and for the purpose of soliciting subscriptions to magazines or periodicals and/or for the purpose of taking photographs is declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 4 § 1, 1974) 
9.64.020 - Nuisance abatement. 
    The chief of police and all police officers in the city are required and directed to suppress solicitation without invitation and to abate any such nuisance as described in Section 9.64.010. 
(Ord. 565 Art. 4 § 2, 1974) 
DIVISION VII - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS 
Chapter 9.72 - CURFEW 
Sections: 

9.72.010 - Regulations. 
A.  It is unlawful for any child fourteen years of age or less to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play on or upon or drive or ride about in a vehicle or be in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, or public buildings, places or grounds between the hours of ten-thirty p.m. and five a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Thursday. 
B.  It is unlawful for any child fifteen years of age or less to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play in or upon, or drive or ride about in a vehicle or be in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, or public buildings, places or grounds between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Thursday. 
C.  It is unlawful for any child sixteen years of age or less to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play in or upon, or drive or ride about in a vehicle or be in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, or public buildings, places or grounds between the hours of twelve a.m. and five a.m. on any weekday, Monday through Thursday. 
D.  All of the foregoing curfew times and limitations shall be extended one hour to the age groups enumerated above on the evenings of Friday, Saturday, and Sunday and during the summer months commencing on June 1st and ending on August 31st thereof. 
(Ord. 756 (part), 1991: Ord. 456 § 1(part), 1965: Ord. 359 § 1(part), 1953: Ord. 342 § 1(part), 1951: Ord. 294 § 1(part), 1945: prior code § 20(part)) 
9.72.020 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter does not apply to: 
A.  Any child accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult having their care and custody, or to any child upon emergency errands, or legitimate business directed by their parent, guardian, or the adult person having their care and custody, or to any child traveling to or from a location outside the city on legitimate business or with the consent of a parent or guardian. 
B.  A child in attendance at or traveling between that child's home and a place of legitimate employment or an event or activity sponsored by or associated with school, church or similar organization, or an organized sporting, political, theatrical, or other like event or activity within thirty minutes of the end of the work shift or the conclusion of the event or activity. 
(Ord. 756 (part), 1991: Ord. 456 § 1(part), 1965: Ord. 359 § 1(part), 1953: Ord. 342 § 1(part), 1951: Ord. 294 § 1(part), 1945: prior code § 20(part)) 
9.72.030 - Authority of police officer. 
    A police officer who has probable cause to believe that a child is in violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall take such child to the police station where the child's parents or guardian shall be immediately contacted. If after this contact there is still probable cause to believe that the child was violating the ordinance codified in this chapter, the child shall be held until the parent or guardian comes to take the child home. When the parent or guardian arrives, he or she must be given a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter. If no parent or guardian has arrived within two hours, the child shall be turned over to the juvenile authorities until a parent or guardian can take custody of him or her. 
(Ord. 756 (part), 1991: Ord. 456 § 1(part), 1965: Ord. 359 § 1(part), 1953: Ord. 342 § 1, 1951: Ord. 294 § 1(part), 1945: prior code § 20 (part)) 
9.72.040 - Parental responsibility. 
    It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit or by inefficient control allow a violation of the ordinance codified in this chapter by a child in his or her custody or control. 
(Ord. 756 (part), 1991: Ord. 456 § 1(part), 1965: Ord. 359 § 1(part), 1953: Ord. 342 § 1(part), 1951: Ord. 294 § 1(part), 1945: prior code § 20(part)) 
9.72.050 - Penalty-Violation. 
    Any child, parent, or guardian violating this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 756 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 9.73 - SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS 
Sections: 

9.73.010 - Intent. 
    The intent and purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the public's health, safety and welfare from the inherent risks and dangers of tobacco use by prohibiting the sale of tobacco products from vending machines, the sale or distribution of tobacco products to minors and the purchase of tobacco products by minors. 
(Ord. 777 (part), 1993) 
9.73.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms, as used in this chapter, shall be defined as follows: 
A.  "City" means the city of Devils Lake. 
B.  "Distribute" means to give tobacco products to the general public at no cost or at a nominal cost for product promotional purposes. 
C.  "E-cigarette, electronic cigarette or smoking devices" shall all mean any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element and battery or electronic circuit or both, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use of inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, and e-pipe or under any other produce name, or descriptor and also includes any cartridge or other component of the device. 
D.  "Minor" means any person, regardless of sex, who has not yet reached the age of eighteen. 
E.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other business or other legal entity. 
F.  "Retail tobacco dealer" means any person, as defined herein, selling, offering for sale, exposing for sale or having in possession for sale, at retail, tobacco as defined herein. 
G.  "Sell" besides its ordinary purposes, means dispensing from a vending machine. 
H.  "Tobacco product" means any product that is made from or derived from tobacco, which contains nicotine or a similar substance, and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to, a cigarette, a cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus, or an electronic smoking device. Tobacco product also includes pipes and rolling papers, but does not include any product specifically approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for legal sale as a tobacco cessation product and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose. The term shall also include e-cigarettes. 
I.  "Vending machine" means any kind of device or mechanical machine which, upon the insertion of a coin or coins, tokens or other objects will release tobacco products in packages or otherwise. 
(Ord. 777 (part), 1993) 
(Ord. No. 923, 10-20-14) 
9.73.030 - Sale of tobacco products through vending machines prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to sell or dispense any tobacco product through the use of a vending machine, provided, however, tobacco products may be offered for sale or sold within the city from a vending machine in a licensed on sale or a licensed off sale alcoholic beverage establishment in any area of the premises where persons under twenty one years of age are prohibited and where the vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity, plain view and control of a responsible adult employee, so that all tobacco purchases will be readily observable by the employee. The vending machine shall not be located in the coatroom, restroom, unmonitored hallway, outer waiting area or similar unmonitered area; nor shall the vending machine be accessible to the public when the establishment is closed. 
B.  The effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be August 28, 1997. 
(Ord. 807 (part), 1997: Ord. 777 (part), 1993) 
9.73.031 - Behind the counter sale of tobacco products. 
A.  Except on licensed alcohol premises, as set forth in Section 9.73.030 of this chapter, no tobacco products may be stored or displayed in a retail outlet in an area or in a manner which allows for self-service access by customers. 
B.  The effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be August 28, 1997. 
(Ord. 807 (part), 1997) 
9.73.040 - Sale of tobacco products to minors prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sell or distribute tobacco products to a minor. 
(Ord. 777 (part), 1993) 
9.73.050 - Purchase and possession of tobacco products by minors prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for a minor to purchase, attempt to purchase, or to have in the possession of the minor any tobacco products. 
(Ord. 802, 1996: Ord. 777 (part), 1993) 
9.73.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating the provisions of Section 9.73.040 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of five hundred dollars. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate punishable offense. 
B.  Any person violating the provisions of Section 9.73.050 of this chapter shall upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of fifty dollars. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of Section 9.73.030 or 9.73.031 of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of a fine of up to five hundred ($500.00) dollars for each violation. 
D.  The effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall be August 28, 1997. 
(Ord. 807 (part), 1997; Ord. 777 (part), 1993) 
DIVISION VIII - WEAPONS 
(RESERVED) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.02 - DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

10.02.010 - Generally. 
    Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings and be defined as provided in the North Dakota Century Code in Title 39, and North Dakota Century Code S39-01-01 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this chapter. In this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires, the words defined in this chapter will have the meanings listed in Sections 10.02.020 through 10.02.730. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-1(part), 1976) 
10.02.020 - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
A.  "Class A authorized emergency vehicles" means: 
1.  Vehicles of a governmental-owned fire department; 
2.  Vehicles when operated by or under the control of a police officer having authority to enforce the provisions of this title or by a salaried employee of any municipal police department within the municipality or by any sheriff or deputy sheriff not to include special deputy sheriffs, or by the warden of the state penitentiary and his authorized agents; 
3.  Ambulances; 
4.  Vehicles operated by or under the control of the commissioner, and district deputy commissioner, and district deputy game warden of the North Dakota game and fish department; 
5.  Vehicles owned or leased by the United States government used for law enforcement purposes; 
6.  Vehicles designated for the use of the adjutant general and assistant adjutant general in cases of emergency; and 
7.  Vehicles operated by or under the control of the director, assistant director, and park superintendents of the North Dakota parks and recreation department. 
B.  "Class B authorized emergency vehicles" means: 
1.  Wreckers and such other emergency vehicles as are authorized by the local authorities. 
C.  "Class C authorized emergency vehicles" means those vehicles authorized by state and local disaster emergency services organizations and those vehicles used by volunteer firemen while performing their assigned disaster and emergency responsibilities. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 11(part), 1976) 
10.02.030 - Bicycle. 
    "Bicycle" means every device propelled solely by human power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is more than twenty inches (50.8 centimeters) in diameter. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-2, 1976) 
10.02.040 - Bus. 
    "Bus" means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation. Provided, every motor vehicle designed for carrying not more than fifteen persons and used for a ridesharing arrangement, as defined in Section 8-02-07 of the North Dakota Century Code, is not a "bus." 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-3, 1976) 
10.02.050 - Business district. 
    "Business district" means the territory contiguous to a highway when fifty percent or more of the frontage thereon for a distance of three hundred feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-4, 1976) 
10.02.060 - Commercial freighting. 
    "Commercial freighting" means the carriage of things, other than passengers, for hire, except that the term shall not include: 
A.  The carriage of things other than passengers within the limits of the same city; 
B.  Carriage by local dray lines of baggage or goods to or from a railroad station from or to places in the city or in the immediate vicinity thereof, in this state, and not to exceed two miles from the corporate or recognized limits of the city; or 
C.  Hauling done by farmers for their neighbors in transporting agricultural products to or from market. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-6, 1976) 
10.02.070 - Commercial passenger transportation. 
    "Commercial passenger transportation" means the carriage of passengers for hire, except that the term shall not include: 
A.  The carriage of passengers within the limits of a city; or 
B.  The carriage by local bus lines of passengers to or from a railroad station from or to places within any city or within two miles (3.22 kilometers) of the limits thereof; or 
C.  The carriage of passengers under a ridesharing arrangement, as defined in section 8-02-07 of the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-5, 1976) 
10.02.080 - Commissioner. 
    "Commissioner" means the commissioner of the state highway department, acting directly or through his authorized agents. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-7, 1976) 
10.02.090 - Controlled access highway. 
    "Controlled access highway" means every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from it except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-8, 1976) 
10.02.100 - Crosswalk. 
    "Crosswalk" means that part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway; or any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-9, 1976) 
10.02.110 - Dealer. 
    "Dealer" means every person, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging motor vehicles, or who advertises, or holds himself out to the public as engaged in the buying, selling or exchanging of motor vehicles, or who engages in the buying of motor vehicles for resale. Any person, partnership, corporation or association doing business in several cities or in several locations within a city shall be considered a separate dealer in each such location. 
(Ord. 599 1-10, 1976) 
10.02.120 - Department. 
    "Department" means the Motor Vehicle Department of this state. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-11, 1976) 
10.02.130 - Director. 
    "Director" means the director of the Division of Public Safety of this state. 
(Ord. 599 1-12, 1976) 
10.02.140 - Division. 
    "Division" means the Division of Public Safety of this state. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-13, 1976) 
10.02.150 - Driver. 
    "Driver" means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-14, 1976) 
10.02.160 - Essential parts. 
    "Essential parts" means all integral and body parts of a vehicle of a type required to be registered under this title, the removal, alteration or substitution of which would tend to conceal the identity of the vehicle or substantially alter its appearance, model, type or mode of operation. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-15, 1976) 
10.02.170 - Explosives. 
    "Explosives" means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion and which contains any oxidizing and combustive units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or by destroying life or limb. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-16, 1976) 
10.02.180 - Farm tractor. 
    "Farm tractor" includes every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm implement for drawing plows, moving machines and other implements of husbandry. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-17, 1976) 
10.02.185 - Farm trailer. 
    "Farm trailer" includes those trailers and semitrailers towed by a bona fide resident farmer hauling his own agricultural, horticultural, dairy, and other farm products if the gross weight, not including the towing vehicle, does not exceed twenty-four thousand pounds (10,886.22 kilograms). 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.190 - Flammable liquid. 
    "Flammable liquid" means any liquid which has a flash point of seventy degrees Fahrenheit, or less, as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed-cup test device. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-18, 1976) 
10.02.200 - Gross weight. 
    "Gross weight" means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-20, 1976) 
10.02.210 - Guest. 
    "Guest" means and includes a person who accepts a ride in any vehicle without giving compensation therefor. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-19, 1976) 
10.02.220 - Highway. 
    "Highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel and of every way privately maintained within a mobile home park, trailer park, or campground containing five or more lots for occupancy by mobile homes, travel trailers, or tents when any part thereof is open for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-21, 1976) 
10.02.230 - House car. 
    "House car" means a motor vehicle which has been reconstructed or manufactured for private use as a temporary or recreational dwelling and having at least four of the following permanently installed systems: 
A.  Cooking facilities; 
B.  Icebox or mechanical refrigerator; 
C.  Potable water supply including plumbing and a sink with faucet either self-contained or with connections for an external source, or both; 
D.  Self-contained toilet or a toilet connected to a plumbing system with connection for external water disposal, or both; 
E.  Heating or air conditioning system or both, separate from the vehicle engine or the vehicle engine electrical system; 
F.  A 110-115 volt alternating current electrical system separate from the vehicle engine electrical system either with its own power supply or with a connection for an external source, or both, or a liquefied petroleum system and supply. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-21.1, 1976) 
10.02.240 - Implement of husbandry. 
    "Implement of husbandry" means every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations or for lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry and in either case not subject to registration if used upon the highway. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-22, 1976) 
10.02.250 - Intersection. 
    "Intersection" means the area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a highway includes two roadways thirty feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event the intersecting highway also includes two roadways thirty feet or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-23, 1976) 
10.02.260 - Intoxicating liquor. 
    "Intoxicating liquor" means and includes any beverage containing alcohol. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-24, 1976) 
10.02.270 - Judgment. 
    "Judgment" means any judgment which has become final by expiration without appeal of the time within which an appeal might have been perfected, or by final affirmation on appeal, rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction of any state of the United States, upon a claim for relief arising out of ownership, maintenance or use of any motor vehicle, for damages, including damages for care and loss of services, because of bodily injury to or death of any person, or for damages because of injury to or destruction of property, including the loss of use thereof, or upon a claim for relief on an agreement of settlement for such damages. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-25, 1976) 
10.02.275 - Lienholder. 
    "Lienholder" means a person holding a security interest in a vehicle. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.280 - Legal owner. 
    "Legal owner" means a person who holds the legal title to a vehicle. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-26, 1976) 
10.02.290 - Local authorities. 
    "Local authorities" includes every county, municipal and other local board or body having authority to adopt local police regulations under the constitution and laws of this state. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-27, 1976) 
10.02.300 - Mail. 
    "Mail" means to deposit mail properly addressed and with postage prepaid with the United States postal service. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-28, 1976) 
10.02.305 - Manifest injustice. 
    "Manifest injustice" means a specific finding by the court that the imposition of sentence is unreasonably harsh or shocking to the conscience of a reasonable person, with due consideration of the totality of circumstances. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.310 - Manufacturer. 
    "Manufacturer" means any person who manufactures, assembles, or imports and sells new motor vehicles to new motor vehicle dealers for resale in the state; but such term shall not include a person who assembles or specifically builds interior equipment on a completed vehicle supplied by another manufacturer, distributor, or supplier. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-29, 1976) 
10.02.320 - Metal tires. 
    "Metal tires" includes all tires the surface of which in contact with the highway is wholly or partly of metal or other hard, nonresilient material, except that this provision shall not apply to pneumatic tires. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-30, 1976) 
10.02.325 - Modular unit. 
    "Modular unit" includes every factory-fabricated transportable building unit designed to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into a modular structure to be used for residential, commercial, educational, or industrial purposes. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.330 - Motorcycle. 
    "Motorcycle" means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding implements of husbandry. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-32a, 1976) 
10.02.340 - Motor vehicle. 
    "Motor vehicle" includes every vehicle which is self-propelled, every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, and, for purposes of motor vehicle registration, title registration, and operator's licenses, motorized bicycles. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-32, 1976) 
10.02.345 - Motorized bicycle. 
    "Motorized bicycle" means a vehicle equipped with two or three wheels, foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion or footrests for use by the operator, a power source providing up to a maximum of two brake horsepower having a maximum piston or rotor displacement of 3.05 cubic inches (49.98 milliliters) if a combustion engine is used, which will propel the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed thirty miles (48.28 kilometers) per hour on a level road surface, and a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged, and the vehicle may not have a width greater than thirty-two inches (81.28 centimeters). 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.350 - Nonresident. 
    "Nonresident" means any person who is not a resident of this state. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-33, 1976) 
10.02.360 - Nonresident's operating privilege. 
    "Nonresident's operating privilege" means the privilege conferred upon a nonresident by the laws of this state pertaining to the operation by such person of a motor vehicle, or the use of a vehicle owned by such person in this state. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-34, 1976) 
10.02.370 - Official traffic-control devices. 
    "Official traffic-control devices" means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-35, 1976) 
10.02.380 - Operator. 
    "Operator" means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-36, 1976) 
10.02.390 - Owner. 
    "Owner" means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-37, 1976) 
10.02.400 - Park. 
    "Park," when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-39, 1976) 
10.02.405 - Passenger motor vehicle. 
    "Passenger motor vehicle" means every motor vehicle designed principally for the transportation of persons and includes vehicles which utilize a truck chassis, but have a seating capacity for four or more passengers. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.410 - Pedestrian. 
    "Pedestrian" means any person afoot. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-38, 1976) 
10.02.420 - Person. 
    "Person" includes every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-40, 1976) 
10.02.430 - Pneumatic tires. 
    "Pneumatic tires" includes all tires inflated with compressed air. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-41, 1976) 
10.02.440 - Pole trailer. 
    "Pole trailer" means every vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-42, 1976) 
10.02.450 - Police officer. 
    "Police officer" means every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-43, 1976) 
10.02.460 - Private road or driveway. 
    "Private road or driveway" means every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-44, 1976) 
10.02.470 - Proof of financial responsibility. 
    "Proof of financial responsibility" means proof of ability to respond in damages for liability, on account of accidents occurring subsequent to the effective date of said proof, arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of a motor vehicle, in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars because of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident and, subject to said limit for one person, in the amount of fifty thousand dollars because of bodily injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident, and in the amount of ten thousand dollars because of injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-45, 1976) 
10.02.480 - Railroad. 
    "Railroad" means a carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-46, 1976) 
10.02.490 - Railroad sign or signal. 
    "Railroad sign or signal" means any sign, signal or device erected by authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-47, 1976) 
10.02.500 - Reconstructed vehicle. 
    "Reconstructed vehicle" means every vehicle of a type required to be registered under this title, materially altered from its original construction by the removal, addition or substitution of essential parts, new or used. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-48, 1976) 
10.02.510 - Residence district. 
    "Residence district" means territory contiguous to a highway not comprising a business district, when the frontage on such highway for a distance of three hundred feet or more is occupied mainly by dwellings, or by dwellings and buildings in use for business. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-49, 1976) 
10.02.520 - Right-of-way. 
    "Right-of-way" means the privilege of the immediate use of a roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-50, 1976) 
10.02.530 - Road tractor. 
    "Road tractor" means every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-51, 1976) 
10.02.540 - Roadway. 
    "Roadway" means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term roadway as used in this title shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-52, 1976) 
10.02.545 - Saddle mount. 
    "Saddle mount" means placing the front wheels of the drawn vehicle upon the bed of the drawing vehicle. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.550 - Safety zone. 
    "Safety zone" means the area or space officially set aside within a highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is so plainly marked or indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set aside as a safety zone. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-53, 1976) 
10.02.555 - Salvage certificate of title. 
    "Salvage certificate of title" means a document issued by the department for purposes of proof of ownership of a salvage or destroyed vehicle and not acceptable for motor vehicle registration purposes. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.560 - School bus. 
    "School bus" means any motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school or to and from school-related activities, or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school or to and from school-related activities. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-54, 1976) 
10.02.570 - Semitrailer. 
    "Semitrailer" includes every vehicle of the trailer type so designed and used in conjunction with a truck or truck tractor that some part of its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by a truck or truck tractor, except that it shall not include a "house-trailer" or "mobile home" as defined in Section 10.02.690. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 1-55, 1976) 
10.02.580 - Sidewalk. 
    "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of pedestrians. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-56, 1976) 
10.02.590 - Solid tire. 
    "Solid tire" includes every tire made of rubber or other resilient material other than a pneumatic tire. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-57, 1976) 
10.02.600 - Specially constructed vehicle. 
    "Specially constructed vehicle" means any vehicle under a distinctive name, make, model or type by a generally recognized manufacturer of vehicles and not materially altered from its original construction. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-58, 1976) 
10.02.610 - Stand or standing. 
    "Stand" or "standing" means the halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-59, 1976) 
10.02.620 - State. 
    "State" means a state, territory or possession of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a province of the Dominion of Canada. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-60, 1976) 
10.02.630 - Stop or stopping. 
    "Stop," when required, means complete cessation from movement. "Stop" or "stopping," when prohibited, means any halting, even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
(Ord. 599 §§ 1-61, 1-62, 1976) 
10.02.640 - Street. 
    "Street" means the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-63, 1976) 
10.02.645 - Superintendent. 
    "Superintendent" means the superintendent of the North Dakota state highway patrol, acting directly or through his authorized employees. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.650 - Through highway. 
    "Through highway" means every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway and in obedience to either a stop sign or yield sign, when such signs are erected by law. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-64, 1976) 
10.02.660 - Trackless trolley coach. 
    "Trackless trolley coach" means every motor vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-65, 1976) 
10.02.670 - Traffic. 
    "Traffic" means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for the purpose of travel. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-66, 1976) 
10.02.680 - Traffic-control signal. 
    "Traffic-control signal" means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-67, 1976) 
10.02.690 - Trailer. 
    "Trailer" includes every vehicle without motive power designed to carry property or passengers wholly on its own structure and to be drawn by a motor vehicle, except that it shall not include a "house trailer" or "mobile home," which terms mean a vehicle as defined in this section, which is designed and intended for use as living or sleeping quarters for people and which is not used for commercial hauling of passengers. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-68, 1976) 
10.02.700 - Truck. 
    "Truck" includes every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for transportation of property. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-69, 1976) 
10.02.710 - Truck tractor. 
    "Truck tractor" includes every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-70, 1976) 
10.02.720 - Urban district. 
    "Urban district" means the territory contiguous to and including any street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-71, 1976) 
10.02.725 - Used vehicle. 
    "Used vehicle" means a motor vehicle which has been sold, bargained, exchanged, given away, or the title to which has been transferred to another, by the person who first acquired it from the manufacturer or importer, dealer, or agent of the manufacturer or importer. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.02.730 - Vehicle. 
    "Vehicle" includes every device in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. 599 § 1-72, 1976) 
Chapter 10.04 - ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Division established. 
    There is established in the police department of this city a traffic division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police. 
(Ord. 599 § 2-1, 1976) 
10.04.020 - Duties. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the traffic division with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the city traffic engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and to carry out those duties especially imposed upon the division by this title and the traffic ordinances of the city. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Ord. 599 §§ 2-2, 2-4, 1976) 
10.04.030 - Records of violations. 
A.  The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. The record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. The record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
B.  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of the forms. 
C.  All such records and reports shall be public records. 
(Ord. 599 § 2-3, 1976) 
10.04.040 - Studies of accidents. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the city traffic engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Ord. 599 § 2-5, 1976) 
10.04.050 - Filing of reports. 
    The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. 599 § 2-6, 1976) 
10.04.060 - Maintenance of violations file. 
A.  The police department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
B.  The division shall study the cases of all such drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and report such information to the highway department or other appropriate state agencies. 
C.  The records shall accumulate during at least a five- year period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five-year period. 
(Ord. 599 § 2-7, 1976) 
10.04.070 - Annual report to be submitted to mayor. 
    The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor. The report shall contain information on traffic matters in this city as follows: 
A.  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
B.  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
C.  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Ord. 599 § 2-8, 1976) 
10.04.080 - Identifying insignia for funeral processions. 
    The traffic division shall designate a type of pennant or other identifying insignia to be displayed upon, or other method to be employed to identify, the vehicles in funeral processions. 
(Ord. 599 § 2-9, 1976) 
Chapter 10.06 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 

10.06.010 - Authority to install and maintain. 
    The city engineer or any person authorized by the governing body shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of the ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-1, 1976) 
10.06.020 - Specifications. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the specifications approved by the state highway commissioner pursuant to North Dakota Century Code 39-13-06. All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter, shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-2, 1976) 
10.06.030 - Legend. 
    The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-05 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this chapter. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution" or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and the terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
A.  Green alone or "Go": 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn, but vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the signal is exhibited; and 
2.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
B.  Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or" Go" signal: 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and the vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited; and 
2.  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right of way to all vehicles. 
C.  Red alone or "Stop": 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown except as provided in subdivision 2 of this subsection; 
2.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn after stopping as required by subdivision 1 of this subsection, unless a sign is in place prohibiting the turn. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and 
3.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in Section 10.06.050, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter a roadway. 
D.  Red with green arrow: 
1.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow but shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; 
2.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
E.  Lights Outside Intersections. In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this chapter shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-3, 1976) 
10.06.040 - Flashing signals. 
    The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-07 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
A.  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow light is used in a traffic signal or with a traffic sign, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
1.  Flashing Red (Stop Signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers or vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
2.  Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
B.  This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules as set forth in Section 10.14.050. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-4, 1976) 
10.06.050 - Pedestrian control signals. 
    The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-06 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
A.  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right of way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
B.  Don't Walk. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the Don't Walk signal is showing. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-5, 1976) 
10.06.060 - Designation of walks, lanes and safety zones. 
    The city engineer or any person shall when authorized by the governing body: 
A.  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as directed by the governing body; 
B.  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians as determined by the governing body; 
C.  Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where regular alignment of traffic is necessary. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep the vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or performing other lawful traffic movements. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-6, 1976) 
10.06.070 - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
    The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-04 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
A.  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this title. 
B.  No provision of this chapter for which traffic- control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a state statute does not state that devices are required, such statute shall be effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
C.  Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in positions approximately conforming to the requirements of this title, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
D.  Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this title, unless the contrary is established by competent evidence. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-7, 1976) 
10.06.080 - Unauthorized signs prohibited. 
    No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is in imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-8, 1976) 
10.06.090 - Alteration or removal of signs prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-07.3 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Ord. 599 § 4-9, 1976) 
Chapter 10.08 - SPEED REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Basic rule. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-09-01 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Any person who drives a vehicle upon a highway or private or public property open to the public for the operation of motor vehicles without heed to the requirements or restrictions of this chapter shall have committed careless driving, and shall be assessed a fee of thirty dollars. 
(Ord. 599 § 5-1, 1976) 
10.08.020 - Restrictions. 
A.  The operator of any vehicle shall drive it at a careful and prudent speed so as not to endanger the person or property of another. In no event shall the operator drive such vehicle at a speed exceeding the following: 
1.  Twenty miles per hour when passing a school while the children are going to or leaving the school during the opening and closing hours; 
2.  Twenty miles per hour when approaching within fifty feet and in traversing an intersection where the operator's view is so obstructed that he is unable to see a vehicle approaching within one hundred feet of the intersection; 
3.  Twenty-five miles per hour at all other places within the city which are not designated for a higher maximum speed; 
4.  Thirty miles per hour where posted for such an increased speed limit; 
5.  Forty miles per hour when proceeding upon U.S. Highway 2 through the city. 
6.  The speed posted in a construction zone, identified as such by construction zone signage. 
B.  These restrictions shall not apply to any vehicle used by or under the direction of the police department or the fire department or ambulances when traveling in emergencies. 
(Ord. 654 § 7, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 922, 7-7-14) 
10.08.030 - City may alter speed limit. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-09-03 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever the city, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, determines that the maximum speed permitted under this title is greater or less than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon a highway or part of a highway, the city may determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit thereon which: 
1.  Decreases the limit at intersections; 
2.  Increases the limit within an urban district but not to more than fifty-five miles per hour; or 
3.  Decreases the limit outside an urban district, but not to less than thirty-five miles per hour. 
C.  The city shall determine by an engineering and traffic investigation the proper maximum speed for arterial streets and shall declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit thereon which may be greater or less than the minimum speed permitted under this chapter for an urban district. 
D.  Any altered limit established as authorized in subsections B and C of this section, shall be effective at all times or during hours of darkness or at other times as may be determined when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon such street or highway. 
E.  Any alteration of maximum limits on state highways or extensions thereof in the municipality shall not be effective until the alteration has been approved by the state highway commissioner. 
F.  Not more than six such alterations as authorized in subsections B and C of this section shall be made per mile along a street or highway, except in the case of reduced limits at intersections, and the difference between adjacent limits shall not be more than ten miles per hour. 
G.  Subject to subsection E of this section, the following speed limits within the city are established, and it is prima facie unlawful for anyone to exceed them:_______. 
(Ord. 599 § 5-3, 1976) 
10.08.040 - Exemption of Class A vehicles-Liability of reckless driver. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-09-06 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The speed limitations provided for in this chapter shall not apply to Class A authorized emergency vehicles. The exemptions provided for in this section shall not protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Ord. 599 § 5-4, 1976) 
10.08.050 - Minimum speed limits fixed by city. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-09-09 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
C.  Whenever the State Highway Commissioner and the Superintendent of the Highway Patrol, acting jointly, or the city, determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any highway or part of a highway impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the commissioner and superintendent of the city may determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law, and that limit shall be effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable signs. 
(Ord. 599 § 5-5, 1976) 
10.08.060 - Timing of traffic signals. 
    The city traffic engineer or authorized person may regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 599 § 5-6, 1976) 
10.08.070 - Exhibition driving and drag racing prohibi ted-Penalty. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-03.1 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall engage in exhibition driving of any vehicle on a highway, street, alley, sidewalk or any public or private parking lot or area, nor shall any person engage in a race, a speed competition, drag race or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance or exhibition of speed or acceleration. Any person who violates this section shall be assessed a fee of forty dollars. 
C.  As used in this section: 
1.  "Drag race" means the operation of two or more vehicles from a point side-by-side by accelerating rapidly in a competitive attempt to cause one vehicle to outdistance the other; or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course from the same point to the same point for the purpose of comparing the relative speed or powers of acceleration of the vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or time limit. 
2.  "Exhibition driving" means driving a vehicle in a manner which disturbs the peace by creating or causing unnecessary engine noise, tire squeal, skid or slide upon acceleration or braking; or driving and executing or attempting one or a series of unnecessarily abrupt turns. 
3.  "Race" means the use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain, outdistance or to arrive at a given distance ahead of another vehicle or vehicles; or the use of one or more vehicles to wilfully prevent another vehicle from passing the racing vehicle or vehicles, or to test the physical stamina or endurance of the persons driving the vehicles over a long distance driving route. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting drag racing, exhibition driving or similar events when carried out in an organized manner on a track or other privately owned area specifically set aside and used solely for such purposes by drivers of motor vehicles, including snowmobiles. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 5-7, 1976) 
10.08.080 - Checking devices to be used as evidence. 
    The speed of any motor vehicle may be checked by the use of radio microwave or other electrical device. The results of such checks shall be accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of the vehicle by the police magistrate or in any legal proceeding when the speed of the vehicle is an issue. 
(Ord. 654 § 8, 1983) 
Chapter 10.10 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 

10.10.010 - Authority to place traffic-control devices. 
    The city traffic engineer or other authorized person may place official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles traveling at such intersections, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-1, 1976) 
10.10.020 - Authority to place restricted turn signs. 
    The city traffic engineer or other authorized person may determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event it shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-2, 1976) 
10.10.030 - Obedience to signs mandatory. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-3, 1976) 
10.10.040 - Method of turning and authority of city to alter requirements. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-35 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
1.  Right Turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
2.  Left Turns on Two-Way Roadways. At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and by passing to the right of the centerline where it enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the centerline of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the intersection. 
3.  Left Turns on Other than Two-Way Roadways. At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the vehicle and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered; and 
4.  The city may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by such markers, buttons or signs. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-4, 1976) 
10.10.050 - Left-hand turns. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-23 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-5, 1976) 
10.10.060 - Certain turns prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-36 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred feet. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-6, 1976) 
10.10.070 - Requirements for signaling. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-38 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in proper position upon the roadway as required in Section 10.10.040, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in Section 10.10.090 in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement. 
C.  A signal of intention to turn right or left when required shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
D.  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in Section 10.10.090 to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-7, 1976) 
10.10.080 - Lamp or hand and arm signals required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-39 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any stop or turn signal when required in this chapter shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in Section 10.10.020. 
C.  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signals shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of the motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen feet. The latter method applies to any single vehicle and to any combination of vehicles. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-8, 1976) 
10.10.090 - Methods of signalling. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-40 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  All signals required in this chapter, given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
1.  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally; 
2.  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward; 
3.  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Ord. 599 § 6-9, 1976) 
Chapter 10.12 - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Determination. 
    The city traffic engineer or authorized person may determine and designate one-way streets or alleys and shall place and maintain official traffic control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective unless such devices are in place. 
(Ord. 599 § 7-1, 1976) 
10.12.020 - Designation authorized. 
    The city traffic engineer or authorized person may determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day, and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The city traffic engineer or authorized person may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 7-2, 1976) 
10.12.030 - Designated. 
    The alleys running east and west through Blocks twenty-three, twenty-four, thirty-three and thirty-four are designated as one-way alleys, and all traffic through those blocks shall be in the following directions: 
A.  Along the alleys in Block twenty-three and twenty- four, it is from west to east; and 
B.  Along the alleys in Block thirty-three and thirty- four, it is from east to west. 
(Ord. 654 § 4, 1983) 
10.12.040 - Signs. 
    The city shall provide suitable signs at the entrances and exits of one-way alleys showing the designation thereof and the direction of traffic through the entrances and exits. 
(Ord. 654 § 5, 1983) 
10.12.050 - Entering and leaving alleys. 
    Entrance into all alleys shall be by a right turn from the right lane of traffic, and all traffic coming from an alley into a street or avenue shall make a right turn into the right lane of traffic. 
(Ord. 654 § 6, 1983) 
Chapter 10.14 - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 
Sections: 

10.14.010 - Authority to designate. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-07-03 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The commissioner, with reference to state highways, and the city, with reference to highways under its jurisdiction, may, by proclamation, designate as through highways, any highway, street or part thereof, and erect stop signs or yield signs at specified entrances thereto, or may designate any intersection as a stop intersection or as a yield intersection and erect stop signs or yield signs at one or more entrances to the intersection. 
(Ord. 599 § 8-1(a), 1976) 
10.14.020 - Designated. 
    The following streets and parts of streets are declared to be through streets for the purposes of this chapter:___________. 
(Ord. 599 § 8-1(b), 1976) 
10.14.030 - Regulations. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-44 and 39-10-24 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Preferential right of way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in Section 10.14.010. 
C.  Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the nearest line of the intersecting roadway. 
D.  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
E.  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 §§ 8-2, 8-3, 1976) 
10.14.040 - Before entering street. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-45 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, private road or building within a business or residence district shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon. 
(Ord. 599 § 8-4, 1976) 
10.14.050 - Regulations on approaching railroad crossings. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century 39-10-41 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of the vehicle shall stop within fifty feet but not less than fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
1.  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
2.  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
3.  A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand three hundred and twenty feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and the railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; or 
4.  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing. 
B.  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. No person shall drive any vehicle past any human flagman at a railroad crossing until the flagman signals that the way is clear to proceed. 
(Ord. 599 § 8-5, 1976) 
10.14.060 - Authority to designate dangerous crossings. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-42 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The State Highway Department and the city, with respect to highways under their respective jurisdiction, are authorized to designate particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When such stop signs are erected, the driver of any vehicle shall stop within fifty feet but not less than fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care. 
(Ord. 599 § 8-6, 1976) 
10.14.070 - Certain vehicles to stop at railroad grade crossings. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-43 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a bus carrying passengers, or of any school bus carrying any school child, or of any vehicle carrying any chlorine, empty or loaded cargo tank vehicles used to transport dangerous articles or any liquid having a flashpoint below two hundred degrees Fahrenheit, cargo tank vehicles transporting a commodity having a temperature above its flashpoint at the time of loading, certain cargo tank vehicles transporting commodities under special permits issued by the hazardous materials regulations board, and every motor vehicle which must have the following placards: "explosives," "poison," "flammable oxidizers," "compressed gas," "corrosives," "flammable gas," "radioactive" or "dangerous," before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet but not less than fifteen feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. After stopping as required in this subsection and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so the driver of any said vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for manually changing gears while traversing the crossing and the driver shall not manually shift gears while crossing track or tracks. 
(Ord. 599 § 8-7, 1976) 
Chapter 10.16 - MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Obstructing vehicular and pedestrian passage prohibited. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-1, 1976) 
10.16.020 - Obstructing funeral procession prohibited. 
    No driver of a vehicle (or motorman of a streetcar) shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in Section 10.16.030. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-2, 1976) 
10.16.030 - Identification of funeral procession. 
    A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by headlights burning in daylight hours on all vehicles in the procession, or by such other methods as may be determined and designated by the chief of police. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-4, 1976) 
10.16.040 - Procession to be driven on right-hand edge of road. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practicable and safe. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-3, 1976) 
10.16.050 - Permit required for large processions-Military exempt. 
    No funeral, procession or parade containing two hundred or more persons or fifty or more vehicles except the armed forces of the United States, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police and such other regulations as are set forth in this chapter which may apply. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-5, 1976) 
10.16.060 - Driving on right-hand side of road. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-08 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
1.  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
2.  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right of way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
3.  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
4.  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic. 
C.  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn in an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-6, 1976) 
10.16.070 - Passing vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-09 and 39-10-11 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least one- half of the main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. 
C.  The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and special rules stated in this chapter: 
1.  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaking vehicle. 
2.  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Ord. 599 §§ 9-7, 9-8, 1976) 
10.16.080 - When passing and driving on left is prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10- 13 and 39-10-14 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within two hundred feet of any approaching vehicle. 
C.  No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
1.  When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction; 
2.  When approaching within one hundred feet of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing; or 
3.  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
D.  The limitations in subsection C of this section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor under the conditions described in Section 10.16.060, nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Ord. 599 §§ 9-10, 9-11, 1976) 
10.16.090 - Passing on right permitted when. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-12 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
1.  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; or 
2.  Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle. 
C.  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-9, 1976) 
10.16.100 - Authority to designate no-passing zone. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-15 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The State Highway Commissioner and local authorities are authorized to determine those portions of any highway under their respective jurisdiction where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones and when such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
C.  Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set forth in subsection B of this section, no driver shall at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within such no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length. 
D.  This section does not apply under the conditions described in Section 10.16.060 nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-12, 1976) 
10.16.110 - Driving on laned roadways. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-17 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent with these shall apply: 
1.  A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
2.  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn or where the center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices. 
3.  Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
4.  Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-13, 1976) 
10.16.120 - Distance between vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-18 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
C.  The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residence district and which is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this shall not prevent a truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
D.  Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other vehicles shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy the space without danger. This provision shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-14, 1976) 
10.16.130 - Driving across highway barriers prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-19 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven upon the right-hand roadway, unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing space, barrier or section, except through an opening in the physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection as established by public authority, unless the crossing is specifically prohibited and the prohibition is indicated by appropriate traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-15, 1976) 
10.16.140 - Restrictions on controlled-access roadways. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-20 and 39-10-21 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
C.  The State Highway Commissioner may by order, and the city may by ordinance, with respect to any controlled- access roadway under their respective jurisdictions, prohibit the use of any such roadway by pedestrians, bicycles or other nonmotorized traffic or by any person operating a motor-driven cycle. 
D.  The State Highway Commissioner or the city, as the case may be, shall erect and maintain official signs on the controlled-access roadway on which such regulations are applicable and when so erected no person shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. 
(Ord. 599 §§ 9-16, 9-17, 1976) 
10.16.145 - Closing road because of hazardous condi tions-Posting of official traffic control devices-Entering closed road prohibited. 
A.  The provision of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-21.1 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The highway patrol or local law enforcement authorities having jurisdiction over a road may close a road temporarily due to hazardous conditions if that closing is necessary for the protection and safety of the public. If such a closing is made, the authority ordering the closing shall make every reasonable attempt to notify the public and, conditions permitting, post appropriate official traffic control devices to advise motorists of the closing. Each operator of a motor vehicle shall obey the traffic control device. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.16.150 - Entering roadway. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-25 and 39-10-22 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a roadway from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed. 
C.  When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right. 
D.  The right of way rule declared in subsection C of this section is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 599 §§ 9-18, 9-19, 1976) 
10.16.160 - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-46 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus stopped on the highway shall stop the vehicle before reaching such school bus when there is in operation on said school bus the flashing red lights specified in North Dakota Century Code 39-21-18, and said driver shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion or he is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the flashing red lights are no longer actuated. 
C.  Every school bus shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight inches (20.32 centimeters) in height. When a school bus is being operated upon a highway for purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from school or for a school sanctioned activity, all markings thereon indicating "SCHOOL BUS" shall be covered or concealed. 
D.  The operator of a school bus equipped with amber caution lights may activate those lights at a distance of not less than three hundred feet (91.44 meters) nor more than five hundred feet (152.4 meters) from the point where schoolchildren are to be received or discharged from the bus. 
E.  Every school bus shall be equipped with red visual signals meeting the requirements of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-18, which may be actuated by the driver of said school bus whenever, but only whenever, such vehicle is stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging schoolchildren. A school bus driver shall not actuate said special visual signals: 
1.  On city streets on which the receiving or discharging of schoolchildren is prohibited by ordinance; 
2.  At intersections or other places where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers; or 
3.  In designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway. 
F.  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 9-20, 1976) 
10.16.165 - Permitting use of vehicle to violate Section 10.16.160 prohibited-Penalty-Presumption of permission- Defense-Dual prosecution prohibited. 
    The registered owner of a motor vehicle may not permit that motor vehicle to be operated in violation of Section 10.16.160. A person violating this provision is subject to civil penalty of twenty dollars. If a motor vehicle is seen violating Section 10.16.160, it is a disputable presumption that the registered owner of the motor vehicle permitted that violation. It is a defense to a charge of violating this section that the registered owner of the vehicle was not operating the vehicle, if that registered owner identifies the person authorized by that owner to operate the motor vehicle at the time of the violation of Section 10.16.160, of if that motor vehicle has been taken without the registered owner's permission. A person may not be charged both with violating this section and with violating Section 10.16.160. Violation of this section is not a lesser included offense of violation of Section 10.16.160. 
(Ord. 715, 1988) 
10.16.170 - Special lighting and warning equipment on school buses required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-27 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The superintendent of public instruction in cooperation with the registrar is authorized to adopt standards and specifications applicable to lighting equipment on and special warning devices to be carried by school buses and other vehicles transporting children to school for compensation, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, but supplemental thereto. Such standards and specifications shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform to the specifications then current as approved by the Society of Automotive Engineers. 
C.  It is unlawful to operate any flashing warning signal light on any school bus unless said school bus is stopped or stopping on a highway or city street for the purpose of permitting schoolchildren to board or alight from the school bus. 
(Ord. 714, 1988; Ord. 599 § 9-40, 1976) 
10.16.180 - Authority to create school patrol. 
    The police commissioner, in cooperation with the superintendent of any school, may establish a school patrol for the purpose of promoting safety in the vicinity of the school. The persons so designated as a school patrol shall be furnished with badges or signs so designating them and they are authorized to regulate traffic of all kinds upon the streets of the city in the vicinity of the school. The school patrol shall serve without compensation and shall at all times be subject to the orders and direction of the regular police officers of the city. Any persons disobeying the orders of the school patrol shall be guilty of violating this title. 
(Ord. 654 § 10, 1983) 
10.16.190 - Leaving vehicle unattended. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-51 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, effectively setting the brake thereon, removing the ignition keys, and when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-21, 1976) 
10.16.200 - Limitations on backing. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-52 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle shall not back it unless such movements can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
C.  The driver of a vehicle shall not back it upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway. 
D.  This section specifically prohibits driving into an alley or private drive, backing out and then proceeding in the opposite direction to avoid going around the block. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-22, 1976) 
10.16.210 - Driver's view to be unobstructed. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-54 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
C.  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-23, 1976) 
10.16.220 - Opening and closing vehicle doors. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-54.1 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-24, 1976) 
10.16.230 - Coasting prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-56 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade shall not coast with the gears or transmission of the vehicle in neutral. 
C.  The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a downgrade shall not coast with the clutch disengaged. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-25, 1976) 
10.16.240 - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-57 and all subsequent amendments and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred feet or stop the vehicle within five hundred feet of any fire apparatus stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-26, 1976) 
10.16.250 - Crossing fire hose prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-58 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-27, 1976) 
10.16.260 - Throwing injurious material on highways pro hibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-59 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle, or throw or deposit rubbish of any kind upon the highway. 
C.  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove it or cause it to be removed. 
D.  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from such vehicle. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-28, 1976) 
10.16.270 - Driving through safety zone prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-64 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-29, 1976) 
10.16.280 - Moving heavy equipment at railroad grade crossings. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-67 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam shovel, derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating speed of ten or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of less than one-half inch per foot of the distance between any two adjacent axles or in any event of less than nine inches, measured above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with this section. 
C.  Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any such vehicle or equipment shall first stop it not less than fifteen feet nor more than fifty feet from the nearest rail of the railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall not proceed until the crossing can be made safely. 
D.  No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic signal or crossing gates or a flagman or otherwise of the immediate approach of a railroad train or car. If a flagman is provided by the railroad, movement over the crossing shall be under his direction. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-30, 1976) 
10.16.290 - Altering odometer prohibited. 
    A person may not wilfully, as defined in North Dakota Century Code 12.1-02-02, alter a motor vehicle odometer or other mileage recorder, hour meter on a tachometer or other hour recorder for the purpose of deceiving another. A person should not be charged under this section if the person has previously been convicted of violating this section or North Dakota Century Code 39-21-51, as amended, or if the person has violated this section with respect to more than one vehicle. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 9-31, 1976) 
10.16.300 - Hanging on vehicle prohibited. 
    No person shall ride upon any automobile or other vehicle without the consent of the driver; and no person shall ride or attempt to ride by hanging to the outside of any such vehicle. No person shall hitch by sled, toboggan or ski behind any such vehicle or otherwise attempt to ride behind it by attaching ropes or lines thereto, except towing a disabled vehicle or conveying a trailer. 
(Ord. 654 § 2, 1983) 
10.16.310 - Driving on new pavement. 
    No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement in any public street, across or around which pavement there is a barrier, or at, over or near which there is a person or sign warning persons not to drive over the pavement or a sign stating that the street is closed. 
(Ord. 654 § 3, 1983) 
10.16.320 - Unnecessary noise prohibited. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle unless it is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and excessive or annoying smoke and it is unlawful to use any muffler cut-out upon any street of the city. No person shall drive through the city with the horn blowing constantly or intermittently for the purpose of creating noise either for advertising or celebration purposes. 
(Ord. 654 § 11, 1983) 
10.16.330 - Tampering with unattended vehicle prohibited. 
    Any person who, without consent of the owner or the person in charge of a vehicle, climbs into or upon the vehicle with the intent to commit any crime, malicious mischief or injury thereto, or who, while the vehicle is at rest or unattended, attempts to manipulate any of the levers, starting devices or starting cranks, brakes or other mechanical parts thereof, or sets the vehicle in motion, is guilty of a violation of this title, except that this section shall not apply when any such act is done in an emergency in furtherance of public safety or convenience, or by or under the direction of a police officer for the regulation of traffic or the performance of any official duty. 
(Ord. 654 § 12, 1983) 
10.16.340 - Injuring vehicle declared violation. 
    Any person who, individually or in association with any one or more persons, wilfully breaks, injures, tampers with or removes any part or parts of any vehicle for the purpose of injuring, defacing or destroying the vehicle or temporarily or permanently preventing its useful operation, or for any other purpose, against the will of the owner of the vehicle, or who in any other manner wilfully or maliciously interferes with or prevents the running or operation of the vehicle, is guilty of a violation of this title. 
(Ord. 654 § 13, 1983) 
10.16.350 - Soliciting rides prohibited. 
    No person shall stand on a street in the city for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any private vehicle. 
(Ord. 654 § 14, 1983) 
10.16.360 - Possession or consumption of alcohol prohi bited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39- 08-18 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages, as defined in North Dakota Century Code 5-01-01, in or on any motor vehicle when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city. No person shall have in his possession on his person while in or on a private motor vehicle when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city, any bottle or receptacle containing such alcoholic beverages which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private motor vehicle or the driver, if the owner be not then present in or on the motor vehicle, to keep or allow to be kept in a motor vehicle when such vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city, any bottle or receptacle containing such alcoholic beverages which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed except when such bottle or receptacle shall be kept in the trunk of the motor vehicle when such vehicle is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and passengers. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in a house car, as defined by Section 10.02.230 of this code, if the consumption or possession occurs in the area of the house car used as sleeping or living quarters and that area is separated from the driving compartment by a solid partition, door, curtain, or some similar means of separation; however, consumption is not authorized while the house car is in motion. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be assessed a fee of fifty dollars; however, the licensing authority shall not record the violation against the driving record of such person unless he was the driver of the automobile at the time that the violation occurred. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 9-32, 1976) 
10.16.370 - Permitting unauthorized minors to drive prohibited. 
    No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age of eighteen years to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway when the minor is not authorized under the laws of this state. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-33, 1976) 
10.16.380 - Permitting unauthorized person to drive prohi bited. 
    No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who is not authorized under the laws of this state. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-34, 1976) 
10.16.390 - Operator licenses. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06-14 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The commissioner shall, upon payment of an eight- dollar fee, issue to every applicant qualifying therefor an operator's license as applied for in the form prescribed by the commissioner. The license shall bear a distinguishing number assigned to the licensee, a color photograph of the licensee, the full name, date of birth, residence address, and a brief description of the licensee, and either a facsimile of the signature of the licensee or a space upon which the licensee shall write his usual signature. If requested on the license application, the license issued by the commissioner shall identify the licensee as a donor under the provisions of North Dakota Century Code 23-06.1. No license shall be valid until it has been so signed by the licensee. For purposes of verification, an officer may require the licensee to write his signature in the presence of such officer. The commissioner shall have the authority to promulgate rules and regulations, pursuant to North Dakota Century Code Chapter 28-32, relating to the manner in which photographs are to be obtained and placed on operator's licenses. 
C.  All applicants holding a valid North Dakota operator's license making application for renewal, shall be issued a Class 3 license without being subjected to an examination as herein provided. 
D.  All applicants, except those holding a valid North Dakota operator's license who will be issued a Class 3 license, applying for issuance of operator licenses shall be issued a classified license after having been required to submit to an examination in the type of motor vehicle or combination of vehicles for which license is desired and which license shall authorize the holder to drive the vehicles set forth in a class as follows: 
1.  Class 1. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles except vehicles under Class 4; 
2.  Class 2. Any vehicle or combination of vehicles except: 
a.  Vehicles towing a trailer when the trailer being towed has a gross weight in excess of six thousand pounds (2721.55 kilograms), and 
b.  Vehicles under Class 4; 
3.  Class 3. Any two-axle or tandem-axle vehicle except: 
a.  A truck tractor combination as defined in Section 10.02.710 of this title, 
b.  A bus more than eighty inches (20.32 decimeters) in width and designed to carry more than thirteen persons and used for carrying passengers, 
c.  A two-axle or tandem-axle vehicle or combination of vehicles when towing a trailer when the trailer being towed has a gross weight in excess of six thousand pounds (2721.55 kilograms), and 
d.  Vehicles under Class 4; An operator with a Class 3 license may operate a farm tractor towing another vehicle having a gross weight in excess of six thousand pounds (2721.55 kilograms), and a truck towing a trailer, semitrailer, or farm trailer when the gross weight of the trailer, semitrailer, or farm trailer, not including the weight of the towing vehicle, does not exceed twenty-four thousand pounds (10,886.22 kilograms). 
4.  Class 4. Any motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding motorized bicycles, tractors and vehicles on which the operator or passengers, or both, ride within an enclosed cab. 
E.  The holder of a Class 1, 2, or 3 license may receive a Class 4 endorsement upon successful completion of an examination. 
F.  An applicant sixteen years of age and older, who does not hold a current valid operator's license, may be issued a Class 4 learner's permit after successful completion of a written examination. The Class 4 license will be issued after the applicant has successfully completed a driver's examination. 
G.  Applicants fourteen or fifteen years of age may be issued a motorcycle learner's permit if the applicant is enrolled in or has completed an approved motorcycle safety course. Applicants for a motorcycle operator's license who are under sixteen shall hold an initial learner's permit for at least two months before applying for a Class 4 operator's license, shall have completed an approved motorcycle safety course, and shall hold a valid motorcycle learner's permit at the time of application. Any person under sixteen years of age who holds a permit or license is restricted to the operation of a motorcycle powered with an engine of two hundred fifty cubic centimeters, or less, displacement. Evidence that the applicant has satisfactorily completed a motorcycle safety course which meets the minimum requirements of the motorcycle safety foundation must accompany the application. 
H.  Any holder of a classified license who drives a motor vehicle otherwise than as permitted by the class of license issued to him shall be deemed to be driving a motor vehicle without being duly licensed by this chapter. The holder of a classified license who desires to obtain a different class license in one of the classes provided by this chapter must exchange or renew such license. The commissioner may impose such rules and regulations as he may deem necessary with respect to such renewals or exchanges for the proper administration of this chapter. No Class 1 or 2 license shall be issued to any person under eighteen years of age. 
I.  If any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter suffers permanent loss of use of a hand, arm, foot, leg, or eye, he shall, before operating any motor vehicle or motorcycle, make a report thereof to the commissioner who shall take such reasonable action as may be proper under the provisions of this chapter as to reexamination to determine if the licensee is capable of operating vehicles for which the individual is licensed. 
J.  The commissioner may issue a motorized bicycle operator's permit to an applicant who is at least fourteen years of age. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall pay a fee of eight dollars and take a written examination of the applicant's knowledge of traffic laws and general rules of the road. If the applicant passes the written examination and the commissioner is satisfied that the applicant has adequate eyesight, the commissioner may issue the applicant a motorized bicycle operator's permit, even if the applicant does not have an operator's license. The permit expires in the same manner as an operator's license. A person who has an operator's license is not required to obtain a motorized bicycle operator's permit. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 9-35, 1976) 
10.16.400 - Vehicle lighting. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-21 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in North Dakota Century Code 39-21-01, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and limitations: 
1.  Whenever a driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within five hundred feet, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver. The lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam, specified in subsection 2 of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-20 shall be deemed to avoid glare at all times, regardless of road contour and loading. 
2.  Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within two hundred feet to the rear, except when engaged in the act of overtaking and passing, the driver shall use a distribution of light permissible under this chapter other than the uppermost distribution of light specified in subsection 1 of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-20. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-36, 1976) 
10.16.410 - Restrictions on lamps other than headlights. 
A.  Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other than headlamps, spot lamps, auxiliary lamps, flashing turn signals, emergency vehicle warning lamps and school bus warning lamps, which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred candlepower shall be so directed that no part of the high intensity portion of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than seventy-five feet from the vehicle. 
B.  No person shall drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying a red or green light visible from directly in front of the center thereof. This subsection shall not apply to any vehicle upon which a red light visible from the front is expressly authorized or required by this chapter. 
C.  Flashing lights are prohibited except on an authorized emergency vehicle, school bus, snow removal equipment or on any vehicle as a means of indicating a right or left turn, or the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, overtaking or passing. 
(Ord. 599 § 9-37, 1976) 
10.16.420 - Display of number plates and tabs required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-04-11 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Except as otherwise specifically provided, no person shall operate or drive a vehicle on the public highways of this state unless the vehicle shall have a distinctive number assigned to it by the registrar, and two number plates, bearing such number conspicuously displayed, horizontally and in an upright position, one on the front and one on the rear of the vehicle, each securely fastened, except number plates assigned to a motorcycle, trailer, or house trailer shall be attached to the rear thereof. When only one number plat is furnished for an apportioned vehicle licensed under the international registration plan as authorized in North Dakota Century Code 39-19-04, truck tractor or semitrailer, the plate shall be attached to the front of the apportioned vehicle or truck tractor and the rear of the semitrailer. The bottom of each number plate shall be at a height of not less than twelve inches (30.48 centimeters) above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands. As far as is reasonably possible, the plates shall at all times be kept free and clear of mud, ice, or snow so as to be clearly visible and all number plates, markers, or evidence of registration or licensing except for the current year shall be removed from the vehicle. All vehicle license plates issued by the department shall continue to be the property of the state of North Dakota for the period for which the plates are valid. An annual registration tab or sticker for the current registration year shall be displayed on each number plate in those years for which the tabs or stickers are issued in lieu of number plates. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 9-38, 1976) 
10.16.430 - False use of registration card or plate un lawful. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-04-37 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Violations of Registration Provisions. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts: 
1.  To operate, or for the owner thereof knowingly to permit anyone to operate, upon a highway any motor vehicle the registration of which has been canceled or revoked, or which is not registered, or which does not have attached thereto and displayed thereon a number plate, or plates, or validation tabs assigned thereto by the registrar for the current registration period, subject to the exemptions allowed in this section; 
C.  To display or cause or permit to be displayed, or to have in possession, any registration card, registration number plate, or validation tabs knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked, suspended, or altered; 
D.  To lend any registration number plate, registration card, or validation tabs to any person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit the use of any registration number plate or registration card by any person not entitled thereto; 
E.  To fail or refuse to surrender to the department, upon demand, any registration card, or registration number plate, or validation tab which has been suspended, canceled, or revoked as provided in this chapter; 
F.  To use a false or fictitious name or address in any application for the registration of any vehicle, or for any renewal or duplicate thereof, or knowingly to make a false statement or knowingly to conceal a material fact or otherwise to commit a fraud in any application; 
G.  To operate a passenger motor vehicle without payment of the registration fees as required in North Dakota Century Code 39-04-19, subsection 2. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 9-39, 1976) 
10.16.440 - Child restraint devices-Penalty-Evidence. 
A.  If a child, under three years of age, is present in any motor vehicle, that motor vehicle must be equipped with at least one child restraint system for each child. The child restraint system must meet the standards adopted by the United States Department of Transportation for those systems (49 CFR 571.213). While the motor vehicle is in motion, each such child must be properly secured in the child restraint system in the accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. While the motor vehicle is moving, each child of three through ten years of age who is in the motor vehicle must be in an approved child restraint system or buckled in a seatbelt. Use of child restraint systems, and seatbelts is not required in motor vehicles that were not equipped with seatbelts when manufactured. If all of the seatbelts are used by other family members in the vehicle or if a child is being transported in an emergency situation, this section does not apply. 
B.  Violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed twenty dollars. 
C.  Violation of this section is not, in itself, evidence of negligence. The fact of a violation of this section is not admissible in any proceeding other than one charging the violation. 
(Ord. 791 (part), 1995) 
10.16.441 - Use of safety belts required in certain motor vehicles-Enforcement. 
    Subject to the limitations of this section and Section 10.16.442, a driver may not operate upon a road or highway within the city a motor vehicle designed for carrying fewer than eleven passengers, which was originally manufactured with safety belts unless each front seat occupant is wearing a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. This section does not apply to a child in a child restraint or seat belt in accordance with Section 10.16.440, to drivers of implements of husbandry, to operators of farm vehicles as defined in subsection 5 of North Dakota Century Code Section 30-04-19, to rural mail carriers while on duty delivering mail, or when all front seat safety belts are in use by other occupants. 
(Ord. 791 (part), 1995) 
10.16.442 - Secondary enforcement. 
    A peace officer may not issue a citation for a violation of Section 10.16.441 unless the officer lawfully stopped or detained the driver of the motor vehicle for another violation. Drivers' license points may not be assessed against any person for violation of Section 10.16.441. 
(Ord. 791 (part), 1995) 
10.16.443 - Penalty. 
    The penalty for a violation of Section 10.16.441 shall be the same penalty which is imposed by the State of North Dakota for a violation of North Dakota Century Code Section 39-21-41.4. 
(Ord. 791 (part), 1995) 
10.16.444 - Amendment or repeal. 
    The above sections shall automatically amend when the corresponding section of the North Dakota Century Code, Sections 39-21-41.2, 39-21-41.4 and 39-21-41.5 respectively, is amended by North Dakota State Law. Further, upon repeal of the North Dakota State Law presently requiring seatbelts, Section 39-21-41.2, 39-21-41.4, and 39-21-41.5 of the North Dakota Century Code, the corresponding section of the Municipal Code shall also be repealed. 
(Ord. 791 (part), 1995) 
10.16.450 - Use of a wireless communications device prohibited. 
A.  The operator of a motor vehicle that is part of traffic may not use a wireless communications device to compose, read, or send an electronic message. 
B.  Under this section: 
1.  "Electronic message" means a self-contained piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be transmitted between physical devices. The term includes e-mail, a text message, an instant message, a command or request to access a worldwide web page, or other data that uses a commonly recognized electronic communications protocol. The term does not include: 
a.  Reading, selecting, or entering a telephone number, an extension number, or voice mail retrieval codes and commands into an electronic device for the purpose of initiating or receiving a telephone or cellular phone call or using voice commands to initiate or receive a telephone or cellular phone call; 
b.  Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global positioning system device or other navigation system device; 
c.  Using a device capable of performing multiple functions, such as fleet management systems, dispatching devices, smartphones, citizen band radios, music players, or similar devices, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited; 
d.  Voice or other data transmitted as a result of making a telephone or cellular phone call; or 
e.  Data transmitted automatically by a wireless communication device without direct initiation by an individual. 
2.  "Traffic" means operation of a motor vehicle while in motion or for the purposes of travel on any street or highway and includes a temporary stop or halt of motion, such as at an official traffic-control signal or sign. The term does not include a motor vehicle that is lawfully parked. 
C.  This section does not apply if a wireless communications device is used for obtaining emergency assistance to report a traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious traffic hazard or to prevent a crime about to be committed, in the reasonable belief that an individual's life or safety is in immediate danger, or in an authorized emergency vehicle while in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 921, 3-17-14) 
10.16.460. - Use of an electronic communication device by minor prohibited. 
    An individual under eighteen years of age who has been issued a class D license may not operate an electronic communication device to talk, compose, read, or send an electronic message while operating a motor vehicle that is in motion unless the sole purpose of operating the device is to obtain emergency assistance, to prevent a crime about to be committed, or in the reasonable belief that an individual's life or safety is in danger. 
(Ord. No. 921, 3-17-14) 
Chapter 10.18 - ANGLE PARKING 
Sections: 

10.18.010 - Authority to designate. 
    The city engineer or other person authorized by the governing body shall mark or sign streets upon which angle parking will be permitted (other than federal aid or state highways). Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Ord. 599 § 13-1, 1976) 
10.18.020 - Permitted where. 
    Angle parking shall be permitted on the following streets: 
(Ord. 599 § 13-2, 1976) 
Chapter 10.20 - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Outside of business or residence districts. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-47 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district no person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main-traveled part of the highway when it is practicable to stop, park or so leave the vehicle off such part of the highway, but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway of not less than twelve feet opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a distance of two hundred feet in each direction upon the highway. 
C.  This section and Sections 10.20.030 and 10.20.040 shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such condition. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-1, 1976) 
10.20.020 - Authority of officers to remove illegally stopped vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-48 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in violation of any of the provisions of Section 10.20.010, the officer is authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move it to a position off the paved or main- traveled part of the highway. 
C.  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any highway, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, the officer is authorized to provide for the removal of the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety. 
D.  Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway when: 
1.  A report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken without the consent of its owner; 
2.  The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are unable to provide for its custody or removal; or 
3.  When the person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person arrested before a police magistrate without unnecessary delay. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-2, 1976) 
10.20.030 - Double parking. 
A.  No operator of any vehicle shall stop it on any street or avenue except: 
1.  When parking adjacent to the curb; 
2.  To prevent an accident; 
3.  When discharging or taking on a passenger; 
4.  In obedience to police direction; 
5.  When permitted by the police to load or unload merchandise; 
B.  Any other stopping on the street shall be deemed double parking and constitutes a violation of this title. 
C.  Double parking for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise may be permitted by the police for a reasonable time and at reasonable hours where no loading or unloading zone is available for such purposes. 
(Ord. 654 § 9, 1983) 
10.20.040 - Methods of parking. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-50 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle parallel to and within twelve inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right- hand shoulder. 
C.  Except where otherwise provided by ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve inches of the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder. 
D.  The city may permit angle parking on any roadway, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal aid or state highway without first obtaining the written authorization of the State Highway Commissioner. 
E.  The State Highway Department with respect to highways under its jurisdiction may place official traffic-control devices prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any highway where in its opinion such stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions indicated by such devices. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-4, 1976) 
10.20.050 - Parking prohibited where. 
    When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to park or leave standing, either attended or unattended, any motor vehicle in the following areas:_______. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-5, 1976) 
10.20.060 - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
A.  Displaying the vehicle for sale; 
B.  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairing such vehicle necessitated by an emergency. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-6, 1976) 
10.20.070 - Creation of hazardous conditions. 
A.  The city engineer or other person designated by the governing body is authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
B.  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this chapter, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-7, 1976) 
10.20.080 - Parking or stopping in alleys. 
    No person shall park a vehicle within an alley, nor shall he stop a commercial vehicle so as to leave available less than twelve feet of the width thereof for free movement of vehicular traffic, nor shall he stop in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. No parking shall be allowed in any of the alleys within the corporate limits of the city, except for the purpose of loading and unloading, for a longer period than thirty minutes. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-8, 1976) 
10.20.090 - Parking adjacent to schools. 
A.  The city traffic engineer or authorized person may erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized in this chapter, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-9, 1976) 
10.20.100 - Parking on narrow streets. 
    The city traffic engineer or authorized person may erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty feet. 
(Ord. 599 § 14-10, 1976) 
10.20.110 - Parking on left-hand side of one-way streets and roadways prohibited. 
A.  The city traffic engineer or authorized person may erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
B.  In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city traffic engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Ord. 599 §§ 14-11, 14-12, 1976) 
10-20-120 - Privileges for mobility impaired. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-01-15 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any mobility impaired person who displays prominently upon an automobile parked by him or under his direction and for his use, the distinguishing certificate or insignia specified in subsection D of this section, shall be entitled to courtesy in the parking of such automobile; provided, however, that the city may, by ordinance, prohibit parking on any street or highway for the purpose of creating a fire lane, or to provide for the accommodation of heavy traffic during morning and afternoon rush hours, and the privileges extended to such mobility impaired persons shall not apply on streets or highways where and during such times as parking is prohibited. 
C.  "Mobility impaired," as used in this section, includes any person who has sustained an amputation or material disability of either or both legs, or who has been otherwise disabled in any manner rendering it difficult and burdensome for him to walk. 
D.  The motor vehicle registrar shall issue without charge a special identifying certificate or insignia for a marked motor vehicle to any mobility impaired applicant upon submission by the applicant of a certificate issued by a qualified physician to the motor vehicle registrar that he is a mobility impaired person within the meaning of subsection C of this section. The motor vehicle registrar shall determine the form and size of the certificate or insignia and shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the issuance thereof. 
E.  If the police of this city find that the certificate or insignia is being improperly used, they shall report to the motor vehicle registrar any such violation. Any person who is not mobility impaired and who exercises the privileges granted a mobility impaired person under subsection B of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
F.  Whenever any public or private agency or authority designates parking spaces for use by motor vehicles operated by mobility impaired persons, those reserved spaces shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the street or parking lot adjacent to the space. In addition to blue paint, the space reserved shall also be indicated by signs or other suitable means. The law enforcement agency of any city or any other political subdivision may enforce the provisions of this subsection in any parking lot or parking facility that is generally open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned. 
G.  Whenever any public or private entity designates parking spaces for use by motor vehicles operated or used by mobility-impaired persons, those reserved spaces must comply with the requirements set forth in section 39-01-15(9) N.D.C.C. and any entity which violates said requirements is guilty of an infraction if the entity does not comply with said requirements within sixty days after receiving official notice of the violation. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986; Ord. 599 § 14-13, 1976; Ord. No. 882, 2-2-09) 
Chapter 10.22 - RESERVED PARKING AREAS 
Sections: 

10.22.010 - Establishment and compliance required. 
A.  No person, firm or corporation shall, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, park or leave standing, either attended or unattended, any motor vehicle on street areas which are reserved for the following temporary uses: loading and unloading, bus parking, guest parking, taxi parking, emergency parking, no parking, police or fire use. 
B.  The city engineer or authorized person shall establish from time to time areas for loading and unloading, bus parking, guest parking, taxi parking, emergency parking, no parking, police and fire use on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine or as the governing body may specifically designate to be of greatest benefit and convenience to the public and to promote the best use of the streets for traffic to pedestrians and designate them by appropriate signs. 
(Ord. 599 § 15-1, 1976) 
Chapter 10.24 - PARKING LARGE VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.24.010 - Vehicles defined. 
    "Vehicles" are any vehicle, trailer or vehicle trailer combination or parts thereof. 
(Ord. 621(part), 1979) 
10.24.020 - Permitted when. 
    No vehicles with a gross weight exceeding fifteen thousand pounds may park on any street, avenue or alley in any residential area of the city, except for purposes of delivering goods and immediate loading or unloading. 
(Ord. 621(part), 1979) 
10.24.030 - Evidence of loading or unloading. 
    Any vehicles parked for the purpose of loading or unloading shall show evidence that such loading or unloading is being done at the time the vehicle is parked on the street, avenue or alley. 
(Ord. 621(part), 1979) 
10.24.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any operator, or if any operator is not locatable, then the owner of a vehicle shall be considered to be in violation of this chapter, and the person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars or a jail sentence of thirty days in jail or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. 621(part), 1979) 
Chapter 10.26 - TIME LIMITS 
Sections: 

10.26.010 - Establishment. 
A.  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person, firm or corporation shall park or leave standing, either attended or unattended, any motor vehicle for more than five consecutive minutes on street areas so posted or for more than ten consecutive minutes on street areas so posted, or for more than fifteen consecutive minutes on street areas so posted, or more than thirty minutes on street areas so posted, or more than sixty consecutive minutes on street areas so posted, or for more than one-hundred-twenty consecutive minutes on street areas so posted, when the areas have been made available for parking. 
B.  The city engineer or authorized person shall establish from time to time in such places and in such manner time parking zones as he shall determine, or as the governing body shall specifically designate to promote the greatest benefit and convenience to the public and the best use of the street areas. 
(Ord. 599 § 16-1, 1976) 
Chapter 10.28 - PARKING METERS* 
Sections: 

10.28.010 - Established. 
A.  Parking meter zones are established within the following district or upon the streets or parts of streets described in this subsection:_______. 
    The parking of vehicles upon the above listed streets shall be regulated between the hours of _______ of any day except Sundays and public holidays. 
B.  The city traffic engineer or authorized person may, subject to the approval of the city council, establish parking meter zones at other locations upon those streets or parts of streets where it is determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that the installation of parking meters shall be necessary to aid in the regulation, control and inspection of the parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. 599 § 17-1, 1976) 
10.28.020 - Installation. 
    The city traffic engineer or authorized person shall install parking meters in the parking meter zones established as provided in Section 10.28.010 upon the curb immediately adjacent to each designated parking space. The meters shall be capable of being operated, either automatically or mechanically, upon the deposit therein of a _______ coin of United States currency, for the full period of time for which parking is lawfully permitted in any such parking meter zone or, in lieu thereof, for the following periods of time, upon the deposit of a coin or coins of United States currency as specified:_______. 
(Ord. 599 § 17-2, 1976) 
Chapter 10.30 - PEDESTRIANS 
Sections: 

10.30.010 - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-27 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device specially applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
C.  Pedestrians are subject to traffic and pedestrian- control signals as provided for in Sections 10.06.030 and 10.06.050. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-1, 1976) 
10.30.020 - Right of way on crosswalks. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-28 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
C.  No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
D.  Subsection B of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated in subsection C of Section 10.06.030. 
E.  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the highway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass the stopped vehicle. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-2, 1976) 
10.30.030 - Right of way on sidewalks. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-33.1 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of- way to any pedestrian on a sidewalk. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-8, 1976) 
10.30.040 - Restrictions. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-29 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
C.  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
D.  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic- control devices are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
E.  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-3, 1976) 
10.30.050 - Avoidance of collision. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-30 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-4, 1976) 
10.30.060 - Use of cane and protection of blind and incapacitated persons. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-31 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person on any public street or highway, unless the person is totally or partially blind, or is otherwise incapacitated, shall carry in a raised or extended position, any cane or walking stick which is white in color, or white tipped with red. 
C.  Whenever any pedestrian is crossing or attempting to cross a public street or highway, guided by a guide dog, or carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color, or white tipped with red, the driver of every vehicle approaching the intersection, or other place where the pedestrian is attempting to cross, shall bring his vehicle to a full stop before arriving at the intersection or place of crossing, and before proceeding shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injuring such pedestrian. 
D.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to deprive any totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person, not carrying such a cane or walking stick, or not being guided by a dog, of any of the rights or privileges conferred by law upon pedestrians, nor shall the failure of such totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person to carry a cane or walking stick, or to be guided by a guide dog upon the streets, highways or sidewalks of this state, be held to constitute or be evidence of contributory negligence. 
E.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be assessed a fee of twenty dollars. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-5, 1976) 
10.30.070 - Use of right half of crosswalks. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-32 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of crosswalks. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-6, 1976) 
10.30.080 - Walking on roadways. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-33 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
C.  Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway. 
D.  Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway. 
E.  Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-7, 1976) 
10.30.090 - Yielding to authorized emergency vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-33.2 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle and displaying a visible flashing, revolving or rotating blue, white or red light, every pedestrian shall yield the right of way to the authorized emergency vehicle. 
C.  This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway nor from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-9, 1976) 
10.30.100 - Yielding to blind. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-33.3 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any blind pedestrian carrying a clearly visible white cane or accompanied by a guide dog. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-10, 1976) 
10.30.110 - Walking prohibited under influence of al cohol or drugs. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-33.4 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree which renders himself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-11, 1976) 
10.30.120 - Crossing closed railroad gates prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-33.5 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-12, 1976) 
10.30.130 - Soliciting rides or business prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-34 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride. 
C.  No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. 
D.  No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. 
(Ord. 599 § 10-13, 1976) 
Chapter 10.32 - MOTORCYCLES 
Sections: 

10.32.010 - Rights and duties generally. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.2-01 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every person operating a motorcycle or motorized bicycle shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under this title, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application. For purposes of this chapter, the term "motorcycle" means motorcycles and motorized bicycles. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 11-1, 1976) 
10.32.020 - Regulations. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.2-02 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator. 
C.  A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle. 
D.  No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle or other article which prevents him from keeping both hands on the handlebars. 
E.  No person shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator. 
(Ord. 599 § 11-2, 1976) 
10.32.030 - Use of lanes. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.2-03 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  All motorcycles are entitled to full use of a lane and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorcycle of the full use of a lane. This subsection shall not apply to the operation of motorcycles two abreast in a single lane as authorized in subsection E of this section. 
C.  The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
D.  No person shall operate a motorcycle between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
E.  Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single lane. 
F.  Subsections C and D shall not apply to police officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. 599 § 11-3, 1976) 
10.32.040 - Attachment to other vehicles prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.2-04 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person riding upon a motorcycle shall attach himself or the motorcycle to any other vehicle on a roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 11-4, 1976) 
10.32.050 - Footrests for passengers required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.2-05 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests for such passengers. 
(Ord. 599 § 11-5, 1976) 
10.32.060 - Protective equipment required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.2-06 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person under the age of eighteen years shall operate or ride upon a motorcycle unless protective headgear, which complies with standards established by the department, is being worn on the head of the operator and rider, except when participating in a lawful parade. If the operator of a motorcycle is required to wear protective headgear, any passenger must also wear protective headgear regardless of the age of the passenger. 
C.  This section shall not apply to persons riding within an enclosed cab or on a golf cart. 
D.  No person shall operate a motorcycle if a person under the age of eighteen years is a passenger upon that motorcycle and is not wearing protective headgear as provided in subsection B of this section. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 11-6, 1976) 
10.32.070 - Other applicable law. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.2-07 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  All of the provisions of Sections 10.46.010, 10.46.020 and 10.46.220 through 10.46.300 pertaining to the disposition of traffic offenses shall apply to this chapter, and Sections 10.32.020 through 10.32.040 shall be considered moving violations within the definition in Section 10.46.010. 
(Ord. 599 § 11-7, 1976) 
Chapter 10.33 - NONLICENSABLE MOTORCYCLES 
Sections: 

10.33.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted: 
A.  "Nonlicensable motorcycle" means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, and cannot be licensed in the state under authority of Chapter 39-04 of the North Dakota Century Code. 
B.  "Operate" means to ride in or on and control the operation of a nonlicensable motorcycle. 
C.  "Operator" means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a nonlicensable motorcycle. 
D.  "Owner" means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to an unlicensable motorcycle entitled to the use or possession thereof. 
E.  "Roadway" means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
F.  "Street" or "highway" means the entire width between the boundary lines of way or place when any part thereof is open to the use of the public in the city, as a matter of right, for the purposes of vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 668 § 1, 1983) 
10.33.020 - Use prohibited-Exceptions-Equipment required. 
A.  No person shall operate a nonlicensable motorcycle upon any road, street or highway in this city kept open for vehicular traffic, except: 
1.  During a period of emergency when travel by conventional automotive equipment is not possible, when declared by the chairman of the city commission or the acting chairman; 
2.  For a special nonlicensable motorcycle event of limited duration, when conducted on a prearranged schedule under permit from the governing body; 
B.  When permitted to operate as provided in this section, a nonlicensable motorcycle shall further not be operated without: 
1.  A manufacturer-installed or equivalent muffler in good working order and connected to the nonlicensable motorcycle exhaust system; 
2.  A lighted headlamp and tail lamp, when required for safety; 
3.  Brakes in good working order. 
(Ord. 668 § 2, 1983) 
10.33.030 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Upon conviction of any provision of this chapter, the violator shall be subjected to a maximum fine of five hundred dollars and/or thirty days in jail. 
(Ord. 668 § 3, 1983) 
Chapter 10.34 - BICYCLES 
Sections: 

10.34.010 - Applicability. 
A.  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this chapter. 
B.  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-1, 1976) 
10.34.015 - License requirements and fees. 
A.  No resident of the city shall operate any bicycle upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the city without a license, procured and evidenced as set forth in this section. 
B.  Application for license for each bicycle intended to be used within the city shall be made to the chief of police of the city. 
C.  The fee for such bicycle license shall be established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners, and upon receipt of such fee the chief of police shall cause to be recorded in a book kept in the police department for that purpose, the name, description and serial number, if any, of each bicycle so registered, together with the number of the license issued for such bicycle, and he shall cause to be affixed to such bicycle an appropriate tag or other device evidencing the license thereof, which tag or device shall bear the number of such license, and he shall also deliver a registration card containing the name of the owner, description of the bicycle and license number to the owner. 
D.  The proceeds of all such licenses issued shall be remitted monthly by the chief of police to the city auditor. 
E.  In case of loss or destruction of either the license tag or registration card, a duplicate tag or registration card, or both, shall be issued upon payment of such fee as may be prescribed by the chief of police to cover the cost thereof. 
F.  Such licenses shall not be transferable, and each purchaser of a new or used bicycle shall apply for a new license within five days after such purchase. Licenses shall be marked "PERMANENT" and will remain valid as long as the bicycle being licensed does not change ownership. 
G.  The use by a resident of Devils Lake upon the streets, alleys, public ways of the city of any bicycle not licensed and not bearing the license tag or device provided for by this section shall constitute a violation of this section, and any police officer shall seize and hold at the police department any such unlicensed bicycle until the license fees provided for in this section shall be paid. 
H.  No person other than a member of the police department shall tamper with, break or damage any license tag issued by the city nor break any seal by which the same may be affixed to the bicycle. 
I.  In the event any bicycle shall be operated within the city contrary to this section, any police officer may impound such bicycle and the same may be detained at the police department until it shall be released by order of the municipal judge. The owner of such bicycle may make application to the municipal judge for the release of any impounded bicycle and the municipal judge may order the release thereof upon such conditions as he may determine. The municipal judge shall have the power to make such release conditional upon the payment of any fine or costs that may have been assessed against the operator of such bicycle, and he may suspend for not more than thirty days the license of such bicycle and he may hold the license tag during such suspension period. 
(Ord. 678, 1984) 
10.34.020 - Traffic ordinances applicable. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except as to special regulations in this chapter and except as to those provisions of this title which by their nature can have no application. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-2, 1976) 
10.34.030 - Obedience to traffic-control devices. 
A.  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic-control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
B.  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event the person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-3, 1976) 
10.34.040 - Riding on sidewalks. 
A.  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
B.  The chief of police or authorized person may erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey them. 
C.  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing the pedestrian. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-4, 1976) 
10.34.050 - Riding on roadways and paths. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.1-05 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
C.  Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
D.  Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the roadway. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-5, 1976) 
10.34.060 - Clinging to vehicles prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.1-04 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle shall attach it or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway, except a sled being pulled by a snowmobile. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-6, 1976) 
10.34.070 - Limitations on carrying articles. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.1-06 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-7, 1976) 
10.34.080 - Lamps required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.1-07 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which emits a white light visible from a distance of at least five hundred feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the Motor Vehicle Department. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-8, 1976) 
10.34.090 - Limitations on use. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.1-03 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
C.  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-9, 1976) 
10.34.100 - Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-10, 1976) 
10.34.110 - Point system not applicable. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10.1-08 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, or any moving violation as defined in Section 10.46.010, or any nonmoving violation as defined in Section 10.46.020 when committed on a bicycle as defined in Section 10.02.030 shall not be cause for the licensing authority to assess points against the driving record of the violator pursuant to North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-10. Any other legally authorized penalty for a criminal traffic offense or noncriminal traffic violation shall be applicable to bicyclists. 
(Ord. 599 § 12-11(b), 1976) 
Chapter 10.36 - EQUIPMENT 
Sections: 

10.36.010 - Signals by hand and arm or signal lamps. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-39 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any stop or turn signal when required in this title shall be given either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
C.  Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and required signals shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds twenty-four inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds fourteen feet. The latter measurement applies to any single vehicle and to any combination of vehicles. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-1, 1976) 
10.36.020 - Headlamps. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-03 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with at least two headlamps with at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, which headlamps shall comply with the requirements and limitations set forth in this chapter. 
C.  Every motorcycle and every motor-driven cycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than two headlamps which shall comply with the requirements and limitations of this chapter. 
D.  Every headlamp upon every motor vehicle, including every motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, shall be located at a height measured from the center of the headlamp of not more than fifty-four inches nor less than twenty-four inches to be measured as set forth in subsection 2 of Section 39-21-02 of the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-2, 1976) 
10.36.030 - Taillamps. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-04 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer, and any other vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be equipped with at least one taillamp mounted on the rear, which when lighted as required in this section, shall emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of one thousand feet to the rear; provided, that in the case of a train of vehicles only the taillamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified. Every such abovementioned vehicle, other than a truck tractor, registered in this state and manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1964 shall be equipped with at least two tail lamps mounted on the rear, on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable which, when lighted as required in this section, shall comply with the provisions of this section. 
C.  Every taillamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not more than seventy-two inches nor less than twenty inches. 
D.  Either a taillamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet to the rear. Any taillamp or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-3, 1976) 
10.36.040 - Lamp or flag on projecting load. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-13 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more beyond the bed or body of the vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the time specified in North Dakota Century Code 39-21-01, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least six hundred feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this section is in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load a red flag or cloth not less than twelve inches square and so hung that the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-4, 1976) 
10.36.050 - Lamps on farm tractors, farm equipment and implements of husbandry. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-15 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every farm tractor, self-propelled unit of farm equipment, or towed implement of husbandry, when operated upon the highways of this state during the times mentioned in North Dakota Century Code 39-21-01, shall be equipped as follows: 
1.  Tractors and self-propelled units of farm equipment shall be equipped with two single-beam or multiple-beam headlamps meeting the requirements of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-20 or 39-21-22; provided, that a tractor or self- propelled unit of farm equipment which is not equipped with an electrical system shall be equipped with at least one lamp displaying a white light visible when lighted from a distance of not less than one thousand feet to the front of the vehicle. Every tractor and self-propelled unit of farm equipment shall be equipped with at least one lamp displaying a red light light visible when lighted from a distance of one thousand feet to the rear of the vehicle. In addition, every self-propelled unit of farm equipment shall be equipped with two red reflectors visible from all distances from six hundred feet to one hundred feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps. 
2.  Every towed unit of farm equipment or implement of husbandry shall be equipped with at least one lamp displaying red light visible when lighted from a distance of one thousand feet to the rear or two red reflectors visible from all distances within six hundred to one hundred feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps. In addition, if the extreme left projection of the towed unit of farm equipment or implement of husbandry extends beyond the extreme left projection of the towing tractor or vehicle, the unit or implement shall be equipped with at least one amber lamp or reflector mounted to indicate as nearly as practicable the extreme left projection and visible from all distances within six hundred feet to one hundred feet to the front thereof when illuminated by the upper beams of headlamps and at least one red lamp reflector so mounted and visible from such distances to the rear. 
C.  The lamps and reflectors required by this section shall be so positioned as to show from front and rear as nearly as practicable the extreme projection of the vehicle carrying them on the side of the roadway used in passing the vehicle. If a farm tractor or a unit of farm equipment, whether self-propelled or towed, is equipped with two or more lamps or reflectors visible from the front or two or more lamps or reflectors visible from the rear, the lamps or reflectors shall be so positioned that the extreme projections both to the left and to the right of the vehicle shall be indicated as nearly as is practicable. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-5, 1976) 
10.36.060 - Lamps on other vehicles and equipment. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-16 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every vehicle, including animal-drawn vehicles and vehicles referred to in subsection 3 of Section 39-21-46 of the North Dakota Century Code, not specifically required by the provisions of this chapter to be equipped with lamps or other lighting devices, shall at all times specified in North Dakota Century Code 39-21-01, be equipped with at least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet to the front of the vehicle, and shall also be equipped with two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet to the rear of the vehicle, or two red reflectors visible for distances of one hundred feet to six hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the upper beams of headlamps. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-6, 1976) 
10.36.070 - Brakes required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-32 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold the vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so connected that: 
1.  Failure of any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels; 
2.  Every farm tractor, motorcycle and motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a highway, shall be equipped with at least one brake, which may be operated by hand or foot. 
3.  Every trailer or semitrailer when operated upon a highway at a speed in excess of fifteen miles per hour shall be equipped with safety chains or brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold the vehicle and so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and the brakes shall be so designed and connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle the brakes shall be automatically applied. 
4.  One of the means of brake operation is parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice or loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the requirements of subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection by the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or other source of power; provided, that failure of the service brake actuation system or other power- assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the requirements of subdivisions 1 through 3 of this subsection. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind. The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe anchors and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the parking brakes. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-7, 1976) 
10.36.080 - Mirrors. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-38 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  On and after January 1, 1964, every motor vehicle, operated singly or when towing any other vehicle, shall be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least two hundred feet to the rear of each vehicle. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-8, 1976) 
10.36.090 - Windshields to be unobstructed and have wipers. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 3921-39 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a windshield. No person shall drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows of the vehicle which obstructs the driver's clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway. 
C.  The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield, which shall be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. 
D.  Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle shall be maintained in good working order. 
E.  A person may not operate a motor vehicle with any object or any material displayed, affixed, or applied on the front windshield or on any side window where that material alters the color or reduces the light transmittance, or reduces the clear and unobstructed view through the windshield or window. This subsection does not apply to windows behind the driver or to tinted windows or windshields in compliance with the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards No. 205. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 21-9, 1976) 
10.36.100 - Certain vehicles to carry flares or lanterns. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-42 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall operate any motor truck, passenger bus or truck tractor, or any motor vehicle towing a house trailer, upon any highway outside the corporate limits of municipalities at any time from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise unless there is carried in the vehicle the following equipment except as provided in subsection C of this section: 
1.  At least three flares or three red electric lanterns or three portable red emergency reflectors, each of which shall be capable of being seen and distinguished at a distance of not less than six hundred feet under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime. No flare, fusee, electric lantern or cloth warning flag shall be used for the purpose of compliance with the requirements of this section unless the equipment is of a type which has been submitted to the registrar and approved by him. No portable reflector unit shall be used for the purpose of compliance with the requirements of this section unless it meets the requirements of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration motor vehicle safety standard number 125, or unless it is so designed and constructed as to include two reflecting elements one above the other, each of which is capable of reflecting red light clearly visible within six hundred feet to one hundred feet under normal atmospheric conditions at night when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps, and unless it is of a type which has been submitted to the registrar and approved by him. 
2.  At least three red-burning fusees unless red electric lanterns or red portable emergency reflectors are carried. 
3.  At least two red cloth flags, not less than twelve inches square, with standards to support such flags. 
C.  No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions stated in subsection B of this section any motor vehicle used for the transportation of explosives, any cargo tank truck used for the transportation of flammable liquids or compressed gases, or any motor vehicle using compressed gas as fuel unless there is carried in the vehicle three red electric lanterns or three portable red emergency reflectors meeting the requirements of subsection B of this section, and there shall not be carried in any vehicle any flares, fusees or signal produced by flame. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-10, 1976) 
10.36.110 - Warning devices to be displayed when vehicle disabled. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-11 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever any motor truck, passenger bus, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer or pole trailer, or any motor vehicle towing a house trailer, is disabled upon the traveled portion of any highway or the shoulder thereof outside of any municipality at any time when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the driver of such vehicle shall display the following warning devices upon the highway during the time the vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in subsection C of this section: 
1.  A lighted fusee, a lighted red electric lantern or a portable red emergency reflector shall be immediately placed at the traffic side of the vehicle in the direction of the nearest approaching traffic. 
2.  As soon thereafter as possible but in any event within the burning period of the fusee (fifteen minutes), the driver shall place three liquid burning flares (pot torches), or three lighted electric lanterns or three portable red emergency reflectors on the traveled portion of the highway in the following order: 
a.  One, approximately one hundred feet from the disabled vehicle in the center of the lane occupied by such vehicle and toward the traffic approaching in that lane; 
b.  One, approximately one hundred feet in the opposite direction from the disabled vehicle and in the center of the traffic lane occupied by such vehicle; 
c.  One at the traffic side of the disabled vehicle not less than ten feet rearward or forward thereof in the direction of the nearest approaching traffic. If a lighted red electric lantern or a red portable emergency reflector has been placed at the traffic side of the vehicle in accordance with paragraph a of this subdivision, it may be used for this purpose. 
C.  Whenever any vehicle referred to in this section is disabled within five hundred feet of a curve, hillcrest or other obstruction to view, the warning signal in that direction shall be so placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the highway, but in no case less than one hundred feet nor more than five hundred feet from the disabled vehicle. 
D.  Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled upon any roadway of a divided highway during the time that lights are required, the appropriate warning devices prescribed in subsections B and F of this section shall be placed as follows: 
1.  One at a distance of approximately two hundred feet from the vehicle in the center of the lane occupied by the stopped vehicle and in the direction of traffic approaching in that lane; 
2.  One at a distance of approximately one hundred feet from the vehicle, in the center of the lane occupied by the vehicle and in the direction of traffic approaching in that lane; 
3.  One at the traffic side of the vehicle and approximately ten feet from the vehicle in the direction of the nearest approaching traffic. 
E.  Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled upon the traveled portion of a highway or the shoulder thereof outside of any municipality at any time when the display of fusees, flares, red electric lanterns or portable emergency reflectors is not required, the driver of the vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of approximately one hundred feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a distance of approximately one hundred feet to the rear of the vehicle. 
F.  Whenever any motor vehicle used in the transportation of explosives or any cargo tank truck used for the transportation of any flammable liquid or compressed flammable gas, or any motor vehicle using compressed gas as a fuel, is disabled upon a highway of this state at any time or place mentioned in subsection B of this section, the driver of such vehicle shall immediately display the following warning devices: 
1.  One red electric lantern or portable red emergency reflector placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle; and 
2.  Two red electric lanterns or portable red reflectors, one placed approximately one hundred feet to the front and one placed approximately one hundred feet to the rear of this disabled vehicle in the center of the traffic lane occupied by the vehicle. 
    Flares, fusees or signals produced by flame shall not be used as warning devices for disabled vehicles of the type mentioned in this subsection. 
G.  The flares, fusees, red electric lanterns, portable red emergency reflectors and flags to be displayed as required in this section shall conform with the requirements of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-42 applicable thereto. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-11, 1976) 
10.36.120 - Sifting or leaking loads prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-44.1 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless it is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping from the vehicle, except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway. No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load unless the load and any covering on the load is securely fastened so as to prevent the covering or load from becoming loose, detached or in any manner a hazard to other users of the highway. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-12, 1976) 
10.36.125 - Drawbar or connection between vehicles -Precautions required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-44.2 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The drawbar or other connection between any two vehicles, one of which is towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall be of such design, strength, and construction so as to prevent the unintentional uncoupling of the vehicles. 
(Ord. 689 (part), 1986) 
10.36.130 - Reflectors or lamps required on certain vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-08 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  In addition to other equipment required in this chapter, the following vehicles shall be equipped as stated in this section under the conditions stated in North Dakota Century Code 30-21-07: 
1.  On every bus, truck, trailer or semitrailer, there shall be the following: 
a.  On the rear, two reflectors, one at each side, and one stop light. A trailer or semitrailer which is not so loaded or of such dimensions as to obscure the stop light on the towing vehicle, need not be equipped with a stop light; 
2.  On every bus, truck, trailer or semitrailer eighty inches or more in overall width, there shall be the following: 
a.  On the rear, two reflectors, one at each side; two clearance lamps, one at each side, and one stop light; 
3.  On every truck tractor, there shall be the following: 
a.  On the front, two clearance lamps, one at each side; 
b.  On the rear, one stop light; 
4.  On every pole trailer, there shall be the following: 
a.  On the rear of the pole trailer or load, two reflectors, one at each side; 
b.  In addition, on pole trailers exceeding three thousand pounds gross weight, there shall be on each side one side marker lamp and one clearance lamp which may be in combination, to show to the front, side and rear. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-16, 1976) 
10.36.140 - Lamps on parked vehicles required when. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-14 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during the hours between a half-hour after sunset and a half-hour before sunrise and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of five hundred feet upon such street or highway no lights need be displayed upon the parked vehicle. 
C.  Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours between a half-hour after sunset and a half-hour before sunrise and there is not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of one thousand feet upon the highway, the vehicle so parked or stopped shall be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following requirements: 
1.  At least one lamp shall display white or amber light visible from a distance of one thousand feet to the front of the vehicle; 
2.  The same lamp, or at least one other lamp, shall display a red light visible from a distance of one thousand feet to the rear of the vehicle; and 
3.  The location of the lamp or lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is closest to passing traffic. 
    Local authorities may provide by ordinance that no lights need be displayed upon any such motor vehicle when parked upon a highway where the speed limit in effect does not exceed thirty miles per hour in accordance with local ordinances where there is sufficient light to reveal any person within a distance of two hundred feet upon the highway. The foregoing provisions shall not apply to a motor- driven cycle. 
D.  Any lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-17, 1976) 
10.36.150 - Horns and warning devices. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-36 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  While being operated upon a highway, every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a horn in good working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than two hundred feet, but no horn or other warning device shall emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or a whistle. Whenever reasonably necessary for safe operations, the driver of a motor vehicle upon a highway shall give audible warning with his horn, but shall not otherwise use his horn while upon a highway. 
C.  No vehicle shall be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a vehicle any siren, whistle or bell, except as otherwise permitted in this section. 
D.  Any commercial vehicle may be equipped with a theft alarm signal device which is so arranged that it cannot be used by the driver as an ordinary warning signal. 
E.  Any authorized emergency vehicle may be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than five hundred feet and of a type approved by the registrar, but the siren shall not be used except when the vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which latter events the driver of such vehicle shall sound the siren when reasonably necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-18, 1976) 
10.36.160 - Mufflers. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-37 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler cut-out, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. 
C.  The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-19, 1976) 
10.36.170 - Approval of lamps and reflectors required. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-29 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  No person shall have for sale, sell or offer for sale for use upon or as a part of the equipment of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, or use upon any such vehicle any headlamp, auxiliary or fog lamp, rear lamp, signal lamp or reflector, which reflector is required under this chapter, or parts of any of the foregoing which tend to change the original design or performance, unless of a type which has been approved by the registrar. The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to equipment in actual use when the section is adopted or replacement parts thereof. 
C.  No person shall have for sale, sell or offer for sale for use upon or as a part of the equipment of a motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer, any lamp or device mentioned in this section which has been approved by the registrar unless such lamp or device bears thereon the trademark or name under which it is approved so as to be legible when installed. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-20, 1976) 
10.36.180 - Modifications prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-45.1 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person may not operate upon a public highway a motor vehicle of a type required to be registered under the laws of this state with a weight of seven thousand pounds (3175.14 kilograms) or less with alterations or changes from the manufacturer's original design of the suspension, steering, or braking system of the motor vehicle. The weight must be computed on the basis of the unmodified and unloaded weight of the motor vehicle, and without regard to any ballast that may be placed in the vehicle. As to bumpers, motor vehicle height, and permitted modifications, the following requirements also apply: 
1.  The motor vehicle must be equipped with front and rear bumpers. 
2.  The maximum body height permitted for the motor vehicle is forty-two inches (106.68 centimeters). Measurement of body height is made from a level ground surface to the floor of the cargo area. 
3.  The maximum bumper height permitted is twentyseven inches (68.58 centimeters). Measurement of bumper height is made from a level ground surface to the highest point on the bottom of the bumper. 
4.  The vehicle may be modified in accordance with the following: 
a.  Any modifying equipment must meet specialty equipment marketing association standards. 
b.  If tires placed on a motor vehicle have a diameter greater than that of the tires on the motor vehicle as manufactured, those tires must comply with Department of Transportation requirements. 
c.  The maximum outside diameter permitted for tires is forty-four inches (111.76 centimeters). 
d.  A horizontal drop bumper may be used to comply with the bumper height requirement of subsection 3 of this section. The horizontal bumper must: 
i.  Be at least three inches (7.62 centimeters) in vertical width; 
ii.  Extend the entire horizontal body width; and 
iii.  Be horizontal, load bearing, and attached to the vehicle frame to effectively transfer impact when engaged. 
e.  The maximum lift permitted in the suspension system is four inches (10.16 centimeters). 
5.  A person charged with violating this section has the burden of proceeding to show that the modifications are permitted under this section. 
6.  Vehicles owned by law enforcement agencies, the military, fire fighting agencies, and ambulances, may be modified without regard to this section. 
7.  The registrar may adopt rules to implement this section. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 21-13, 1976) 
10.36.190 - Operation of unsafe or improperly equipped vehicles prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-46 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which the actor knows to be in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person, or which the actor knows does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in this chapter, or which the actor knows is equipped in any manner in violation of this chapter, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required under this chapter. Any person who violates any of the provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-08, 39-21-09, 39-21-10, or 39-21-14 shall be assessed a fee of ten dollars. Any person who, in violation of this chapter, drives, or any owner who causes or knowingly permits to be driven upon a highway, any vehicle or combination of vehicles which he knows is unsafe or improperly equipped is guilty of an infraction. 
C.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
D.  The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers or farm tractors except as specifically made applicable. 
E.  The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment required on vehicles shall not apply to motorcycles or motor-driven cycles, except as specifically made applicable. 
F.  The provisions of this chapter and regulations of the department shall not apply to vehicles moved solely by human power, except as specifically made applicable. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 21-14, 1976) 
10.36.200 - Slow-moving vehicles to display identify- ing emblem. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-50 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  All implements of husbandry, as defined in North Dakota Century Code 39-01-01, and machinery, including all road construction machinery, which is designed for operation at a speed of twenty-five miles an hour or less, shall display either a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem or a rotating or flashing amber light, as authorized for Class B emergency vehicles, whenever it is traveling along the roadway on any county, state, federal highway or city street in the state. Such emblem or light shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet to the rear. The highway commissioner shall adopt standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the slow-moving vehicle emblems and light. The standards and specifications for slow-moving vehicle emblems referred to in this section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers. No vehicle, other than those specified in this section, shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem, and its use on any type of stationary object is prohibited. Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section shall be assessed a fee of twenty dollars for each offense. 
(Ord. 599 § 21-15, 1976) 
10.36.210 - Driving without liability insurance. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-20 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  A person may not drive a motor vehicle within the corporate limits of the city without a valid policy of liability insurance in effect in order to respond in damages for liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance or use of that vehicle in the amount required by Section 10.02.470 of this title. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 21-21, 1976) 
10.36.220 - Child restraint devices-Penalty-Evidence. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-21-41.2 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  If a child, under three years of age, is present in any motor vehicle, that motor vehicle must be equipped with at least one child restraint system for each such child. The child restraint system must meet the standards adopted by the United States Department of Transportation for those systems (49 CFR 571.213). While the motor vehicle is in motion, each such child must be properly secured in the child restraint system in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. While the motor vehicle is moving, each child of three to five years of age who is in the motor vehicle must be in an approved child restraint system or buckled in a seatbelt. Use of child restraint systems and seatbelts is not required in motor vehicles that were not equipped with seatbelts when manufactured. If all of the seatbelts are used by other family members in the vehicle, this section does not apply. 
C.  Violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed twenty dollars. 
D.  Violation of this section is not in itself evidence of negligence. The fact of a violation of this section is not admissible in a proceeding other than one charging the violation. 
(Ord. 730, 1989: Ord. 700, 1987) 
Chapter 10.38 - SNOWMOBILES AND ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES* 
Sections: 

10.38.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted: 
A.  "All-terrain vehicle" means any motorized off- highway vehicle fifty inches (1270.00 millimeters) or less in width, having a dry weight of six hundred pounds (272.15 kilograms) or less, traveling on three or more low-pressure tires, designed for operator use only with no passengers, having a seat or saddle designed to be straddled by the operator, and handlebars for steering control. 
B.  "Operate" means to ride in or on and control the operation of a snowmobile or an all-terrain vehicle. 
C.  "Operator" means every person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile or an all-terrain vehicle. 
D.  "Owner" means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a snowmobile or all- terrain vehicle who is entitled to the use or possession thereof. 
E.  "Person" means and includes an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trustee, association, estate and its agencies and subdivisions and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not, and with respect to acts prohibited or required herein shall include employees and licensees. 
F.  "Roadway" means that portion of a highway, street, boulevard, avenue or alley improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
G.  "Snowmobile" means a self-propelled vehicle designed for travel on snow or ice steered by skis, or runners. 
H.  "Street, highway, boulevard, avenue or alley" means the entire width between the boundary lines of the same. 
(Ord. 742 (part), 1989) 
10.38.020 - Prohibited generally. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile or all- terrain vehicle within the corporate limits of the city. However, the following exceptions shall apply to this chapter: 
1.  A police officer may operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. 
2.  In the event of an emergency the chief of police or his designate may authorize temporary use of a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle within the city. 
3.  No person shall drive a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle upon or on city streets, avenues, boulevards or alleys, except as necessary to go from his residence to outside the city limits and return thereto in a reasonable direct route, and then only subject to the following rules and regulations whereupon no person shall drive: 
a.  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage to such person or property; 
b.  While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance; 
c.  Without at least one headlamp, one taillamp, and brakes, all in working order, which conform to standards prescribed by rule of the highway commissioner; 
d.  In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys growing stock; 
e.  Without a manufacturer-installed or equivalent muffler in good working order and connected to the snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle exhaust system; 
f.  The driver of a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle must yield the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard; 
g.  In violation of any rules or regulations promulgated for regulating the use of snowmobiles or all- terrain vehicles by the state highway commissioner where applicable within the geographical limits of the city; 
h.  While towing a sled, skid or other vehicle, unless the sled, skid or other vehicle is connected to the snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle by a hinged swivel and secured hitch and lighted or reflectorized at night; 
i.  Abreast of another snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle upon any highway as defined in this chapter; 
j.  Between the hours of eleven p.m. and seven a.m., except when returning to the city at a reasonable direct route to the residence of an operator; 
k.  In any municipal park or recreation area or school grounds except when posted as open to snowmobiles or all-terrain vehicles and within the hours permitted; 
l.  Upon private property within the corporate limits of the city; 
m.  At any time with more than two persons riding therein in addition to the operator; 
n.  Without observing all traffic signs, signals, rules and regulations applying to motor vehicles when also applicable to snowmobiles; 
o.  At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the surrounding circumstances and in no event at a speed greater than fifteen miles per hour; 
p.  No person shall drive on any street or highway or through street except to cross the same or in the far right lane thereof; 
q.  The operator and all passengers must wear a helmet or protective headgear; 
r.  No person shall operate a snowmobile or all- terrain vehicle in any cemetery or in the downtown area, including all streets, avenues or alleys between the Burlington Northern Railroad tracks to 7th Street North and College Drive East to 6th Avenue. 
B.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person under sixteen years of age who is not in possession of a valid operator's license or permit to operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle may not operate a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle within the city limits of Devils Lake, except upon the lands of the person's parent or guardian thereof. 
C.  The speed restrictions set forth in this section shall not apply to U.S. Highway No. 2, but the speed on U.S. Highway No. 2 shall be the posted rate of speed for motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 794 (part), 1995; Ord. 742 (part), 1989) 
10.38.030 - Parent or guardian's responsibility. 
    Any parent, person or guardian who knowingly does himself operate or allows his or her child or ward to operate his or her snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle upon or over the city streets, highways, boulevards, avenues or alleys in violation of this chapter shall be subject to the same fine and penalty as if that parent, person or guardian violated this section himself or herself. 
(Ord. 794 (part), 1995: Ord. 742 (part), 1989) 
10.38.040 - Penalty provision. 
    A violation of this chapter shall be an infraction and the violator shall be subject to pay a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 794 (part), 1995) 
Chapter 10.40 - TRUCK ROUTES* 
Sections: 

10.40.010 - Use required and exceptions. 
    Trucks are not to be operated except upon designated truck routes. No truck or commercial vehicle exceeding fifteen thousand pounds registered gross weight shall be operated in the city unless upon a truck route designated by resolution of the governing body of the city. The above shall not prohibit: 
A.  Such vehicle from operating upon other city streets when delivering or picking up merchandise; provided entrance or exit to or from such street is made at the nearest intersection; through streets established elsewhere in the city ordinances shall be considered as secondary truck routes and must be used in preference to other streets whenever possible; 
B.  The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city; trucks owned or operated by the utility companies franchised in the city; or trucks owned or operated by any contractor or materialman while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or utilities within the city; 
C.  Trucks making more than one delivery on any one trip may take the most direct route between one delivery and the next; 
D.  The operation of any Class A, B or C emergency vehicle (as designated by the North Dakota Century Code) upon any street in the city or any vehicle so designated an emergency vehicle by the mayor or an authorized representative designated by the mayor; 
E.  A tractor unit only, without a trailer, from being driven to the operator's place of residence; provided the tractor unit's engine is not left idling after arrival at the residence, and its vehicle is parked off of the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. 640 § 1, 1980) 
10.40.020 - Maps and signs. 
A.  The city auditor and the chief of police shall keep and maintain an accurate map setting out the truck routes. 
B.  The street department shall erect and maintain appropriate truck route signs along all streets and avenues designated as truck routes by resolution of the governing body of the city. 
(Ord. 640 § 2, 1980) 
Chapter 10.42 - SNOW REMOVAL 
Sections: 

10.42.010 - Effective when. 
    Whenever a snowfall occurs in sufficient quantities to impede vehicular traffic or vehicular parking to the extent that it appears necessary to conduct snow removal operations from the city streets and avenues this chapter shall take effect. 
(Ord. 648 § 1, 1982) 
10.42.020 - Parking restrictions. 
A.  Upon a determination to remove and plow snow from the city streets and avenues all parking on streets and avenues which have restricted parking or are signed and designated as snow removal routes shall be prohibited, until such streets and avenues are cleared of snow. 
B.  As much notice as is possible through the public media shall be given prior to the commencement of snow removal operations. 
(Ord. 648 § 2, 1982) 
10.42.030 - Towing. 
    All vehicles in violation of this chapter shall be subject to be towed at the owner's expense to ensure the street is clear of obstructions and clear for the operation of snow removal equipment and vehicles. 
(Ord. 648 § 3, 1982) 
10.42.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Vehicle owners in violation of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty as set in the fees and rates as adopted by the city commission. 
(Ord. 648 § 4, 1982) 
(Ord. No. 958, 12-3-18) 
Chapter 10.44 - ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

10.44.010 - Enforcing officers. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws. 
B.  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
C.  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. 599 § 3-1, 1976) 
10.44.020 - Refusal to comply. 
    No person shall wilfully refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or fireman invested by law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(Ord. 599 § 3-3, 1976) 
10.44.030 - Nonmotorized traffic to obey regulations. 
A.  Every person propelling any pushcart upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title and by the rules of the road portion of the State Vehicle Code, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no application. 
B.  Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal-drawn vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this title, except those provisions of this title which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Ord. 599 § 3-4, 1976) 
10.44.040 - Toy vehicles. 
    No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. 599 § 3-5, 1976) 
10.44.050 - Drivers of public vehicles not exempt. 
    The provisions of this title shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this title or in the State Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 599 § 3-6, 1976) 
10.44.060 - Emergency vehicles. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-03, 39-10-03.1 and 39-10- 03.2 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Class A Authorized Emergency Vehicles. 
1.  The driver of a Class A authorized emergency vehicle may: 
a.  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
b.  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
c.  Exceed the speed limit so long as he does not endanger life or property; 
d.  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
2.  The exceptions herein granted to a Class A authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only: 
a.  When the authorized emergency vehicle is in pursuit of or apprehension of a violator or a suspected violator requiring the use of these exemptions; 
b.  When the Class A authorized emergency vehicle is being operated in response to a reported emergency involving a possible personal injury, death or damage to property, and when giving audible signal by siren or when giving adequate warning by use of a flashing red or combination red and white lights which are visible under normal atmospheric conditions for at least five hundred feet (152.4 meters); 
c.  In any instance when the head of a law enforcement agency deems advisable within the area of his jurisdiction, for the protection of persons and property, and when, giving audible signal by siren or when giving adequate warning by use of a flashing red light or combination of red and white lights which is visible under normal atmospheric conditions for at least five hundred feet (152.4 meters). 
3.  No emergency vehicle shall display or permit to be displayed any red lamp except when operated on official business. 
4.  Any law enforcement officer as provided in Section 10.02.020(A)(2) of this title, having stopped another vehicle along a highway, and while still involved in that incident, or any other such activity, may use amber lights, visible under normal atmospheric conditions for at least five hundred feet (152.4 meters), for the purpose of maintaining traffic flow. 
C.  Class B Authorized Emergency Vehicles. 
1.  The driver of Class B authorized emergency vehicles may: 
a.  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
b.  Exceed the speed limit so long as he does not endanger life or property during the time of a local or national disaster; 
c.  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
2.  The exceptions granted in subsection C of this section to a Class B authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the authorized emergency vehicle is displaying an amber light visible under normal atmospheric conditions for a distance of five hundred feet in any direction, and: 
a.  When it is necessary for the authorized emergency vehicle to use these exemptions for the immediate protection of life or property; 
b.  When an authorized emergency vehicle is stopped on a highway for the purpose of performing a duty as required of him; or 
c.  When traveling at a speed slower than the normal flow of traffic. 
D.  Class C Authorized Emergency Vehicles. All Class B specifications shall apply except that a rotating blue flashing light shall be displayed. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 3-7, 1976) 
10.44.070 - Operation of vehicles on approach of emer gency vehicles. 
    The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-26 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle and displaying a visible flashing, revolving or rotating blue, white or yellow light, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
C.  Whenever an emergency vehicle is parked or stopped at the scene of an emergency and is displaying a flashing, revolving or rotating blue, white, amber or red light, approaching traffic shall move to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway and shall stop, but once having stopped, traffic may proceed past the scene at its own risk when the roadway is clear, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
D.  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Ord. 599 § 3-8, 1976) 
10.44.080 - Immediate notice of accident. 
A.  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or property damage to an apparent extent of at least six hundred dollars shall immediately give notice of the accident to the local police department. The name of the motor vehicle insurance policy carrier and the policy number of the driver, or if the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the motor vehicle insurance policy carrier and the policy number of the owner of the vehicle, must be furnished to the law enforcement officer investigating the accident. If the driver does not have the required information concerning insurance to furnish to the investigating law enforcement officer, then within five days of the accident the driver shall supply that information to the driver's license division in the form the division requires. 
B.  The commissioner may suspend the license or permit to drive and any nonresident operating privileges of any person failing to comply with the duties as provided in North Dakota Century Code 39-08-06 through 39-08-09 until those duties have been fulfilled, and the commissioner may extend the suspension not to exceed thirty days. 
C.  An accident notice is not required from any person who is physically incapable of making the report during the period of such incapacity. 
1.  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, the occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice by the driver. 
2.  Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident and the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved shall within five days after learning of the accident, make such report not made by the driver. 
D.  The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a reportable accident as provided in subsection C of this section or of being struck by any bullet, shall report or cause a report to be made to a police officer within twenty-four hours after the motor vehicle is received, and before any repairs are made to the vehicle, giving the registration number, and the name and address of the owner, operator or person in control of the vehicle with a description of the location and type of damage to the vehicle, or any missing parts, if the vehicle does not have a sticker on a window thereof issued by a police officer, sheriff or highway patrolman, bearing information to show that the accident in which the vehicle was involved had been investigated. If the vehicle does bear such a sticker the the garage or repair shop need not make the report this section requires and may begin repairs immediately. After repairs have been made and before the vehicle is released, the sticker provided in this subsection shall be removed. 
E.  Any person who gives information reports as required in this section, knowing or having reason to believe that the information is false, shall be guilty of a violation of this title. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 3-9, 1976) 
10.44.090 - Failure to obey regulations unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by the provisions of this chapter, and upon conviction of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, every person, firm or corporation shall be punished as provided in Section 10.46.300. 
(Ord. 599 § 3-2, 1976) 
Chapter 10.46 - VIOLATION-PENALTY 
Sections: 

10.46.010 - Moving violation defined. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-09 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  For the purposes of Section 10.46.290, a "moving violation" means a violation of Section 39-04-22; subsection 1 of Section 39-04-37; Section 39-04-55; 39-06-01; 39-06-14; 39-06-16; 39-08-09; 39-08-18; 39-09-04.1; 39-09-09; 39-1204; 39-12-05; 39-12-06; 39-12-09; 39-24-02; or 39-24-09, except subdivisions b and c of subsection 5 of the North Dakota Century Code, or equivalent ordinances; or a violation of the provisions of Chapter 39-10, 39-10.2, or 39-21 of the North Dakota Century Code, or equivalent ordinances, except Sections 39-21-01, 39-21-44, and those sections within those chapters which are specifically listed in subsection 1 of section 39-06.1-08, North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 20-10, 1976) 
10.46.020 - Nonmoving violation defined. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-08 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  For the purposes of Section 10.46.290, a "nonmoving violation" means Sections 10.16.120, 10.16.370 and 10.16.380, or the provisions of Chapter 10.20. 
(Ord. 599 § 20-9, 1976) 
10.46.030 - Driving under influence of intoxicating li quor or drugs prohibited. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-01 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  A person may not drive any vehicle upon a highway or upon public or private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use within the corporate limits of the city if any of the following apply: 
1.  That person has a blood alcohol concentration of at least ten one-hundredths of one percent by weight at the time of the performance of a chemical test within two hours after the driving; 
2.  That person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor; 
3.  That person is a habitual user of narcotic drugs or is under the influence of a narcotic drug; 
4.  That person is under the influence of any controlled substance to a degree which renders that person incapable of safely driving; 
5.  That person is under the influence of a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance to a degree which renders that person incapable of safely driving. 
C.  A person may not be in actual physical control of any vehicle upon a highway or upon public or private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use within the corporate limits of the city if any of the following apply: 
1.  That person has a blood alcohol concentration of at least ten one-hundredths of one percent by weight at the time of the performance of a chemical test within two hours after being in physical control of a vehicle; 
2.  That person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor; 
3.  That person is a habitual user of narcotic drugs or is under the influence of a narcotic drug; 
4.  That person is under the influence of any controlled substance to a degree which renders that person incapable of safely driving; 
5.  That person is under the influence of a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance to a degree which renders that person incapable of safely driving. 
D.  A person violating this section, or equivalent state statute for the first or second conviction in a five-year period shall be charged under this section. A third or subsequent violation of this section, or equivalent state statute shall be charged in state court. 
E.  Upon conviction, the court may order the motor vehicle owned and operated by the offender at the time of the offense to be impounded by the sheriff or the chief law enforcement officer of the city, as is appropriate, for the duration of the period of suspension of the offender's driver's license or driving privilege by the licensing authority. The impounded motor vehicle number plates may be released, upon the order of the court, to a bona fide purchaser of the offender's motor vehicle, if that purchaser produces a new certificate of title issued by the registrar of motor vehicles. 
F.  A person convicted of violating this section must be sentenced in accordance with this subsection. 
1.  For a first offense, the sentence must include both a fine of at least two hundred fifty dollars and an order for addiction evaluation by an appropriate licensed addiction treatment program. 
2.  For a second offense within five years, the sentence must include at least four days' imprisonment of which forty-eight hours must be served consecutively, or ten days' community service; a fine of at least five hundred dollars; and an order for addiction evaluation by an appropriate licensed addiction treatment program. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 676 (part), 1984; Ord. 599 § 19-1, 1976) 
10.46.040 - Reckless driving. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-03 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any person shall be guilty of reckless driving if he drives a vehicle: 
1.  Recklessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others; or 
2.  Without due caution and circumstances and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or the property of another. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-2, 1976) 
10.46.050 - Duty when involved in accident. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-05 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close thereto as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of the accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of Section 10.46.060. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with the requirements under such circumstances shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-3, 1976) 
10.46.060 - Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-07 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances thereof. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-4, 1976) 
10.46.070 - Duty upon striking highway fixtures. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-08 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the property of the fact and of his name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and shall make report of such accident when and as required in Section 10.44.080. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-5, 1976) 
10.46.080 - Driving while license suspended or revoked. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06-42 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Except as provided in North Dakota Century Code Chapters 39-16 and 39-16.1, and in North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-11, any person who drives a motor vehicle on a highway or on public or private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use in this state while that person's license or privilege so to do is suspended or revoked is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
C.  If the suspension or revocation was imposed for violation of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-01 or Section 10.46.030 of this code, or equivalent ordinance or was governed by North Dakota Century Code 39-06-31 or Chapter 3920, the sentence must be at least four consecutive days' imprisonment and such fine as the court deems proper. The sentence and the imposition of sentence may not be suspended under North Dakota Century Code 12-53. Forfeiture of bail is not permitted in lieu of the defendant's personal appearance in open court for arraignment on a charge under this subsection. 
D.  In addition to any other punishment imposed, the court may order the number plates of the motor vehicle owned and operated by the offender at the time of the offense to be impounded by the city police for the duration of the period of suspension or revocation. When a period of suspension has been extended under North Dakota Century Code 39-06-17, subsection 5, the court may order the number plates to be impounded in accordance with this subsection. The impounded number plates may be released, upon order of the court, to a bona fide purchaser of the offender's motor vehicle, if that purchaser produces a new certificate of title to the motor vehicle issued by the registrar of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 19-6, 1976) 
10.46.090 - Driving without a license. 
    No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a highway in this city unless the person has a valid license as an operator, or is expressly exempted from licensing requirements, by the laws of this state. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-10, 1976) 
10.46.110 - Harassment of domestic animals. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-19 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any person operating a motorcycle, snowmobile or other motor vehicle as defined in Sections 10.02.330 and 10.02.340 who wilfully harasses or frightens any domestic animal shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense. If injury or death results to the animal due to such action, the person shall be liable for the value of the animal and exemplary damages as provided in North Dakota Century Code 36-21-13. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-8, 1976) 
10.46.120 - Operation on flood protective works. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-10-65 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Unless authorized by the authority in charge thereof, no person shall operate a motor vehicle, tractor or other vehicle upon or across any flood protective works, including but not limited to, any dike or flood protective works constructed by a state or federal agency, or by any municipality or local subdivision of the state. 
C.  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be liable to any person suffering injury as a result of the violation, and, in addition, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-9, 1976) 
10.46.130 - License to be carried and displayed on de mand. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06- 16 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Every licensee shall have his operator's license or permit in his immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and shall display the same, upon demand of any district court, municipal court, county court, a patrolman, peace officer, or a field deputy or inspector of the highway department. However, no person charged with violating this section shall be convicted or assessed any court costs if he produces in court, to the chief of police or in the office of the arresting officer, an operator's license or permit theretofore issued to him and valid and not under suspension, revocation, or cancellation at the time of his arrest. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 19-11, 1976) 
10.46.140 - Restricted licenses. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06-17 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The commissioner, upon issuing an operator's license or a temporary restricted operator's license pursuant to North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-11, shall have authority whenever good cause appears to impose restrictions suitable to the licensee's driving ability with respect to the type of or special mechanical control devices required on a motor vehicle which the licensee may operate or such other restrictions applicable to the licensee as the commissioner may determine to be appropriate to assure the safe operation of a motor vehicle by the licensee. 
C.  The commissioner may either issue a special restricted license or may set forth such restrictions upon the usual license form. The commissioner shall likewise restrict licenses pursuant to the requirements of North Dakota Century Code 39-16.1-09. 
D.  A restricted operator's license or permit to operate his parent's or guardian's automobile, or any other automobile which is equipped with dual controls and while accompanied by a qualified instructor, may be issued to any child, who is at least fourteen years of age, and otherwise qualified, upon the written recommendation of his parent or guardian. No driver's license shall be issued until the child, accompanied by his parent or guardian, shall appear in person and satisfy the examining officer that: 
1.  The child is at least fourteen years of age; 
2.  The child is qualified to operate an automobile safely; 
3.  It is necessary for the child to drive his parent's or guardian's automobile without being accompanied by an adult; 
4.  The child has completed a course of classroom instruction and a course of behind-the-wheel instruction acceptable to the commissioner; or, in the alternative, has successfully completed a course at an approved commercial driver training school. 
    The parent or guardian, at all times shall be responsible for any and all damages growing out of the negligent operation of a motor vehicle by any such child. The provisions of this subsection shall not authorize the child to drive a motorcycle, commercial truck, motor bus, or taxicab. 
E.  The commissioner may upon receiving satisfactory evidence of any violation of the restrictions of such license suspend or revoke the same but the licensee shall be entitled to a hearing as upon a suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
F.  It is an offense for any person to operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the restrictions imposed in a restricted license issued to that person. If the restricted license was issued under North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-11, and the underlying suspension was imposed for a violation of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-01, or equivalent ordinance, or is governed by North Dakota Century Code 39-20, punishment is as provided in subsection C of Section 10.46.080 of this code, and upon receiving notice of the conviction the commissioner shall revoke, without opportunity for hearing, the licensee's restricted license and shall extend the underlying suspension for a like period of not more than one year. The commissioner may not issue a restricted license for the extended period of suspension imposed under this subsection. If the conviction referred to in this section is reversed by an appellate court, the commissioner shall restore the person to the status held by the person prior to the conviction, including restoration of driving privileges if appropriate. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 19-13, 1976) 
10.46.150 - Unlawful use of license a misdemeanor. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06-40 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  A driver shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor when he: 
1.  Displays or causes or permits to be displayed or has in his possession any cancelled, revoked, suspended, fictitious or fraudulently altered operator's or chauffeur's license; 
2.  Lends his operator's or chauffeur's license to any other person or knowingly permits its use by another; 
3.  Displays or represents as one's own any operator's or chauffeur's license not issued to him; 
4.  Fails or refuses to surrender to the commissioner upon his lawful demand any operator's or chauffeur's license which has been suspended, revoked or cancelled; 
5.  Permits any unlawful use of an operator's or chauffeur's license issued to him. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-14, 1976) 
10.46.160 - Unlawful to reproduce or alter valid license. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06-40.1 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to print, photograph, photostat, duplicate, alter or in any way reproduce any operator's or driver's license or permit or facsimile thereof, or to print, photograph, photostat, duplicate, alter, or in any way reproduce any document used in the production of any operator's or driver's license or permit or facsimile thereof, in such a manner that it would be mistaken for a valid license or document containing valid information, or to display or have in his possession any such print, photograph, photostat, duplicate, reproduction or facsimile unless authorized by the provisions of the North Dakota law. 
C.  It is also unlawful for any person to alter in any manner any operator's or driver's license or permit, or to display or have in his possession any altered operator's or driver's license or permit. 
D.  Every person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
E.  The commissioner, upon receiving a record of the conviction or other satisfactory evidence of the violation of this section, shall revoke forthwith the operator's or driver's license or driving privileges of such person. The period of revocation shall be determined at the discretion of the commissioner. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 19-15, 1976) 
10.46.170 - Duty to submit to weighing of load. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-12-21 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any driver of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit the vehicle and load to a weighing when directed to do so by any police officer or any agent of this state having police powers relating to motor vehicles, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-12, 1976) 
10.46.200 - Duty to give information about accident resulting in injury or death. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-08-06 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall give his name, address and the registration number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available, exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with and shall render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the carrying, of such person to a physician, surgeon or hospital for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is requested by the injured person. 
(Ord. 599 § 19-18, 1976) 
10.46.210 - Care required in operating vehicle. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-09-01.1 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any person driving a vehicle upon a highway shall drive the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner, having due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the highway and other conditions then existing, and shall give such warnings as are reasonably necessary for safe operation under the circumstances. No person may drive any vehicle upon a highway in a manner to endanger the life, limb or property of any person. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 19-19, 1976) 
10.46.220 - Authority of police when halting violator. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-07-07 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Whenever any person is halted for the violation of any of the provisions of North Dakota Century Code Chapters 39-01 through 39-13, 39-18, 39-21, and 39-24, or of equivalent city ordinances, the officer halting that person, except as otherwise provided in Section 10.46.240, may: 
1.  Take the name and address of the person; 
2.  Take the license number of the person's motor vehicle; and 
3.  Issue a summons or otherwise notify that person in writing to appear at a time and place to be specified in the summons or notice. 
    A halting officer employed by the city may not take a person into custody or require that person to proceed with the officer to any other location for the purpose of posting bond, where the traffic violation was a noncriminal offense under North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-02. The officer shall provide the person with an envelope for use in mailing the bond. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 20-1, 1976) 
10.46.230 - Notice of hearing and penalty for failure to promise to appear. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-07-08 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The time to be specified in the summons or notice provided for in Section 10.46.220 shall be within ten days after the issuance of the summons or notice unless the person halted demands an earlier hearing and, if the person halted desires, he may have the right, at a convenient hour, to an immediate hearing or to a hearing within twenty-four hours. The hearing shall be before the municipal court. Upon the receipt from the person halted of a written promise to appear at the time and place mentioned in the summons or notice, the officer shall release him from custody. Any person refusing to give such written promise to appear shall be taken immediately by the halting officer before the nearest or most accessible magistrate, or to such other place or before such other person as may be provided by a statute or ordinance authorizing the giving of bail. Any person wilfully violating his written promise to appear shall be guilty of an offense, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he originally was halted. 
(Ord. 599 § 20-2, 1976) 
10.46.240 - Police to hold violator when. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-07-09 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The provisions of Section 10.46.220 shall not apply to a person if: 
1.  The halting officer has good reason to believe the person guilty of any felony or when the person is halted and charged with any of the offenses listed in Section 10.46.280, except reckless driving; or 
2.  The halting officer, acting within his discre- tion, deems it inadvisable to release the person upon his promise to appear when halted and charged with either of the following offenses: 
a.  Reckless driving, or 
b.  Driving in excess of speed limitations established by the state or by local authorities in their respective jurisdictions. 
C.  The halting officer forthwith shall take any person not released upon his promise to appear before the nearest or most accessible magistrate. 
(Ord. 599 § 20-3, 1976) 
10.46.250 - Violations a noncriminal offense. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-02 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any person cited, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 10.46.220 and 10.46.230 for a traffic violation under a municipal ordinance, other than an offense listed in Section 10.46.280, shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal offense and may appear before the designated official and pay the statutory fee for the violation charged at or prior to the time scheduled for a hearing, or, if he has posted bond in person, as provided by Section 10.46.220, or by mail, he may forfeit bond by not appearing at the designated time. If the person appears at the time scheduled in the citation, he may make a statement in explanation of his action, and the official may at that time, in his discretion, waive, reduce or suspend the statutory fee or bond, or both. If the person cited follows the foregoing procedures, he shall be deemed to have admitted the violation and to have waived his right to a hearing on the issue of commission of the violation. The bond required to secure appearance before the official designated in the citation shall be identical to the statutory fee established by Section 10.46.290. Within ten days after forfeiture of bond or payment of the statutory fee, the official having jurisdiction over the violation shall certify to the licensing authority: 
1.  Admission of the violation; and 
2.  In speeding violations, whether the speed charged was in excess of the lawful speed limit by more than nine miles (14.48 kilometers) per hour and the miles (kilometers) per hour by which the speed limit was exceeded. 
C.  This section shall not be construed as allowing a halting officer to receive the statutory fee or bond, unless he is otherwise authorized by law to do so. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 20-4, 1976) 
10.46.260 - Hearing procedure, cost and appeal. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-03 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  If a person cited for a traffic violation, other than an offense listed in Section 10.46.280, does not choose to follow one of the procedures set forth in Section 10.46.250, he may request a hearing on the issue of his commission of the violation charged, the hearing to be held at the time scheduled in the citation or at some future time, not to exceed ninety days later, set at that first appearance. 
C.  At the time of a request for a hearing on the issue of commission of the violation, the person charged shall deposit with the official having jurisdiction an appearance bond equal to the statutory fee for the violation charged. 
D.  If a person cited for a traffic violation, other than an offense listed in Section 10.46.280, who has requested a hearing on the issue of the commission of the violation charged, appears at the time scheduled for the hearing and the state or city, as the case may be, does not appear or is not ready to prove the commission of a charged violation at the hearing, the official shall dismiss the charge. 
E.  If the official finds that the person had committed the traffic violation, he shall notify the licensing authority of that fact, and whether the person was driving more than nine miles (14.48 kilometers) per hour in excess of the lawful limit, stating specifically the miles (kilometers) per hour in excess of the lawful limit, if charged with a speeding violation, within ten days of the date of the hearing. The fact that a person has admitted a violation, or has, in any proceeding, been found to have committed a violation, shall not be referred to in any way, nor be admissible as evidence in any court, civil, equity, or criminal, except in an action or proceeding involving that person's driving license or privilege. 
F.  1.  If a person is aggrieved by a finding that he committed the violation, he may, without payment of a filing fee, appeal that finding to the district court or county court for trial anew. If, after trial in the appellate court, the person is again found to have committed the violation, there shall be no further appeal. Notice of appeal under this subsection shall be given within thirty days after a finding of commission of a violation is entered by the official. Oral notice of appeal may be given to the official at the time that the official adjudges that a violation has been committed. Otherwise, notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with the official, and a copy of the notice shall be served upon the prosecuting attorney. An appeal taken under this subsection shall not operate to stay the reporting requirement of subsection E of this section, nor to stay appropriate action by the licensing authority upon receipt of that report. 
2.  The appellate court upon application by the appellant may: 
a.  Order a stay of any action by the licensing authority during pendency of the appeal, but not to exceed a period of one-hundred-twenty days; 
b.  Order a stay and that the appellant be issued a temporary restricted driving certificate by the licensing authority to be effective for no more than one-hundred-twenty days; or 
c.  Deny the application. 
    An application for a stay or temporary certificate under this subdivision shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the appellant's driving record, for the furnishing of which the licensing authority may charge a fee of two dollars. Any order granting a stay or a temporary certificate shall be forwarded forthwith by the clerk of court to the licensing authority, which shall issue a temporary certificate in accordance with the order in the manner provided by law. A court shall not make a determination on an application under this subdivision without notice to the appropriate prosecuting attorney. A person who violates or exceeds the restrictions contained in any temporary restricted driving certificate issued pursuant to this subdivision shall be guilty of a traffic violation and shall be assessed a fee of twenty dollars. 
3.  If the person charged is found not to have committed the violation by the appellate court, the clerk of court shall report that fact to the licensing authority immediately. If an appeal under this subsection is from a violation of a city ordinance, the city attorney for the city wherein the alleged violation occurred shall prosecute the appeal. In all other cases, the appropriate state's attorney shall prosecute the appeal. 
G.  The city must prove the commission of a charged violation at the hearing or appeal under this section by a fair preponderance of the evidence. Upon an appeal under subsection F of this section, the court and parties shall follow, to the extent applicable, the North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure. If on appeal from the finding of the official the finding is affirmed, costs may be assessed at the discretion of the trial judge. 
H.  As used in Sections 10.46.250 through 10.46.270, the word "official" means a district judge, a judge of a county court, a municipal judge, or, when provided by statute, a person appointed by a district judge to serve as official for all or a specified part of a judicial district. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 20-5, 1976) 
10.46.270 - Failure to appear means admission of guilt. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-04 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  If a person fails to choose one of the methods of proceeding set forth in Sections 10.46.250 or 10.46.260, he shall be deemed to have admitted to commission of the violation charged, and the municipal court shall report such fact to the licensing authority within ten days after the date set for the hearing. Failure to appear at the time designated, after signing a promise to appear, without paying the statutory fee or posting and forfeiting bond shall be an offense. Failure to appear without just cause at the hearing shall also be deemed an admission of commission of the violation charged. 
(Ord. 599 § 20-6, 1976) 
10.46.280 - When appeal not permitted. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-05 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The procedures authorized under Sections 10.46.250 and 10.46.260 may not be utilized by a person charged with one of the following offenses: 
1.  Driving or being in actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of a controlled substance or intoxicating liquor in violation of Section 10.46.030; 
2.  Reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving in violation of Section 10.46.040; 
3.  Leaving the scene of an accident in violation of Sections 10.46.050 through 10.46.070; 
4.  Driving while license or driving privilege is suspended or revoked in violation of Section 10.46.080; 
5.  Violating Section 10.46.100; 
6.  Driving without a license in violation of Section 10.46.090; 
7.  Operating a modified motor vehicle in violation of Section 10.46.180. 
(Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 20-7, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 920, 3-17-14) 
10.46.290 - Fees for violations. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-06.1-06 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  The fees required for a noncriminal disposition pursuant either to Section 10.46.250 or Section 10.46.260 shall be as follows: 
1.  For a nonmoving violation as defined in Section 10.46.020, a fee of ten dollars; 
2.  For a moving violation as defined in Section 10.46.010, a fee of twenty dollars; 
3.  For a violation of Section 10.08.020, or an equivalent ordinance, a fee established as follows: 
Miles per hour 
over lawful 
speed limit Fee 1-5 $5.00 6-10 $5.00 plus $1.00/each mph over 5 mph over limit 11-15 $10.00 plus $1.00/each mph over 10 mph over limit 16-20 $15.00 plus $2.00/each mph over 15 mph over limit 21-25 $25.00 plus $3.00 each mph over 20 mph over limit 26-35 $40.00 plus $3.00 each mph over 25 mph over limit 36-45 $70.00 plus $3.00 each mph over 35 mph over limit 46 + $100.00 plus $5.00 each mph over 45 mph over limit  
4.  For a violation of Section 10.08.010 or an ordinance defining careless driving, a fee of thirty dollars. 
5.  For a violation of Section 10.46.210, or an ordinance defining care required in driving, a fee of not less than ten dollars nor more than thirty dollars. 
6.  For a violation of Section 10.20.120, a fee of one hundred dollars. 
7.  For a first violation of Section 10.36.210 a fee of one hundred fifty dollars which may not be suspended. For a second or subsequent violation of driving without liability insurance within a three-year period a fee of three hundred dollars which may not be suspended. 
8.  For a violation of Section 10.16.450(A), a fee of one hundred dollars. 
9.  For a violation of Section 10.16.460, a fee of twenty dollars. 
(Ord. 724, 1988; Ord. 688 (part), 1986: Ord. 599 § 20-8, 1976) 
(Ord. No. 920, 3-17-14) 
10.46.300 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  The provisions of North Dakota Century Code 39-07-06 and all subsequent amendments shall be and are incorporated by reference in this title. 
B.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which another criminal penalty is not provided specifically, shall be guilty of an infraction. As used in this section, the phrase "another criminal penalty" includes provision for payment of a fixed fee for violating another section in this chapter, but does not include any other administrative sanction which may be imposed. 
(Ord. 599 § 20-11, 1976) 
Chapter 10.47 - RAILROAD CARS AND TRAINS 
Sections: 

10.47.010 - Speed limit of railroad cars and trains. 
    All railroad trains, engines, cars and other equipment or vehicles moving on fixed rails within the inhabited and business limits of the city shall be run and operated at a speed not to exceed that mandated by the Federal Railroad Safety Act, 45 USC Section 434, and relevant regulations covering train speed pursuant to Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(Ord. 769, 1992: Ord. 762, 1991) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 12.04 - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - Materials and methods. 
    All sidewalks to be located in public rights-of-way shall be constructed of such materials and by such methods as are specified within the most current edition of the construction specifications of the city for the construction of public sidewalks. 
(Ord. 642 § 1, 1981) 
12.04.020 - Width as required by engineering department. 
    All sidewalks shall be constructed in such a manner that the developed width of the sidewalk will be as required by the city engineering department. 
(Ord. 642 § 2, 1981) 
12.04.030 - Permit required. 
    Prior to the commencement of construction or removal of any sidewalk located, or to be located, in a public right-of-way, a permit shall be obtained for such work from the city engineering department. 
(Ord. 642 § 3, 1981) 
12.04.040 - Inspection prior to and after completion of work. 
A.  All work to be conducted under such permit shall be caused to be inspected, prior to the placement of concrete, by a representative of the city engineering department who will establish the sidewalk grade for the purposes of drainage, public safety and walkway continuity. No permitted work shall proceed without the prior approval of the representative of the city engineering department. 
B.  Upon completion, all such work shall be inspected by a representative of the city engineering department to insure that the completed work has been accomplished in compliance with the construction specifications of the city. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the person, or persons, doing the work to arrange inspections with the city engineering department. 
(Ord. 642 § 4, 1981) 
12.04.050 - Permit fee rates established by board of city commissioners. 
    Permit fee rates for construction or removal of sidewalks located, or to be located, in a public right-of-way shall be established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. 642 § 5, 1981) 
12.04.060 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the event that a party constructing or removing sidewalk in a public right- of-way fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter the city commission may refuse to issue further city permits to that party. The commission may impose an administrative fine upon that party in a sum not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 642 § 6, 1981) 
Chapter 12.08 - OPENING STREETS FOR INSTALLATION AND REPAIR OF PUBLIC UTILITIES 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Application and fee for permit. 
A.  Any person, contractor or other entity desiring to open any street or alley within the city for the purpose of installing or repairing public utilities shall, before commencing the installation or repair, apply to the commissioner of the street department or such other person as may be designated by the commissioner of the street department, for permit to open the paved street or alley. 
B.  The fee for opening any street or alley for the installation or repair of public utilities shall be set by resolution of the city commission, and revised as it may see fit. The fee shall be payable within ten days of application for the permit mentioned in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 685 (part), 1986; Ord. 677 (part), 1984; Ord. 643 § 1, 1981) 
12.08.020 - Regulations. 
A.  The contractor shall have the opening in the street prepared for resurfacing, pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, within seventy-two hours of the original opening. In the event the closure is delayed for good cause shown, the street commissioner or his designee may grant an extension of time for closure not to exceed five additional days. 
B.  When the contractor is opening the street or alley, the opening in the street or alley shall be vertical, with straight edges. 
C.  During the period from when the opening is commenced and until such time as the opening in the street or alley is prepared for resurfacing, the contractor shall barricade the opening, the reflectorized signs and barriers which shall have the name of the contractor affixed on them. When it is necessary to close the street, barricades shall be erected at the nearest intersections on both sides of the opening. 
(Ord. 643 § 2, 1981) 
12.08.030 - Procedure and charge for closure. 
A.  The contractor shall backfill the ditch in maximum eight-inch (loose) lifts to the top of the surfacing and shall notify the director of utilities or his designee at least one day in advance as to the time that the backfilling operation will begin. The director of utilities or his designee shall be present at the site during the backfilling. If employees are required to be present at a backfill site after five p.m. Monday through Friday or anytime on Saturday or Sunday a charge of twenty-five dollars per hour shall be necessary. The bill for the charge shall be sent directly to the contractor with a letter sent to the property owner explaining that the bill is a result of the contractor's planned time of closing. 
B.  The backfill material shall be placed in such a manner that no further settlement occurs. The degree of compaction and moisture content shall be equivalent to the surrounding soil. 
C.  The charge for an employee's time required at a backfill site after five p.m. Monday through Friday or anytime on Saturday or Sunday shall be set by the city commission by January 1st of each year by resolution. 
(Ord. 685 (part), 1986; Ord. 643 § 3, 1981) 
12.08.050 - Replacement of concrete in certain areas. 
    In areas paved with concrete and asphalt, the contractor shall replace the concrete to its original thickness and leave the surface of the concrete two inches below the finished grade. 
(Ord. 643 § 5, 1981) 
12.08.060 - Contractors must have license. 
    All persons contracting to do this type of work shall have a North Dakota contractor's license along with a city contractor's license and have a liability insurance in the minimum amount of three hundred thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 643 § 6, 1981) 
12.08.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    In the event the party opening the street or alley fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the city commission may revoke the contractor license and refuse to issue further city permits to the contractor. The commission may impose an administrative fine upon the contractor in a sum not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars per violation. 
(Ord. 643 § 7, 1981) 
Chapter 12.12 - SNOW REMOVAL AND STREET SWEEPING* 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Definitions. 
    It is understood that streets generally run east and west, and avenues generally run north and south. 
(Ord. 763 (part), 1991) 
12.12.020 - Publication of notice for snow removal. 
A.  On or before November 1st of each year a notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the city for seven consecutive days stating that following each snowfall of the winter season the city will remove snow from streets and avenues of the city, and that all vehicles shall be removed from them accordingly. Such notice will state the schedule to be followed. 
B.  In the event of a snowfall prior to the notice, which justifies snow removal, the department head of the street department shall announce a special warning on the radio which gives notice to remove vehicles from the streets or avenues affected. However, the vehicles shall not be removed by the city nor shall penalties described in this section apply unless a minimum of twelve hours have elapsed from the time of this special warning. 
(Ord. 763 (part), 1991) 
12.12.030 - Publication of notice for sweeping. 
A.  On or before April 1st of each year a notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the city for seven consecutive days giving notice to residents that the streets and avenues of the city will be swept on designated days and that all vehicles shall be removed from them on these days. 
B.  Certain days of the week shall be designated for the sweeping of streets and other certain days of the week shall be designated for the sweeping of avenues 
(Ord. 763 (part), 1991) 
12.12.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
    All persons who fail to remove their vehicle from the streets or avenues of the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may have their vehicles removed by employees of the city, or their agents to an impound lot or such other convenient place as may be deemed necessary and be subject to a penalty as set forth in the fees and rates as set by the city commission. 
(Ord. 763 (part), 1991) 
(Ord. No. 959, 12-3-18) 
Chapter 12.13 - OBSTRUCTIONS CAUSED BY SNOW REMOVAL 
Sections: 

12.13.010 - Snow placed on streets. 
    No person shall deposit, place, move, push or locate snow and leave the snow on streets or alleys in the city. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 2000) 
12.13.020 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Snow shoveled from sidewalks to the street or alley in the downtown area, provided the downtown property has no place other than the sidewalk and street to put the snow. For the purposes of this exception, the downtown area is defined as the area between the following: one-half of the block on the outside of 6th Street, the one-half of the block on the outside of 6th Avenue, and the one-half of the block on the outside of Railroad Avenue. 
B.  City employees, while in the course of their employment for the city, may place snow on the streets or alleys while removing the snow from the city. 
C.  By motion of the city commission, the ordinance codified in this chapter may be suspended for a time period and upon conditions set by the city commission. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 2000) 
12.13.030 - Penalty. 
    The penalty for a violation of this chapter shall be set in the fees and rates adopted by the city commission. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 2000) 
12.13.040 - Payment of penalty. 
    The person causing the violation of this chapter shall be responsible to pay the penalty. Should that person fail to pay the penalty, these charges shall be assessed to the property from where the snow was taken. 
(Ord. 839 (part), 2000) 
Chapter 12.14 - REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE 
Sections: 

12.14.010 - Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. 
    The owner of any lot or parcel of land abutting any sidewalk shall: 
A.  Keep the sidewalk clean and unobstructed at all times. 
B.  Remove snow and ice within twenty-four hours after the snow falls or ice forms, and keep the sidewalk free of ice and snow. Sand, salt, or any chemical product approved by the city engineer may be used to make the area safe for pedestrian travel if removal of ice is impracticable. 
(Ord. No. 957, 12-3-18) 
12.14.020 - Assessment for removal of snow and ice. 
    Should snow and ice not be removed in the manner required, it shall be removed under the direction of the department head of public works or the city engineer, and costs assessed to the abutting property pursuant to Chapter 40-29 and any subsequent amendments. 
(Ord. No. 957, 12-3-18) 
Chapter 12.16 - SHADE TREES* 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Shade tree foreman" is the forester, tree warden or other qualified official of the municipality assigned to carry out the enforcement of this chapter under the supervision of the shade tree committee. 
B.  "Small trees" are designated as those attaining a height of twenty to thirty feet. 
C.  "Street" or "highway" means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
D.  "Tree lawn" is that part of a street or highway, not covered by a sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. 636 § 2, 1980) 
12.16.020 - Permits required. 
A.  No person shall plant, prune, remove, cut aboveground or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or municipal-owned property without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the shade tree foreman or otherwise specified municipal authority designated by the shade tree committee. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the aboricultural specifications and standards of practice adopted by the shade tree committee. 
B.  If chemicals used to fertilize or spray for disease and/or insects on any street or municipal-owned property are chemicals that require the applicant to have a license when using, then a permit is required. 
C.  Application for permits should be made at the office of the shade tree foreman or other designated authority not less than forty-eight hours in advance of the time the work is to be done. 
D.  The shade tree foreman shall issue the permit provided for in this section if, in his judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration and the work shall be completed in the time allowed on the permit and in the manner described in the permit. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. 
E.  Notice of completion shall be given within five days to the shade tree foreman for his inspection. 
(Ord. 636 § 7(I), 1980) 
12.16.030 - Application specifications and removal of improper planting. 
A.  Permit Data. The application required in Section 12.16.020 shall state the number of trees to be set out; the location, grade specified, cultivar or variety of each tree; the method of planting; and such other information as the shade tree foreman shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
B.  Improper Planting. Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be lawful for the shade tree foreman to remove or cause removal of it, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the case of special assessments. 
(Ord. 636 § 7(II), 1980) 
12.16.040 - Improvement projects. 
    All municipal improvement projects that may impact boulevard trees shall be considered by the shade tree committee or its designated representative prior to the finalization of plans or the commencement of construction. 
(Ord. 636 § 7(III)(A), 1980) 
12.16.050 - Application and permit for removal. 
    No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the treelawn for the purpose of construction, or for any other reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit from the shade tree foreman, and without replacing the removed tree or trees in accordance with the adopted arboricultural specifications. The replacement shall meet the standards of size, species and placement as provided for in a permit issued by the shade tree foreman. The person or property owner shall bear the cost of removal and replacement of all trees removed if the tree does not constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. 636 § 7(III)(B), 1980) 
12.16.060 - Hazards to be pruned or removed. 
A.  All trees and shrubs within the municipality shall be pruned or removed when the trees or shrubs constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a threat to other trees or shrubs within the city. 
B.  The shade tree committee has the power and authority to prune or remove, or order to prune or remove, any such trees or shrubs on private property. The shade tree committee, or its designee, shall notify, in writing, the owners of such trees or shrubs. 
(Ord. 833 (part), 2000; Ord. 636 § 7(III)(C), 1980) 
12.16.070 - Notice of removal of public nuisance. 
    If it is determined that a tree is a public nuisance as provided in this chapter, or if the city determines that any dead or substantially dead elm trees, or dead elm wood, is a public nuisance as provided in this chapter, the shade tree foreman shall serve or cause to be served upon the owner of record of the lot or parcel of land on which the tree or dead elm wood is located, a written notice requiring the owner to comply with the provisions of this chapter. The notice shall require the property owner to correct the violation within thirty days from the receipt of the notice. The notice shall specify the legal description of the premises and, if possible, the street address of the premises. The notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at his last known address, or by personal service. If any of the owners are absent from the city and their address is unknown, the notice may be given by publishing it in the official county newspaper for two successive weeks, the time for the notice beginning on the date of the first publication. The notice shall also advise the owner that if he should fail to abate the nuisance within thirty days after receipt of the notice, the nuisance shall be abated by the city and the cost of the abatement as provided in Section 12.16.090 shall be levied as a special assessment against the property. 
(Ord. 636 § 7(III)(D), 1980) 
12.16.080 - Authority to abate nuisance. 
    Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner notified to correct a violation of this chapter within thirty days of receipt of notice as provided for in Section 12.16.070, or if the notice is returned to the city because of the inability of the United States postal service to make delivery; provided the notice was properly addressed and mailed to the last known address of the owner, the shade tree foreman and/or his delegate is authorized to abate a public nuisance as defined in this code. 
(Ord. 636 § 7(III)(E), 1980) 
12.16.090 - Cost and record of nuisance abatement. 
    Where the city has used its equipment and personnel to abate a nuisance, the cost of the service shall be carefully itemized by the shade tree foreman or other designated official or employee and the bill shall be sent to the responsible property owner. If the bill is not paid when due, the amount thereof shall be assessed against the premises on which the work is done, or for which the service is rendered and collected and returned in the same manner as other municipal taxes are assessed, certified, collected and returned. 
(Ord. 636 § 7(III)(F), 1980) 
12.16.100 - Maintenance and review of special assessments book. 
A.  The city auditor shall keep in his office a book called Nuisance Abatement, Special Assessment Book, and shall enter the cost of the abatement of a nuisance as declared by the city commission therein as a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land from which the nuisance was abated, with the name of the owner, if known to him. 
B.  At the regular meeting of the city commission in October of each year, the city commission shall review all such assessments and hear all complaints against them and approve them as finally adjusted, and the city auditor shall certify to the county auditor a list of the lots and parcels of land specially assessed for the purpose, and the sum shall be collected as other city taxes are collected. 
(Ord. 636 § 7(III)(G), 1980) 
12.16.120 - Duty to prune trees and action by city upon violation. 
A.  It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street upon which property there may be trees, to prune the trees in such manner that they will not obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, obstruct vision of traffic signs or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection. The minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be ten feet over sidewalks and twelve feet over all streets except truck routes, which shall have a clearance of sixteen feet. 
B.  Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as provided in subsection A of this section, the shade tree foreman shall order such person, or persons, within eight days after receipt of written notice, to so prune such trees. 
C.  The order required in subsection B of this section shall be served by mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the property owner, by certified mail, registered mail or hand delivered. 
(Ord. 833 (part), 2000; Ord. 636 § 8, 1980) 
12.16.130 - Responsibilities of public utilities. 
A.  Trees on public land trimmed by or under the direction of any public utility to afford clearance for wires or any other purpose should require a permit from the shade tree foreman, and such work shall be done in accordance with the regulations in the community forestry management plan. 
B.  All wires belonging to public utilities, city or individual, shall be securely fastened and maintained so as to safeguard the trees against any damage from them. An inspection should be made periodically to prevent damage to shade trees, or adjustments made whenever requested by the shade tree foreman. 
C.  Trenching operations shall be made in accordance with Section 12.16.150, and applicable criteria in the community forestry management plan. 
D.  Exemptions are made to subsections A, B and C of this section in the event of an emergency condition as determined by the public utilities companies. 
E.  Following an emergency condition in which any tree damage occurs, the public utilities are required to notify the shade tree foreman of the location of the emergency condition and the extent of the tree damage. 
F.  The public utility companies shall be required to submit to the shade tree foreman the names of tree care personnel used by the utility company to assure that they have been certified by the shade tree foreman. 
(Ord. 636 § 9, 1980) 
12.16.140 - Damaging public trees prohibited. 
    Unless specifically authorized by the shade tree foreman, no person shall intentionally damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree; attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any tree, allowing any gaseous liquid or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire or permit any fire to burn when the fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any tree. 
(Ord. 636 § 10, 1980) 
12.16.150 - Protection during construction. 
A.  All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work, shall be guarded with a good, substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet high and eight feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the tree in inches D.B.H. (Diameter at breast height approximately four and one-half feet), whichever is greater, and all building material, dirt or other debris shall be kept outside the barrier. 
B.  No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches or lay any drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree without first obtaining a written permit from the shade tree foreman. 
(Ord. 833 (part), 2000; Ord. 636 § 12, 1980) 
12.16.160 - Storing construction materials under trees. 
    No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public place of the municipality, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other materials, which may impede the free passage of water, air and nutrients to the roots of any tree growing therein, except by written permit of the shade tree foreman. 
(Ord. 833 (part), 2000: Ord. 636 § 13, 1980) 
12.16.170 - Interfering with enforcement prohibited. 
    No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the shade tree foreman or any of his assistants while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the municipality. 
(Ord. 636 § 11, 1980) 
12.16.180 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which fine shall be equal to the amount of physical damage sustained. 
(Ord. 833 (part), 2000: Ord. 660 § 1, 1983: Ord. 636 § 14, 1980) 
Chapter 12.20 - PARKS 
Sections: 

12.20.010 - State laws accepted. 
    The provisions of the Act of the legislature of the state, being Sections 4055 to 4083 inclusive, Compiled Laws 1913, as amended, are accepted by the board of city commissioners, for and on behalf of the city, it being the intent and desire of the city, acting by and through the board of city commissioners, to accept all of the benefits and provisions of the act. 
(Prior code § 476) 
Chapter 12.24 - MAILBOXES 
Sections: 

12.24.010 - Definitions of terms used in this chapter. 
A.  "Mailbox" means a residential or commercial mail delivery receptacle, the design and construction of which is approved by the U.S. Postal Service for delivery of mail directly from the operator of a motor vehicle; said receptacle is typically fastened to a free standing post and adjacent to the shoulder of a road or the curbs. 
B.  "Newspaper box" means a residential or commercial receptacle for newspapers typically fastened to a post adjacent to the shoulder of a roadway or behind the curb enabling the placement of newspapers therein directly from a motor vehicle. 
C.  "Right-of-way" means a strip of land designed or dedicated for streets, boulevards, alley, sidewalks, railroad, electric transmission line, telephone and telegraph lines, oil or gas pipeline, sanitary and storm sewer, or water systems. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.020 - Prohibition of mailboxes or right-of-way. 
    Mailboxes are not permitted within the right-of-way on any four lane road, any two lane road with center left turn lanes, and any roads with diagonal parking unless the city engineer determines there are adequate parking and stopping areas outside the lanes of traffic on those roads. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.030 - Mailboxes in areas with greater than twenty-five mile per hour speed limits. 
    All mailboxes along routes with posted speed limit greater than twenty-five miles per hour must be installed with breakaway posts according to the standards established by the North Dakota Department of Transportation. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.040 - Multiple area service. 
    Multiple mailboxes for area service are recommended, wherever possible. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.050 - Damage to mailboxes. 
    The city is not liable for any damage which may result to any mailbox during the city's normal maintenance operation (i.e. snow removal, street sweeping, etc.). The owner of the mailbox shall be responsible for any such damage to their mailbox. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.060 - Removal, resetting or relocation of mailboxes. 
A.  The removal, resetting or relocation of any mailbox shall be the responsibility of the owner of the mailbox. This includes the removal, resetting or relocation of any mailbox because of street or city utility construction or maintenance operations, or if the location of the mailbox is a safety hazard as determined by the city engineer. 
B.  If the removal, resetting or relocation of any mailbox is necessary, the city will provide the owner of the property upon which the mailbox is located written notice. This notice will inform the property owner of the grounds for the request and that the property owner has ten days from the date of the notice to remove, reset or relocate the mailbox. 
C.  If the property owner has not removed, reset or relocated the mailbox within those ten days, the city shall do it and the cost to the city shall be assessed to the property where the mailbox is located. 
D.  The property owner may appeal the determination of the city engineer set out in paragraph A above. To do so, the property owner must file with the city auditor a notice of appeal no later than seven days from the date of the notice to remove, reset or relocate the mailbox. The city auditor shall set the hearing before the city commission no later than thirty days from receiving the notice of appeal. The city auditor shall send to the property owner the date, time and location of the hearing no later than seven days prior to the date of the hearing. Should there be an emergency, as determined by the city commission, the dates set forth herein may be reduced by action of the city commission. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.070 - Mailbox supports. 
    The use of the mailbox supports that, when struck, could damage vehicles and cause serious injury to vehicle occupants, are prohibited. Heavy metal posts, railroad ties, concrete posts, brick base, and items such as farm equipment or supports filled with concrete are also prohibited. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.080 - Newspaper box. 
    All newspaper boxes within the city, installed or replaced subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be as close as practical to the residential and commercial mailboxes specified and utilized by the United States Postal Service. It is the intention of this chapter that these newspaper boxes shall be attached to the pole and/or other edifice used for the delivery of mail by the United States Postal Service. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.090 - Penalty provision. 
    Any violation of this chapter shall result in a fine not to exceed three hundred dollars. Further, the city may request, and the court shall order, the removal of any delivery mailbox and/or newspaper box which violates any provision of this chapter and the cost of the removal shall be assessed as a cost to the defendant in addition to the fine. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
12.24.100 - Existing mailboxes. 
    This chapter does not effect any mailboxes which exist on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, which mailboxes may be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. If any of these existing mailboxes are removed, replaced, reset, relocated, or repaired, those mailboxes must then be in compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
Chapter 13.08 - WATER AND SEWER UTILITY 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Water facilities. 
    The water facilities now and hereafter owned by the city shall henceforth constitute a public utility of the city, to be held, operated and administered by it as an undertaking to be known as the water utility. The properties shall include the pumping plant, water treatment plant, other buildings and machinery in all such buildings, the water mains, hydrants and connections as now or hereafter constructed or erected, the water line, wells and appurtenances and all other systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, equipment, material and supplies and all lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchise, reservoirs, mains, conduits, pumping stations and all parts and appurtenances of any of the foregoing which are or shall be used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply and the conservation, treatment and distribution of water for public and private uses. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.020 - Sewerage facilities. 
    The sewerage facilities now and hereafter owned by the city shall henceforth constitute a public utility of the city, to be held, operated and administered by it as a separate undertaking to be known as the sewer utility. The properties shall include all systems, plants, works, instrumentalities, equipment, material and supplies and all lands, easements, rights in land, contract rights, franchises, mains, conduits, pumping stations, lagoons and all parts and appurtenances of any of the foregoing which are or shall be used or useful in connection with the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage waste and stormwater. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.030 - Authority of city commissioners. 
    Each of the utilities shall at all times be under the management and control of the board of city commissioners and shall be operated and maintained in such manner as to provide its services and facilities with maximum efficiency and at the minimum cost therefor which is compatible with the plan of operation described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.040 - Charges to maintain self-sufficiency. 
    Each of the utilities shall at all times be operated, maintained, used, extended and improved, and the rates and charges for the services, facilities and benefits produced and furnished thereby shall be fixed in such manner as to make the utility self-supporting and self-perpetuating. The charges from time to time imposed and collected for the service, facilities and benefits of each utility shall be made and kept adequate to pay all costs of operation and maintenance thereof, and to repay principal and interest on all money borrowed to establish and maintain reasonable reserves for the aforesaid purposes, and also to produce reasonable surplus money in amounts substantially comparable to a fair return upon the city's capital investment in each of the utilities, which surplus money, when actually on hand, may be appropriated from time to time by the board of city commissioners to pay or contribute to the cost of any other city functions, subject to the limitations prescribed by law. The foregoing appropriations and provisions shall not, however, be deemed or construed to preclude the city from using at any time any special assessment method or methods nor or hereafter permitted by for defraying all or any part of the expense of any improvement to, or enlargement or extension of, either of the utilities, whenever and to the extent the board is of the opinion that it is fair and equitable to do so. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.050 - Funds established. 
    There shall be maintained by the city, a water fund and a sewer fund, of which all receipts and disbursements for each of the utilities shall be entered and reflected. The funds shall be permanent ones and shall be separate and distinct from all other city funds, but the moneys from time to time on hand, which are to be credited to and disbursed from each of the funds, shall always constitute public municipal funds and shall be deposited and their safekeeping secured in the same manner as other city funds. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.060 - Director to supervise connections and repairs. 
    The director of utilities or his appointed representative shall supervise the making of all connections and repairs with the waterworks system, shall follow the instructions of the city auditor in turning on or turning off the water for any consumer, and shall see that all of the provisions of the waterworks ordinance are strictly complied with. In addition to these duties the director of utilities or the city engineer shall keep an accurate account, showing when and where all locations in the streets and alleys of all valves, cutoffs, connections and other matters connected with the city waterworks system. He shall make and file with the city auditor a full report in writing at the close of each month of all the work of his office. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.070 - Duties of director. 
    It shall be the duty of the director of utilities to perform the following acts as set forth in this section or as may be set forth in other city ordinances: 
A.  To issue permits to tap mains or make connections with the service pipes or extensions, or to make extensions, and to keep a record of all permits issued and a copy to the city engineer; 
B.  To keep a record of any and all applications issued for water service and discontinue them upon notice of failure to pay for such water thereunder as provided in this chapter; 
C.  To notify the city auditor of the filing of all applications for water service, permits issued for tapping mains, making connections or extensions, and when application has been duly made and all requirements of this chapter complied with, order the water turned on pursuant to the application. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.080 - Applications for tapping of mains. 
    Applications for the excavations and tapping of water or sewer mains must be made in writing by a master plumber or licensed water or sewer contractor. Such application shall be made to the director of utilities before any such work is commenced. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.090 - Applications for house sewer connections. 
    No person other than a master plumber or licensed water or sewer contractor shall be permitted to excavate for or construct a house sewer and application for such permits shall be made to the director of utilities on or before any such work is commenced. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.100 - Standards for connecting to city mains. 
    All work in connection with the excavation or construction for a sewer or water connection to the city mains shall be done in accordance with the ordinances of the city and the state plumbing code. Wye connections must be used except with special approval of the city utility director. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.110 - Inspections-Liability. 
    Inspections made by the engineering department shall not in any manner be construed to relieve the master plumber or licensed water and sewer contractor doing such work from any liability or responsibility as is imposed upon him under the ordinances of the city or by law. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.120 - Assessment payment required for connections. 
    No permit shall be granted to any person to lay, relay, repair or extend any branch water service pipes or sewer pipes or connect them with the waterworks or sewer system of the city for water service for any property which is not within the improvement district or has not been assessed for the waterworks or sewer system, except where systems have been paid for without special assessments against the property benefited. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.130 - Standards for pipe connections. 
    No connection shall be made unless the service pipe between the water main and the curbline and/or the water meter is constructed of copper or approved plastic, and no such service pipes shall be less than the size specified in the state plumbing code, and it is unlawful for any person to connect more than one house or building to each corporation cock of the water main distribution system of the city. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.140 - Curb cock regulations. 
    The curb cock used in making all connections with the city mains shall be the Mueller Inverted Key, Minneapolis, Minnesota, pattern, round way curb cock for a copper or approved plastic service pipe or such other make of curb cock as shall be approved by the city engineer for copper or approved plastic couplings with Minneapolis type stop box to be approved by the utility director. The top of cap of the stop box shall be in all cases on a level with the top of the curb, and if there is no curb it shall be placed on the sidewalk, not more than six inches from the roadway side of the walk. When there is a curb, the stop box shall be placed outside the curb and as near to it as possible. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.150 - Responsibility for expense. 
    Persons desirous of taking water from or connecting in any manner with the waterworks system must pay all the expenses and the cost of the corporation cock, stop cock and the iron shutoff box attached to it. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.160 - Responsibility for maintenance. 
    All service pipes, stop cocks, corporation cocks and other fixtures from the main to the curb stop and including the shutoff box must be laid and attached and kept in repair and kept from frost at the expense of the city, and will remain under the control of the city, the property owner waiving and releasing all claims thereto of control. All service pipes and connecting pipes located or on the property owner side of the curb stop shall be maintained by the property owner. 
(Ord. 855 (part), 2003: Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.170 - Water meters-Required. 
A.  Every separate piece of property now connected or hereinafter connected with the city water main and shall be provided with a water meter by the city for the measurement of water consumed at such place. 
B.  Immediately after any service pipe connected with the city waterworks system has been placed within the property line and made ready for using water from it, there shall be installed on the service pipe a water meter and remote reading system provided, or specifically approved, by the city. 
C.  All meters must have a remote reading capability at or above ground level with easy accessibility for reading as determined by the city. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.180 - Depth of service pipe. 
    All service pipe for water mains must be laid at least seven feet, six inches below the street grade from the water main to the inside of the building. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.190 - Taps or lawn cocks-Unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to have any tap, lawn cock, sill cock or other opening in the service pipe between the corporation cock and the water meter so placed. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.200 - Waterworks use regulations. 
    The rules and regulations of the city waterworks are established as follows: 
A.  Every person taking or using water from the city waterworks shall comply with and abide by the following regulations: 
B.  In the case of making repairs or construction of new work, the city reserves the right to shut off the water at once, and keep it shut off as long as may be necessary to accomplish such purpose. The director of utilities shall, in case of users of steam boilers who are consumers of the city water, give such reasonable notice of the shutting off as may be practicable. 
C.  It is expressly provided that the city shall in no event be or become liable to any consumer of water for a deficiency in the supply of water or the quality thereof, whether by shutting off the water to make repairs or to construct new work or for any other cause whatsoever. 
D.  No person shall turn or cause to be turned on the supply of water to any premises to which the supply of the water has been shut off for any cause by the city, without first making the application for and obtaining the permit described in this chapter. 
E.  No person shall turn or cause to be turned on the supply of water into any new supply pipe without first making application and obtaining the permit described in this chapter. 
F.  Whenever the director of utilities has caused the water to be turned off from any service pipe he may, whenever he suspects any probability of tampering with the pipes, cause them to be severed from the main. 
G.  No person except the city employees in performance of their official duties shall open or cause to be opened 
H.  No person shall open, interfere or tamper with any hydrant connected with the city waterworks system without permission from the director of utilities. This section shall not apply when the opening is under the supervision of the fire department or employees thereof. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.210 - Authority to shut off due to abandonment. 
    The city utility director has the right to shut off any water service lines at the main where the service lines are abandoned by the owners thereof, either by reason of the substitution of a new or different service line or the abandonment or disuse of the water service line. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.08.220 - Stubbing on new residential areas required. 
    All new residential areas shall be stubbed in for water and sewer to the property line, before hard surfacing is started. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 13.12 - SEWER REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
ARTICLE I. - DEFINITIONS 

13.12.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
A.  "Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at twenty degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
B.  "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
C.  "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
D.  "Combined sewer" means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
E.  "Easement" means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
F.  "Fee" shall mean a charge fixed by resolution by the city Commission from time to time and revised as it may see fit. 
G.  "Floatable oil" is oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
H.  "Garbage" means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
I.  "Industrial wastes" means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
J.  "Natural outlet" means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
K.  "Person" means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
L.  "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10-7. 
M.  "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
N.  "Public sewer" means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
O.  "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
P.  "Sewage" is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater," Section 13.12.250. 
Q.  "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
R.  "Slug" means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen minutes more than five times the average longer twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
S.  "Storm drain" (sometimes termed "storm sewer") means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source. 
T.  "Superintendent" means the director of public works or his designee. 
U.  "Suspended solids" means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
V.  "Unpolluted water" is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
W.  "Wastewater" means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
X.  "Wastewater facilities" means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
Y.  "Wastewater treatment works" means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with waste treatment plant or wastewater treatment plant or water pollution control plant. 
Z.  "Watercourse" means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

13.12.020 - Deposit of Waste-Unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.030 - Control of discharqes to natural outlets. 
    It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.040 - Private disposal system restricted. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.050 - Toilet facilities and sewer connection required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within sixty days after date of official notice to do so; provided, that the public sewer is within two hundred feet of the property line. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

13.12.060 - Private systems permitted when. 
    Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.070 - Permit required. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent, and pay the fee required. The application for the permit shall contain any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.080 - Installation to be inspected. 
    A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. The superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within twenty-four hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.090 - Regulation compliance required. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than twenty thousand square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.100 - Connection with public sewer. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within sixty days, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.110 - Maintenance in sanitary manner. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. Sludge removal from private disposal systems shall be performed by licensed operators. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.120 - Additional requirements may be imposed. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by proper health officials. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
ARTICLE IV. - SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

13.12.130 - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.140 - Permit-Application and fee. 
A.  The two classes of building sewer permits are, residential and commercial service, and for establishments producing industrial wastes. 
B.  In either case, the owner shall make application and the application shall contain any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A fee shall be paid when the application is filed. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.150 - Building sewer cost responsibility. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.160 - Separate connection and exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection mentioned in this section. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.170 - Use of old building sewers. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.180 - Conformance required. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers, including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof, the superintendent shall decide. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.190 - Elevation of building sewer. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings to which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.200 - Surface runoff or groundwater connection. 
    No person shall make connection or roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless the connection is approved by the superintendent for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.210 - Building sewer connection standards. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M.. All such connections shall be made gas-tight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent before installation. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.220 - Notice to inspect. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his representative. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.230 - Hazard protection and public property restoration. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
ARTICLE V. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

13.12.240 - Unpolluted waters. 
A.  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the superintendent. 
B.  Stormwater other than that exempted and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.250 - Wastes prohibited from discharge. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described water or wastes to any public sewers: 
A.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
B.  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in or have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge for the treatment works; 
C.  Any waters or wastes having pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the wastewater works; 
D.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.260 - Limits of concentrations or quantities. 
    The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm nor wither the sewers, wastewater treatment process of equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. The superintendent may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations set out in this section if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to acceptability, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent as follows: 
A.  Wastewater having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five degrees celsius); 
B.  Wastewater containing more than twenty-five milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils or product of mineral oil origin; 
C.  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fats or grease; 
D.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers; 
E.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such materials; 
F.  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent; 
G.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
H.  Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a slug; 
I.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
J.  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.270 - Treatment of hazardous discharges. 
A.  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated herein, and which in the judgement of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise creates a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent may: 
1.  Reject the wastes; 
2.  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
3.  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
4.  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing sewer charges. 
B.  When considering the alternatives listed heretofore, the superintendent shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.280 - Interceptors required when. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner must be performed by currently licensed wasted disposal firms. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.290 - Pretreatment or flow equalization facilities. 
    Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.300 - Industrial waste measurement facilities. 
    When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner, and shall be maintained so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.310 - Compliance information required when. 
    The superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may include: 
A.  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
B.  Chemical analysis of wastewaters; 
C.  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
D.  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control; 
E.  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
F.  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
G.  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.320 - Waste measurement standards. 
    All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the superintendent. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.330 - Industrial waste treatment agreement authorized. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
ARTICLE VI. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS 

13.12.340 - Right of entry for inspection. 
    The engineer and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.350 - Authority to obtain information. 
    The engineer or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.360 - Observation of safety rules required. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties, the employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.370 - Authority to enter property lying within easement. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
ARTICLE VII. - VIOLATION-PENALTIES 

13.12.380 - Damaging or defacing wastewater facilities. 
    No persons shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person in violation of this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.390 - Notice of violation. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.400 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person who continues any violation after the time limit provided for in Section 13.12.390 of Article VII of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding five hundred dollars for each violation. Each day in which any such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.12.410 - Liability for city losses. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 13.14 - SEWER CONNECTIONS IN MOBILE HOME COURTS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
Sections: 

13.14.000 - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to ensure sanitary sewer service connections within mobile home courts and recreational vehicle parks are properly sealed to prevent rainfall runoff and snow melt from entering the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. 865 (part), 2005) 
13.14.010 - Sewer connections in mobile home courts and recreational vehicle parks. 
    The following shall apply to all sewer connections in mobile home courts and recreational vehicle parks in the city of Devils Lake: 
A.  All connections from sewer service to mobile homes, manufactured homes, or recreational vehicles must be water tight. 
B.  All sewer services not in use must be capped with a water tight connection. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the mobile home court or recreational vehicle park to ensure that sewer connections and services are water tight. 
D.  If the owner fails to ensure sewer services are properly sealed, the owner will be subject to a fine as stated in the resolution of fees and rates, and will also be responsible for any and all damages which may result. 
(Ord. 865 (part), 2005: Ord. 858 (part), 2003) 
13.14.020 - Notification to city. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the mobile home court to notify the city of Devils Lake engineering department when a mobile home or manufactured home does move in or out of the owner's mobile home court. This notification shall be provided to the city not later than seven calendar days from when a mobile home or manufactured home moves in or moves out of the mobile home court. If the owner fails to notify the city within the required time, the owner will be subject to a fine as stated in the resolution of fees and rates, and will also be responsible for any and all damages which may result from the owner's failure to timely notify the city when a mobile home or manufactured home moves in or out of the owner's mobile home court. 
(Ord. 865 (part), 2005: Ord. 858 (part), 2003) 
13.14.030 - Inspections. 
    The city of Devils Lake does reserve the right to inspect any and all sewer connections. The city of Devils Lake, or its agents or representatives, have the right to enter all mobile home courts and recreational vehicle parks within the city of Devils Lake to conduct their inspection of the sewer connections. 
(Ord. 865 (part), 2005: Ord. 858 (part), 2003) 
13.14.040 - Responsibility to cap sewer service. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the mobile home court or recreational vehicle park to cap the sewer service to any lot in the owner's mobile home court or recreational vehicle park when that lot is not in use. If the service is not properly capped, the city of Devils Lake will make arrangements to have the sewer service capped at the expense of the owner of the mobile home court or recreational vehicle park. The determination of whether a sewer service is properly capped will be determined by the Devils Lake city engineer. 
(Ord. 865 (part), 2005: Ord. 858 (part), 2003) 
13.14.050 - Assessment of amounts. 
    If any owner fails to pay any of the amounts set out in this chapter, the city shall assess those amounts against the real property on which the mobile home court or recreational vehicle park is located. 
(Ord. 865 (part), 2005: Ord. 858 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 13.16 - WASTEWATER SYSTEM SERVICE CHARGES 
Sections: 

13.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to generate sufficient revenue to pay all costs for the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater system. The costs shall be distributed to all users of the wastewater system in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the treatment works. Factors such as strength (BOD and suspended solids), volume and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered to ensure a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs to each user. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.020 - Annual costs of operation and maintenance. 
    The city engineer shall determine the total annual costs of operation and maintenance of the wastewater system which are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance, during the service life of the treatment works, for which the works are designed and constructed. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling, laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.030 - Users volume contribution percentage. 
A.  The city engineer shall determine each users average daily volume of wastewater, which has been discharged to the wastewater system, which shall then be divided by the average daily volume of all wastewater discharged to the wastewater system, to determine each user's volume contribution percentage. The amount used as the total average daily volume of wastewater shall exclude infiltration and inflow. The city engineer shall determine each user's average daily poundage of five-day twenty degree Centigrade biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) which has been discharged to the wastewater system which shall then be divided by the average daily poundage of all five-day BOD discharged to the wastewater system to determine each user's BOD contribution percentage. 
B.  The city engineer shall determine each user's average suspended solids (SS) poundage which has been discharged to the wastewater system which shall then be divided by the average daily poundage of all suspended solids discharged to the wastewater system, to determine the users suspended solids contribution percentage. Each user's volume contribution percentage, SOD contribution percentage and suspended solids contribution percentage shall be multiplied by the annual operation and maintenance costs for wastewater treatment of the total volume flow, of the total five-day twenty degree centigrade SOD and of the suspended solids, respectively. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.040 - Fee for nonresidential users. 
    The city engineer will determine the average suspended solids (SS) and biochemical oxygen demand (SOD) daily loadings for the average residential user. The city engineer will assess a fee for all nonresidential users discharging wastes with SOD and SS strengths greater than the average residential user. Such users will be assessed a fee sufficient to cover the costs of treating same above normal strength wastes. Normal strength wastes are considered to be two hundred ppm SOD and two hundred fifty ppm SS. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.050 - Surcharge rate schedule. 
A.  Any nonresidential user with BOD and total suspended solids greater than the average residential user's strength will pay a fee. 
B.  The city engineer may determine the total suspended solids (TSS) and a five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD 5 ) daily loadings for the average residential user and/or user class or in lieu of such a determination can consider the average residential strength wastes to be two hundred mg/l BOD 5 and two hundred fifty mg/l TSS. The city will assess a fee for all nonresidential users discharging wastes with BOD and TSS strengths greater than the average residential user. The surcharge will be sufficient to cover the costs of treating such users above normal strength wastes. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.060 - Rates for residential and nonresidential users. 
    Each nonresidential user's wastewater treatment cost contributions shall be added together to determine the user's annual wastewater service charge. Residential users may be considered to be one class of user and an equitable service charge may be determined for each user based upon an estimate of the total wastewater contribution of this class of user. The city commission may classify industrial, commercial and other nonresidential establishments as a residential user; provided, that the wastes from these establishments are equivalent to the wastes from the average residential user with respect to volume, suspended solids and BOD. Each users wastewater treatment cost contribution will be assessed a fee. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.070 - Schedule of rates. 
A.  Residential users are considered to be one class of user and are assessed a fee per one hundred cubic feet with a minimum charge per month. Nonresidential users with flows no greater than the minimum residential user's flow of five hundred cubic feet per month and with BOD and SS no greater than the average residential user's strength of two hundred mg/l BOD and two hundred fifty mg/l SS will pay the same fee per one hundred cubic feet per month as the minimum residential user. 
B.  Nonresidential users with volumes greater than the minimum residential user will pay an additional fee per one hundred cubic feet per month for all flows greater than the minimum residential user's flow of five hundred cubic feet per month. 
C.  Any nonresidential user with SOD and SS greater than the average residential user's strength of two hundred mg/l BOD and two hundred fifty mg/l SS will pay a fee. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.080 - Statement of charges-Penalty for late payment. 
    The monthly utility billing and penalties shall be according to Chapter 3.01. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.090 - Review of costs and charges every year. 
    The city shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance as well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage not less often than every year and will revise the system as necessary to assure equity of the service charge system established in this chapter and to assure that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater treatment works. If a significant user, such as an industry, has completed in-plant modifications which would change that user's wastewater contribution percentage, the user can present at a regularly scheduled meeting of the governing body such factual information and the city shall then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be changed. The city shall notify the user of its findings as soon as possible. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.100 - Notification of rates. 
    Each user will be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.110 - Discharge of toxic wastes prohibited. 
    The discharge of any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interactions with other wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal systems, or to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an adverse affect on the waters receiving any discharge from the treatment works is prohibited. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.120 - Connection of runoff to sanitary sewer prohibited. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources or surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.16.130 - Construction specifications. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers and sewer connections, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 13.20 - WATER AND SEWER FEES 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Designated. 
A.  All connections to city water or sewer mains shall be charged a fee as established by resolution of the city commission, and revised as it may see fit. 
B.  If tapping is necessary, to either a city sewer main or city water main an additional charge shall be made. Such additional charge shall be established by resolution of the city commission, and revised as it may see fit. 
C.  Saddles shall also be required for four-inch or six-inch water lines and all taps one inch or larger. 
(Ord. 677 (part), 1984; Ord. 609, 1977: Ord. 592, 1976: Ord. 554, 1974) 
13.20.020 - Rates and charges. 
    Water and sewer rates shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the governing body and the city reserves the right to change the rates from time to time as it deems best. The resolution fixing water and sewer rates and charges shall be kept on file in the office of the city auditor and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. 738 (part), 1989) 
13.20.030 - Rates and charges-Liability. 
A.  The owner or owners of all real property in the city furnished water, sewer and garbage service or repairs shall be responsible for the payment of any and all such charges regardless of who the occupant or tenant may be. 
B.  Owners of premises where water or sewer service is supplied shall notify the city auditor's office in case any tenant moves from the premises, prior to such moving. 
C.  On request of the owner or owners the city auditor will bill or cause to be billed the occupant or tenant for such charges, but if such charges are not paid when due by the occupant or tenant, the owner or owners shall be responsible for such charges and they shall be assessed to the property served. 
D.  It shall be the duty of the city auditor to certify to the county auditor such unpaid water or service charges that are unpaid in the same manner and at the same time as other assessments are certified, and they shall be assessed and collected in the same manner. 
E.  A late charge of one percent shall be assessed to all accounts overdue. 
(Ord. 738 (part), 1989) 
Chapter 13.24 - INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY 
Sections: 

13.24.010 - Repayment of grant moneys. 
    At the present time we have no industry served by the wastewater treatment works construction completed under EPA Project C380385; however, we will require any industry served by this construction in the future, during the applicable industrial cost recovery period, to pay back its fair share of the appropriate grant moneys, in accordance with Title 40, CFR 35, Subpart E. 
(Ord. 625, 1979) 
Chapter 13.28 - LEAKS IN WATER MAINS AND WATER SERVICE MAINS* 
Sections: 

13.28.010 - Nuisance declared. 
    Leaks in water mains and water service mains are declared to be a nuisance dangerous to the safety of the streets of the city. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.28.020 - Notice. 
    When the utility director determines that a leak exists in any water mains or water service mains within the city, he shall determine where the leak exists, and it exists in a water main he shall promptly notify the owner or occupant of the property served by the service main. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.28.030 - Responsibility for repair and penalty. 
    The person responsible for the maintenance of the water main or water service main shall cause the leak to be repaired promptly, and unless the leak is so repaired within five days after notice has been given by the utility director, the person responsible for the maintenance of the water main or water service main shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.28.040 - City repair and cost assessment. 
    If the leak is not repaired within the time specified, the utility director may cause the repair to be made and shall certify to the city auditor all costs incident to the opening of the street and the repair of the water main or water service main. The city auditor thereupon shall add to such costs a penalty of one hundred dollars, which is fixed as damages to the city streets from the neglect of the leak, and shall certify the total amount to the person responsible for the maintenance of the water main or water service main. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
13.28.050 - Collection of charges. 
    If the charge for repair of the leak, together with the penalty is not paid within thirty days, the city auditor shall cause the amount thereof to be certified as a charge against the property of the person so responsible the same as special assessments taxes are spread against the benefited property, and the city may maintain an action for the collection of such charges. 
(Ord. 767 (part), 1991) 
Chapter 13.32 - FLUORIDATION OF WATER SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.32.010 - Authority. 
    Upon receiving the approval of the State Department of Public Health, and until further direction of the board of city commissioners, the public works director, or his designee, is authorized and directed to provide the means and to proceed with the addition of approximately one and not more than 1.5 parts of fluoride to every million parts of water being distributed in the water supply system of the city. 
(Ord. 665 § 1, 1983: Ord. 439 § 1, 1964) 
Chapter 13.34 - FRANCHISES REQUIRED 
Section: 

13.34.010 - Franchises required. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, a person, firm, corporation or utility may not place or maintain any permanent or semipermanent fixtures, including poles, wire, cable, conduit, or any other medium used to transmit or transport electric or electronic signals, natural gas or other materials, in, over, upon or under any street or public place without a franchise to do so from the city. A franchise may be granted by adoption of an ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 914, 5-20-13) 
Chapter 13.36 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM (MIDCONTINENT COMMUNICATIONS)[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 940, adopted May 2, 2016, repealed the former Chapter 13.36, §§ 13.36.010-13.36.140, and enacted a new Chapter 13.36 as set out herein. The former Chapter 13.36 pertained to community antenna television service and derived from Ord. No. 844, 2001. 

13.36.010 - Statement of intent and purpose. 
    The city intends, by the adoption of this franchise, to bring about the development of a cable communications system, and the continued operation of it. Such a development can contribute significantly to the communication needs and desires of many. Further, the city may achieve better utilization and improvement of public services with the development and operation of a cable communication system. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.020 - Findings. 
    In review of the renewal proposal and application of midcontinent communications ("grantee"), and as a result of a public hearing, the city commission makes the following findings: 
A.  The grantee's technical ability, financial condition, legal qualifications, and character were considered and approved in a full proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; 
B.  Grantees' plans for the constructing, upgrading, and operating the system were considered and found adequate and feasible in a full public proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; and 
C.  The franchise granted to grantee by the city complies with the existing applicable North Dakota Statues, federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.030 - Short title and definitions. 
A.  Short Title. The franchise ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and cited as the cable ordinance. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not mandatory. 
1.  "Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the lawful retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public, educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7)(1993). 
2.  "Cable programming service" means any video programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: 
a.  Video programming carried on the basic service tier; 
b.  Video Programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis; or 
c.  A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service: 
i.  Consists of commonly-identified video programming; and 
ii.  Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service. 
    Cable programming service as defined herein shall not be inconsistent with the definition as set forth in 47 U.S.C. § 543(1)(2) (1993) and 47 C.P.R. 76.901(b)(1993). 
3.  "Cable service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
4.  "Cable system" or "system" means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
a.  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
b.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
c.  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
d.  An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 653; or 
e.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
5.  "City" means City of Devils Lake, a municipal corporation, in the State of North Dakota, acting by and through its city commission. 
6.  "City commission" means the Devils Lake, North Dakota City Commission. 
7.  "Drop" means the cable that connects the ground block subscriber's residence to the nearest feeder cable of the system. 
8.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor. 
9.  "Franchise" means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof (including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to 47 U.S.C. § 546) issued by a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
10.  "Grantee" is midcontinent communications, its agents and employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees. 
11.  "Gross revenue" means all revenue received from basic cable service, cable programming service and pay television directly by the grantee from the operation of its system within the city. The term "gross revenues" shall include revenues derived from the provision of internet service, to the extent internet services are deemed "cable services" under federal law. The term "gross revenues" shall not include installation fees, disconnection fees, upgrade and downgrade of service fees, fees for telecommunications services, if any, fees for the sale, leasing, or servicing of equipment, franchise fees, advertising revenues, late fees, any fees itemized and passed through a result of franchise imposed requirements or any taxes or fees on services furnished by grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit and collected by grantee for such governmental unit. 
12.  "Installation" means the connection of the system from feeder cable to the point of connection, including standard installations and custom installations. 
13.  "Internet service" means the offering of access to the international computer network of both federal and non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks to customers for a fee. For purposes of this franchise, internet service shall mean the direct access to the internet provided to customers over the cable system and shall not include the provision of incidental services including, but not limited to internet web design, internet web hosting, sales or leases of modems or other services not associated with the basic monthly internet service fees. 
14.  "Lockout device" means an optional mechanical or electrical accessory to a subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain program, certain channel, or certain channels provided by way of the cable communication system. 
15.  "Pay television" means the delivery over the system of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge, in addition to the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services. 
16.  "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity. 
17.  "standard installation" means any residential installation which can be completed using a drop of one hundred fifty feet or less. 
18.  "Street" means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by city. 
19.  "Subscriber" means any person who lawfully receives cable television service. 
20.  "Video programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.040 - Grant of authority and general provisions. 
A.  Franchise Required. It shall be lawful for any person to construct, operate or, maintain a cable communications system in city unless such person or the person for whom such action is being taken shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise ordinance. It shall also be unlawful for any person to provide cable television service in city unless such person shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise ordinance. 
B.  Grant of Franchise. This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein. 
C.  Grant of Nonexclusive Authority. 
1.  The grantee shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets; alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in city, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in city of a cable communications system as herein defined. 
2.  The franchise shall be nonexclusive, and city reserves the right to grant a similar use of said streets, alleys, public ways and places, to any person at any time during the period of this franchise, provided, however, that any additional cable franchise grants shall be under the same substantive terms and conditions as this franchise. 
3.  Grantee shall have the authority to use city easements, public right-of-way, streets and other conduits for the distribution of grantee's system. The city shall require all developers of future subdivisions to allow and accommodate the construction of the system as part of any provisions for utilities to serve such subdivisions. 
D.  Franchise Term. This franchise shall be in effect for a period of ten years from the date of acceptance by grantee, unless renewed, revoked or terminated sooner as herein provided. 
E.  Previous Franchises. Upon acceptance by grantee as required by Section 13.36.150(B) herein, this franchise shall supersede and replace any previous ordinance or agreement granting a franchise to grantee to own, operate and maintain a cable communications system within city. Ordinance No. 844 is hereby expressly repealed. 
F.  Rules of Grantee. The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable said grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under this franchise. 
G.  Territorial Area Involved. This franchise is granted for the corporate boundaries of city, as it exists from time to time. In the event of annexation by city, or as development occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area covered, provided, however, that grantee shall not be required to extend service beyond its present system boundaries unless there is a minimum of forty homes per cable mile as measured from the last fiber node or terminating amplifier. Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which such group resides. Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time to construct and activate cable plant to service annexed or newly developed areas. 
H.  Written Notice. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to any officer or grantee or city's administrator of this franchise or forty-eight hours after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the party to whom notice is being given, as follows: 
If to city: City of Devils Lake 
423 6th Street 
P.O. Box 1048 
Devils Lake, ND 58301 
Attn: City Auditor If to grantee: Midcontinent Communications 
3901 N. Louise Ave 
Sioux Falls, SD 57107 
Attn: Nancy Vogel  
    Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as provided in this section. 
I.  Drops to Public Buildings. Grantee shall provide installation of one cable drop, one cable outlet, and monthly basic cable service without charge to all public and private elementary and secondary schools, excluding home schools, located in the city within one hundred fifty feet of the system, upon request of the school system. 
    Grantee shall provide installation of one cable drop, one cable outlet, and monthly basic cable service without charge to one city-owned building, excluding hospitals, nursing homes, apartments or buildings located at the airport, located in the city within one hundred fifty feet of the system as designated by the city. 
    No redistribution of the free basic cable service provided pursuant to this section shall be allowed. Additional drops and/or outlets in any of the above locations will be provided by grantee at the cost of grantee's time and material. Alternatively, at the institution's request, said institution may add outlets at its own expenses, as long as such installation meets grantee's standards and provided that any fees for cable communications services are paid. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring grantee to extend the system to serve additional institutions as may be designated by city. Grantee shall have one year from the date of city commission designation of additional institution(s) to complete construction of the drop and outlet. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.050 - Construction standards. 
A.  Construction Codes and Permits. 
1.  Grantee shall obtain all required permits from city before commencing any construction upgrade or extension of the system, including the opening or disturbance of any street, or private or public property within city. 
2.  The city shall impose no permit fees upon grantee given that grantee pays franchise fees pursuant to this franchise. 
3.  The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests at its own expense as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise and applicable provisions of local, state and federal law. 
B.  Repair of Streets and Property. Any and all streets or public property or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the system shall be promptly and fully restored by grantee, at its expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to grantee's work. 
C.  Conditions of Street Use. 
1.  If at any time during the period of this franchise city shall elect to alter, or change the grade or location of any street, alley or other public way, the grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by city, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and other fixtures of the system, and in each instance comply with the standards and specifications of city. If city reimburses other occupants of the street, grantee shall be likewise reimbursed. 
2.  The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by city, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall be given not less than ten days' advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes. 
3.  The grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee. 
4.  Nothing contained in this franchise shall relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring grantee's facilities. 
D.  Undergrounding of Cable. 
1.  In all areas of city where all other utility lines are placed underground, grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities underground. 
2.  In any area of city where one or more public utilities are aerial, grantee may construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities from same pole with the consent of the owner of the pole. 
E.  Safety Requirements. The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause, damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.060 - Design provisions. 
A.  Operation and Maintenance of System. The grantee shall render effective service, make repairs, promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the extent feasible, shall be preceded by notice in accordance with Section 13.36.040(H) herein and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
B.  Technical Standards. The technical standards used in the operation of the system shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the FCC relating to cable communications systems pursuant to the Federal Communications Commission's rules and regulations and found in Title 47, Sections 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time. 
C.  Lockout Device. Upon the request of a subscriber, grantee shall provide by sale or lease a lockout device. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.070 - Services provisions. 
A.  Subscriber Inquiry and Complaint Procedures. Grantees shall have a publicly listed toll-free telephone number and be operated so as to receive subscriber complaints and requests on a twenty-four hour-a-day, seven day-a-week basis. 
B.  Refund Policy. In the event a subscriber established or terminates service and receives less than a full month's service, grantee shall prorate the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in the period for which service was rendered to the number of days in the billing. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.080 - Educational and governmental access. 
A.  Grantee shall dedicate one channel for educational and governmental use ("EG access") to the city for the public noncommercial, noncompetitive uses. Grantee shall have the right to use any portion of said channel that is not being used by the city. 
B.  All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the system shall be eligible to receive said access channel at no additional charge. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.090 - Operation and administration providing. 
A.  Franchise Fee. 
1.  Grantee pay city an annual franchise fee in the amount of three percent of grantee's annual gross revenues. 
2.  The franchise fee shall be payable monthly. The payment shall be made within thirty days of the end of each of grantee's fiscal month, together with a brief report showing the basis for the computation. 
B.  Indemnification of City. 
1.  City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents shall not be liable for any loss or damage to any real or personal property of any person, or any injury or death of any person, arising out of or in connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of, or other action or event with respect to the system. 
2.  Grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and agents, from and against all liability, damages, and penalties which they may legally be required to pay as a result of the exercise of the franchise, except claims because of PEG programming or, the city's operation, administration, promotion or management of the PEG access channel or any use of the internet services in public institutions. 
3.  Nothing in this franchise relieves a person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the grantee's facilities while performing work connected with grading, regarding, or changing the line of a street or public place or with the construction or reconstruction of a sewer or water system. 
4.  In order for city to assert its rights to be indemnified, defended, and held harmless, city must with respect to each claim: 
a.  Promptly notify grantee in writing of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right; 
b.  Afford grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding; and 
c.  Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of grantee, at grantee's expense, in its participation in, and control, compromise, settlement or resolution or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to subsection (B)(4)(b) above. 
C.  Insurance. 
1.  As a part of the indemnification provided in Section 13.36.090(B), but without limiting the foregoing, grantee shall file with its acceptance of this franchise, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including contractual liability coverage, in protection of city in its capacity in such. The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not less than three hundred thousand dollars for personal injury or death of any one person, and one million dollars for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, three hundred thousand dollars for property damage to any one person and one million dollars for property damage resulting from any one act or occurrence. 
2.  The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of grantee or for the other reasons, except after thirty days' advance written notice have been provided to city. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.110 - Revocation, abandonment, and sale or transfer not contained in present ordinance. 
A.  City's Right to Revoke. In addition to all other rights which city has pursuant to law or equity, city reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel this franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if after the hearing required by Section 13.36.110(B)(2) herein, it is determined grantee has violated any material provision of this franchise. 
B.  Procedures for Revocation. 
1.  City shall provide grantee with written notice of a cause for revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow grantee sixty days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the franchise. Together with the notice required herein, city shall provide grantee with written findings of fact which are the basis of the revocation. 
2.  Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording due process before the city commission prior to revocation, which public hearing shall follow the sixty-day notice provided in paragraph (a) above. City shall provide grantee with written notice of its decision together with written finds of fact supplementing said decision. 
3.  After the public hearing and upon written determination by city to revoke the franchise, grantee may appeal said decision with an appropriate state or federal court or agency. 
4.  During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires. 
5.  Upon satisfactory correction by grantee of the violation upon which said notice was given, the initial notice shall become void. 
C.  Abandonment of Service. Grantee may not abandon the system or any portion thereof without having first given three months' written notice to the city. 
D.  Sale or Transfer of Franchise. No sale or transfer of this franchise shall take place without the written approval of the city, which approval shall not be reasonably withheld. All of the rights, privileges, obligations, duties, and liabilities created by this franchise shall pass to and be binding upon the successor or assign of the grantee. Said approval shall not be required where grantee grants a security interest in its franchise and assets to secure an indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.120 - Protection of individual rights. 
A.  Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age. Grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and city laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination. 
B.  Subscriber Privacy. Grantee shall comply with terms of 47 U.S.C. § 551 relating to the protection of subscriber privacy. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.130 - Unauthorized connections and modifications. 
A.  Unauthorized Connections or Modifications Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or governmental body or agency, without the express consent of the grantee, to make or possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with or to any segment of the System. 
B.  Removal or Destruction Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or government body or agency to willfully interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or segment of the system for any purpose whatsoever. 
C.  Penalty. Any firm, person, group, company, corporation or government body or agency found guilty of violating this section may be fined not less than twenty dollars and the costs of the action not more than five hundred dollars and the costs of the action for each and every subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall be considered a separate occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.140 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  Franchise Renewal. Any renewal of this franchise shall be done in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
B.  Amendment of Franchise Ordinance. Grantee and city may agree, from time to time, to amend this franchise. Such written amendments may be made at any time if city and grantee agree that such an amendment will be in the public interest or if such an amendment is required due to changes in federal, state or local laws. City shall act pursuant to local law pertaining to the ordinance amendment process. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
13.36.150 - Publication, effective date and acceptance. 
A.  Publication: Effective Date. This franchise shall be published in accordance with applicable North Dakota law. The effective date of this franchise shall be the date of acceptance by grantee in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.36.152. 
B.  Acceptance. 
1.  Grantee shall accept this franchise by executing same. Such acceptance by the grantee shall be deemed the grant of this franchise for all purposes. 
2.  Upon acceptance of this franchise, grantee shall be bound by all terms and conditions contained herein. 
3.  Grantee shall accept this franchise in the following manner: 
a.  This franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by grantee and delivered to city. 
b.  With its acceptance, grantee shall also deliver any insurance certificates required herein that have not previously been delivered. 
(Ord. No. 940, 5-2-16) 
Chapter 13.37 - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SERVICE (NORTH DAKOTA TELEPHONE CO.) 
Sections: 

13.37.010 - Statement of intent and purpose. 
    The city intends, by the adoption of this franchise, to bring about the development of a cable communications system and the continued operation of it. Such a development can contribute significantly to the communication needs and desires of many. Further, the city may achieve better utilization and improvement of public services with the development and operation of a cable communication system. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.020 - Findings. 
    In review of the renewal proposal and application of North Dakota Telephone Co. ("Grantee"), and as a result of a public hearing, the city commission makes the following findings: 
A.  The grantee's technical ability, financial condition, legal qualifications, and character were considered and approved in a full proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; 
B.  The grantee's plans for the constructing, upgrading, and operating the system were considered and found adequate and feasible in a full public proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; and 
C.  The franchise granted to the grantee by the city complies with the existing applicable North Dakota statutes, federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.030 - Short title and definitions. 
A.  Short Title. The franchise ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and cited as the cable ordinance. 
B.  Definitions. For the purposes of this franchise, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The word "may" is directory and discretionary and not mandatory. 
1.  "Basic cable service" means any service tier which includes the lawful retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public, educational, and governmental access programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier. Basic cable service, as defined in this section, shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. Section 543(b)(7) (1993). 
2.  "Cable programming service" means any video programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: 
a.  Video programming carried on the basic service tier; 
b.  Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis; or 
c.  A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service: 
i.  Consists of commonly identified video programming, and 
ii.  Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service. 
    Cable programming service, as defined in this section, shall not be inconsistent with the definition as set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 543(1)(2) (1993) and 47 C.F.R. 76.901(b) (1993). 
3.  "Cable service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service, and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
4.  "Cable system" or "system" means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
a.  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast statements; 
b.  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public right-of-way; 
c.  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. Sections 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. Section 541(c) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; 
d.  An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. Section 653; or 
e.  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
5.  "City" means the city of Devils Lake, a municipal corporation, in the state of North Dakota, acting by and through its city commission. 
6.  "City commission" means the Devils Lake, North Dakota, city commission. 
7.  "Drop" means the cable that connects the ground block subscriber's residence to the nearest feeder cable of the system. 
8.  "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed, designated, or elected agent or successor. 
9.  "Franchise" means an initial authorization or renewal thereof (including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted subject to 47 U.S.C. Section 546) issued by a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system. 
10.  "Grantee" is North Dakota Telephone Co., its agents and employees, lawful successors, transferees, or assignees. 
11.  "Gross revenue" means all revenue received from basic cable service, cable programming service, and pay television directly by the grantee from the operation of its system within the city. The term "gross revenues" shall include revenues derived from the provision of internet service, to the extent internet services are deemed "cable services" under federal law. The term "gross revenues" shall not include installation fees, disconnection fees, upgrade and downgrade of service fees, fees for telecommunications services, if any, fees for the sale, leasing, or servicing of equipment, franchise fees, advertising revenues, late fees, any fees itemized and passed through a result of franchise imposed requirements, or any taxes or fees on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber or user by any municipality, state, or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for such governmental unit. 
12.  "Installation" means the connection of the system from feeder cable to the point of connection, including standard installations and custom installations. 
13.  "Internet service" means the offering of access to the international computer network of both federal and nonfederal interoperable packet switched data networks to customers for a fee. For purposes of this franchise, internet service shall mean the direct access to the internet provided to customers over the cable system, and shall not include the provision of incidental services including, but not limited to, internet web design, internet web hosting, sales or leases of modems, or other services not associated with the basic monthly internet service fees. 
14.  "Lockout device" means an optional mechanical or electrical accessory to a subscriber's terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain program, certain channel, or certain channels provided by way of the cable communication system. 
15.  "Pay television" means the delivery over the system of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program audio-visual signals to subscribers for a fee or charge in addition to the charge for basic cable service or cable programming services. 
16.  "Person" is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or other legal entity. 
17.  "Standard installation" means any residential installation which can be completed using a drop of one hundred fifty feet or less. 
18.  "Street" means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk, parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by the city. 
19.  "Subscriber" means any person who lawfully receives cable television service. 
20.  "Video programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.040 - Grant of authority and general provisions. 
A.  Franchise Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, operate, or maintain a cable communications system in the city unless such person or the person for whom such action is being taken shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise ordinance. It is also unlawful for any person to provide cable television service in the city unless such person shall have first obtained and shall currently hold a valid franchise ordinance. 
B.  Grant of Franchise. This franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and conditions contained herein. 
C.  Grant of Nonexclusive Authority. 
1.  The grantee shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways, and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in city, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the city of a cable communications system as herein defined. 
2.  The franchise shall be nonexclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of such streets, alleys, public ways and places, to any person at any time during the period of this franchise, provided, however, that any additional cable franchise grants shall be under the same substantive terms and conditions as this franchise. 
3.  The grantee shall have the authority to use city easements, public right-of-way, streets, and other conduits for the distribution of the grantee's system. The city shall require all developers of future subdivisions to allow and accommodate the construction of the system as part of any provisions for utilities to serve such subdivisions. 
D.  Franchise Term. This franchise shall be in effect for a period of fifteen years from the date of acceptance by the grantee, unless renewed, revoked, or terminated sooner as herein provided. 
E.  Previous Franchises. Upon acceptance by the grantee as required by Section 13.37.140(B) in this chapter, this franchise shall supersede and replace any previous ordinance or agreement granting a franchise to the grantee to own, operate, and maintain a cable communications system within the city. 
F.  Rules of Grantee. The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable such grantee to exercise its rights and perform its obligation under this franchise. 
G.  Territorial Area Involved. This franchise is granted for the corporate boundaries of the city as it exists from time to time. In the event of annexation by the city, or as development occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area covered, provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to extend service beyond its present system boundaries unless there is a minimum of forty homes per cable mile as measured from the last fiber node or terminating amplifier. Access to cable service shall not be denied to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in which such group resides. The grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time to construct and activate cable plant to service annexed or newly developed areas. 
H.  Written Notice. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in writing under this franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to any officer or grantee or the city's administrator of this franchise or forty-eight hours after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the party to whom notice is being given, as follows: 
If to City: City of Devils Lake 

423 - 6th Street N.E. 

P.O. Box 1048 

Devils Lake, ND 58301 

Attn: City Auditor If to Grantee: North Dakota Telephone Co. 

211 - 22nd Street N.W. 

P.O. Box 180 

Devils Lake, ND 58301 

Attn: Dave Dircks  
    Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party given as provided in this section. 
I.  Drops to Public Buildings. The grantee shall provide installation of one cable drop, one cable outlet, and monthly basic cable service, without charge, to all public and private elementary and secondary schools, excluding home schools, located in the city within one hundred fifty feet of the system, upon request of the school system. 
    The grantee shall provide installation of one cable drop, one cable outlet, and monthly basic cable service, without charge, to one city-owned building, excluding hospitals, nursing homes, apartments, or buildings located at the airport, located in the city within one hundred fifty feet of the system as designated by the city. 
    No redistribution of the free basic cable service provided pursuant to this section shall be allowed. Additional drops and/or outlets in any of the above locations will be provided by the grantee at the cost of the grantee's time and material. Alternatively, at the institution's request, such institution may add outlets at its own expense, as long as such installation meets the grantee's standards, and provided that any fees for cable communications services are paid. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the grantee to extend the system to serve additional institutions as may be designated by the city. The grantee shall have one year from the date of city commission designation of additional institution(s) to complete construction of the drop and outlet. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.050 - Construction standards. 
A.  Construction Codes and Permits. 
1.  The grantee shall obtain all required permits from the city before commencing any construction upgrade or extension of the system, including the opening or disturbance of any street or private or public property within the city. 
2.  The city shall impose no permit fees upon the grantee, given that the grantee pays franchise fees pursuant to this franchise. 
3.  The city shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed pursuant to the provisions of the franchise and to make such tests at its own expense as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of the franchise and applicable provisions of local, state, and federal law. 
B.  Repair of Streets and Property. Any and all streets or public property or private property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or reconstruction of the system shall be promptly and fully restored by the grantee, at its expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing prior to the grantee's work. 
C.  Conditions of Street Use. 
1.  If at any time during the period of this franchise, the city shall elect to alter or change the grade or location of any street, alley, or other public way, the grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by the city, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes, and other fixtures of the system, and in each instance comply with the standards and specifications of the city. If the city reimburses other occupants of the street, the grantee shall be likewise reimbursed. 
2.  The grantee shall, on request of any person holding a moving permit issued by the city, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the moving of buildings, with the expense of such temporary removal to be paid by the person requesting the same, and the grantee shall be given not less than ten days advance notice to arrange for such temporary changes. 
3.  The grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and overhanging the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public easements of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the grantee. 
4.  Nothing contained in this franchise shall relieve any person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the grantee's facilities. 
D.  Undergrounding of Cable. 
1.  In all areas of the city where all other utility lines are placed underground, the grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires, and other facilities underground. 
E.  Safety Requirements. The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.060 - Design provisions. 
A.  Operation and Maintenance of System. The grantee shall render effective service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the extent feasible, shall be preceded by notice in accordance with Section 13.37.040(H) of this chapter and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
B.  Technical Standards. The technical standards used in the operation of the system shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission relating to cable communications systems pursuant to the Federal Communications Commission's rules and regulations and found in Title 47, Sections 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time. 
C.  Lockout Device. Upon the request of a subscriber, the grantee shall provide by sale or lease a lockout device. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.070 - Services provisions. 
A.  Subscriber Inquiry and Complaint Procedures. The grantee shall have a publicly listed toll-free telephone number and be operated so as to receive subscriber complaints and requests on a twenty-four hour-a-day, seven day-a-week basis. 
B.  Refund Policy. In the event a subscriber establishes or terminates service and receives less than a full month's service, the grantee shall prorate the monthly rate on the basis of the number of days in the period for which service was rendered to the number of days in the billing. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.080 - Educational and governmental access. 
A.  Educational and Government Access. 
1.  The grantee shall dedicate one channel for educational and governmental use (EG Access) to the city for the public noncommercial, noncompetitive use. The grantee shall have the right to use any portion of such channel that is not being used by the city. 
2.  All residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services offered on the system shall be eligible to receive such access channel at no additional charge. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.090 - Operation and administration providing. 
A.  Franchise Fee. 
1.  The grantee shall pay the city an annual franchise fee in the amount of three percent of the grantee's annual gross revenues. 
2.  The franchise fee shall be payable monthly. The payment shall be made within thirty days of the end of each of the grantee's fiscal month, together with a brief report showing the basis for the computation. 
B.  Indemnification of City. 
1.  The city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees, and agents shall not be liable for any loss or damage to any real or personal property of any person, or any injury or death of any person, arising out of or in connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of, or other action or event with respect to the system. 
2.  The grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees, and agents from and against all liability, damages, and penalties which they may legally be required to pay as a result of the exercise of the franchise, except claims because of EG programming, or the city's operation, administration, promotion or management of the EG access channel or any use of the internet services in public institutions. 
3.  Nothing in this franchise relieves a person from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the grantee's facilities while performing work connected with grading, regrading, or changing the line of a street or public place or with the construction or reconstruction of a sewer or water system. 
4.  In order for the city to assert its rights to be indemnified, defended, and held harmless, the city must, with respect to each claim: 
a.  Promptly notify the grantee, in writing, of any claim or legal proceeding which gives rise to such right; 
b.  Afford the grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement, or other resolution or disposition of any claim or proceeding; and 
c.  Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of the grantee, at the grantee's expense, in its participation in and control, compromise, settlement, or resolution, or other disposition of such claim or proceeding subject to subsection (B)(4)(b) of this section. 
C.  Insurance. 
1.  As a part of the indemnification provided in subsection B of this section, but without limiting the foregoing, the grantee shall file with its acceptance of this franchise, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, including contractual liability coverage, in protection of the city in its capacity in such. The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not less than three hundred thousand dollars for property damage to any one person and one million dollars for property damage resulting from any one act or occurrence. 
2.  The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by the grantee in full force and effect during the entire term of the franchise. Each policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of the grantee or for other reasons, except after thirty days advance written notice have been provided to the city. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.100 - Revocation, abandonment, and sale or transfer. 
A.  City's Right to Revoke. In addition to all other rights which the city has pursuant to law or equity, the city reserves the right to revoke, terminate, or cancel this franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if after the hearing required by subsection (B)(2) of this section, it is determined the grantee has violated any material provision of this franchise. 
B.  Procedures for Revocation. 
1.  The city shall provide the grantee with written notice of a cause for revocation and the intent to revoke and shall allow the grantee sixty days subsequent to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to provide adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the franchise. Together with the notice required herein, the city shall provide the grantee with written findings of fact which are the basis of the revocation. 
2.  The grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording due process before the city commission prior to revocation, which public hearing shall follow the sixty-day notice provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section. The city shall provide the grantee with written notice of its decision together with written findings of fact supplementing such decision. 
3.  After the public hearing, and upon written determination by the city to revoke the franchise, the grantee may appeal the decision with an appropriate state or federal court or agency. 
4.  During the appeal period, the franchise shall remain in full force and effect unless the term thereof sooner expires. 
5.  Upon satisfactory correction by the grantee of the violation upon which the notice was given, the initial notice shall become void. 
C.  Abandonment of Service. The grantee may not abandon the system or any portion thereof without having first given three months' written notice to the city. 
D.  Sale or Transfer of Franchise. No sale or transfer of this franchise shall take place without the written approval of the city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All of the rights, privileges, obligations, duties, and liabilities created by this franchise shall pass to and be binding upon the successor or assignee of the grantee. Such approval shall not be required where the grantee grants a security interest in its franchise and assets to secure an indebtedness. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.110 - Protection of individual rights. 
A.  Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. The grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers or general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or age. The grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and city laws, and all executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination. 
B.  Subscriber Privacy. The grantee shall comply with terms of 47 U.S.C. Section 551 relating to the protection of subscriber privacy. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.120 - Unauthorized connections and modifications. 
A.  Unauthorized Connections or Modifications Prohibited. It is unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or governmental body or agency, without the express consent of the grantee, to make or possess, or assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension, or division, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically, or otherwise, with or to any segment of the system. 
B.  Removal or Destruction Prohibited. It is unlawful for any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or government body or agency to wilfully interfere with, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage or assist therein, any part or segment of the system for any purpose whatsoever. 
C.  Penalty. Any firm, person, group, company, corporation, or government body or agency found guilty of violating this section may be fined not less than twenty dollars and the costs of the action, and not more than five hundred dollars and the costs of the action, for each and every subsequent offense. Each continuing day of the violation shall be considered a separate occurrence. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.130 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  Franchise Renewal. Any renewal of this franchise shall be done in accordance with applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations. 
B.  Amendment of Franchise Ordinance. The grantee and city may agree, from time to time, to amend this franchise. Such written amendments may be made at any time if the city and grantee agree that such an amendment will be in the public interest, or if such an amendment is required due to changes in federal, state, or local laws. The city shall act pursuant to local law pertaining to the ordinance amendment process. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
13.37.140 - Publication, effective date, and acceptance. 
A.  Publication, Effective Date. This franchise shall be published in accordance with applicable North Dakota law. The effective date of this franchise shall be the date of acceptance by the grantee in accordance with the provisions of subsection B of this section. 
B.  Acceptance. 
1.  The grantee shall accept this franchise by executing same. Such acceptance by the grantee shall be deemed the grant of this franchise for all purposes. 
2.  Upon acceptance of this franchise, the grantee shall be bound by all terms and conditions contained herein. 
3.  The grantee shall accept this franchise in the following manner: 
a.  This franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by the grantee and delivered to the city. 
b.  With its acceptance, the grantee shall also deliver any insurance certificates required herein that have not previously been delivered. 
(Ord. 872 (part), 2006) 
Chapter 13.38 - Gas Distribution System 

13.38.010 - Statement of intent and purpose. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter is granting to Montana-Dakota Utilities Co., a division of MDU Resources Group, Inc. a corporation, its successors and assigns, the franchise and right to construct, maintain and operate, within and upon, in and under the streets, alleys and public grounds of the city of Devils Lake, ND a gas distribution system for transmitting and distributing natural of manufactured gas, or a mixture of both, for public and private use. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
13.38.020 - Definitions. 
    The following shall be definitions for purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "City" shall be the city of Devils Lake, ND. 
B.  "Company" shall be Montana-Dakota Utilities Co., a division of MDU Resources Group, Inc. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
13.38.030 - Purpose and jurisdiction. 
    Company shall maintain an efficient distribution system for furnishing natural or manufactured gas, or a mixture of both for public and private use at such reasonable rates as may be approved by the Public Service Commission of the State of North Dakota and under such orders, rules or regulations as may be issued by a federal or state agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
13.38.040 - Term. 
    This franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of fifteen years from the date of acceptance by company, unless renewed, revoked, or terminated sooner as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
13.38.050 - Nonexclusive franchise. 
    This franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent the city from granting to any other party, or prevent the city itself, the right to use the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the city for like purposes. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
3.38.060 - Governing public ways and places, grants of access and use of public rights-of-way. 
A.  All gas pipes, mains, regulators and other property and facilities shall be located, constructed, installed and maintained as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary trade, traffic, travel upon the use of public ways of the city. In installing, repairing, maintaining, removing, or replacing said gas pipes, mains and appurtenances, company shall, in all cases, place the public ways, in, on, under, or across which the same are located in as good condition as they were prior to said operation. 
B.  Company shall provide filed locations for all its underground facilities when requested by city within a reasonable period of time. The period of time will be considered reasonable if it compares favorable with the average time required to locate minicipal underground facilities for company. 
C.  Company shall fully comply with all city of Devils Lake Ordinances governing public ways and places, including but not limited to access and public use of streets, sidewalks, and public places. 
D.  In those instances when city's fire department members are providing assistance at the scene of a gas leak: 
1.  For gas leakage occurrences involving Company's jurisdictional area, which area ends at the customer's meter shutoff, the city may require reimbursement by the company to the city for all fire department expenses incurred at the then existing fire department rate for personnel and equipment responding to the gas leakage occurrence when the company does not timely provide at the site of the leakage a service representative(s) capable of evaluating the incident (i. e. service technician). Reimbursement may be requested for the time period commencing forty-five minutes from when the company receives notice of the potential gas leakage situation or from when the time the fire department is dispatched, whichever is later, and ending at the time the service representative(s) arrives at the scene. The city may seek reimbursement for its entire cost of responding to the incident if the cause of the leakage is a result of the negligence of the company or if its agent or employee requests the services of the fire department in addressing the situation. If the fire department is required to remain on the site and the company's construction crew arrives to repair a gas leakage, reimbursement may be requested for the time period commencing one and one-half hours from the time the fire department is dispatched and up until the time as such construction personnel are on site, after which time no further reimbursement shall be sought, unless the cause of the leakage is as a result of the negligence of the company and/or its agents or employees and the representative(s) requests the services of the fire department. 
2.  The city may seek reimbursement from the responsible party, for all fire department expenses incurred at the then existing city rate for personnel and equipment used in responding to a gas leakage occurrence when the gas leakage is caused by the negligent and/or intentional acts or omissions of such responsible party i.e. including corporate and business entities. Except for the time requirements as provided for in Section 13.38.060(E)(1), city will not hold company responsible for leakages caused by others. 
3.  The determination as the whether or not to seek reimbursement as provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above shall be in the discretion of the city fire chief. 
4.  Subsections 1 and 2 above apply only to gas leakage calls involving the company's jurisdictional area which would be up to the customer's meter shutoff. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
13.38.070 - Relocating. 
A.  Whenever the city shall grade, regrade, or change the line of any public way, or construct or reconstruct any city utility system therein and shall, in the proper exercise of its police power, and with due regard to reasonable working conditions, when necessary order company to relocate permanently its mains, services and other property located in said public way, company shall relocate its facilities at it own expense. City shall give company reasonable notice of plans to grade, regrade or change the line of any public way or to construct or reconstruct any city utility system. 
B.  Any relocation, removal or rearrangement of any company facilities made necessary because of the extension into or through city of a federally aided highway project shall be governed by the provisions of North Dakota or federal statutes as supplemented or amended. 
C.  Nothing contained herein shall relieve any person, persons, or corporations from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring company's facilities while performing any work connected with grading, regrading or changing the line of any public way, or with the construction or reconstruction of any city utility system. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
13.38.080 - Indemnification. 
    Company shall indemnify, keep and hold city free and harmless from any and all liability on account of injury to persons or damage to property occasioned by the construction, maintenance, repair or operations of company's gas facilities located on, over, under, or across the public ways and public grounds of the city, unless such injury or damage grows out of the negligence of city, its employees, or agents, results from the performance in a proper manner of acts reasonably deemed hazardous by company, but such performance is nevertheless ordered or directed by city after notice of company's determination. In the event a suit shall be brought against city under circumstances where the above agreements to indemnify applies, company at its sole cost and expense shall defend city in such suit if written notice thereof is promptly given to company within a period wherein company is not prejudiced by lack of such notice. If such notice is not reasonably given as hereinbefore pro vided, company shall have no duty to either indemnify or defend. If company is required to indemnify and defend, it will thereafter have complete control of such litigation, but company may not settle such litigation without the consent of city, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. This section is not, as to third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available To Company; And Every Defense Or Immunity That City Could Assert In Its Own Behalf. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
13.38.090 - Vacation of public ways. 
    Except where required solely for a city improvement project, the vacation of any public way or public ground, after the installation of gas facilities, shall not operate to deprive company of its rights to operate and maintain such gas facilities, until the reasonable cost of relocating the same and the loss and expense resulting from such relocation are first paid to the company by the party requesting the relocation. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
13.38.100 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 883, adopted March 2, 2009, repealed § 13.38.100, which pertained to franchise fee and derived from Ord. No. 881, adopted January 20, 2009. 
13.38.110 - Assignment. 
    The company shall have the right to assign this franchise to any party, or corporation, but all obligations of the company shall be binding upon its successors and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
13.38.120 - Written acceptancy. 
    Within thirty days after company is notified of passage and final approval of the ordinance codified in this chapter, company shall file with the city Auditor its written acceptance of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 881, 1-20-09) 
Chapter 13.39 - NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE FOR COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM (NORTH DAKOTA TELEPHONE CO.) 
Sections: 

13.39.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter shall establish a non-exclusive franchise, which constitutes an agreement between the city of Devils Lake (hereinafter the "city") and North Dakota Telephone Co. (hereinafter the "operator"). The operator agrees to construct, maintain, and operate a communications services system for the distribution of telephone service, broadband services, and video service pursuant to the terms of this franchise. The city agrees to grant all necessary rights and privileges to use public rights of way necessary for the communications services system. This agreement shall, as of the effective date, supercede all existing franchises previously granted by the city to operator, or any of its predecessors, subsidiaries, or affiliated companies. This chapter does not affect Ordinance No. 872, which has been codified as Chapter 13.37 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code, Community Antenna Television Service (North Dakota Telephone Co.). 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.020 - Length of franchise. 
    The length of this franchise shall be for a term of fifteen years from January 1, 2010 through midnight of December 31, 2025. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.030 - Service area. 
    The operator's service area shall be the entire area of the city of Devils Lake, in its present form, or any later reorganized, or enlarged, or re-incorporated form, and any area annexed to the city after the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.040 - Liability and indemnification. 
    Operator shall have in effect during the term of this franchise the following types of insurance coverage: 
A.  Workforce liability insurance upon its employees engaged in any manner in the installation or servicing of its plant and equipment within the city of Devils Lake, North Dakota. 
B.  Property damage liability insurance to the extent of two hundred fifty thousand dollars as to each occurrence and two hundred fifty thousand dollars aggregate, and personal injury insurance to the extent of five hundred thousand dollars aggregate. Excess bodily insurance and property damage of one million dollars each occurrence and one million dollars aggregate. Automobile, bodily injury and property damage liability combined of one million dollars each occurrence. 
    Operator shall indemnify, protect, save, defend, and hold harmless the city from and against losses and physical damage to property and bodily injury or death to persons, for property within the city, or by any act of operator, its agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.050 - Technical standards. 
    Operator shall be governed by technical standards established by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.060 - Operation and maintenance of system. 
A.  The operator shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest possible time. Such interruptions in so far as possible shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system, if possible. 
B.  All service requests and complaints should be responded to within forty-eight hours of receipt. 
C.  If at any time the city, acting through its city commission, shall deem it necessary to make any improvements or changes on all or any part of the right of way of any city roadway which affects a utility located on city right of way, then and in such event, the operator shall within fifteen days after written notice from the city proceed to alter, change, vacate or remove said utility from the city right of way so as to conform to the city roadway changes and as directed by the city. 
    Such work shall be done without any cost to the city and shall be completed within the date specified in said written notice. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.070 - Emergency use of facilities. 
    In the case of an emergency or disaster, the operator shall, upon request of the city, make available its facilities to the city for emergency use during the emergency or disaster. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.080 - Successors or assigns. 
    This franchise shall be binding upon the operator, its successors, and assigns. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.090 - Acceptance. 
    This grant of franchise and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by operator by the submission of a written instrument, executed and sworn by a corporate officer of the operator before a notary public, and filed with the city within sixty days after the effective date of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.100 - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect upon adoption by the city commission. The franchise granted by this chapter shall not be effective until the operator files its written acceptance with the city, as set out in Section 13.39.090. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.110 - Severability. 
    Each section, subsection, or portion of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be severable if any section, subsection, or portion shall be found to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.120 - Notice. 
    Written notices shall be deemed to have been duly served if delivered in person to the individual or the entity for which it was intended, or if delivered by registered or certified U.S. mail to the last business address known to the party who gives notice. All notices and requests shall be addressed as follows: 
CITY: 
City of Devils Lake 
City Auditor 
423 - 6th St. NE 
PO Box 1048 
Devils Lake, ND 58301 
OPERATOR: 
North Dakota Telephone Co. 
211 - 22nd St. NW 
PO Box 180 
Devils Lake, ND 58301 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
13.39.130 - Rates. 
    Operator shall at all times maintain on file with the city auditor a schedule setting forth all rates and charges to be made to subscribers for all communications services. 
    During the term of this franchise, the city may regulate rates only if authorized to do so by the Federal Communications Commission and/or the North Dakota Public Service Commission and then such regulation shall only be in accordance with the provision of the Federal Communications Commission and/or the North Dakota Public Service Commission. 
    In the event the city has the authority to regulate the rates, the following procedure shall be used: 
A.  Before making any changes in the rates and charges to subscribers for the operator's communications services, operator shall file, in writing, with the city a new proposed rate schedule at least thirty days in advance of the proposed effective date of such rate change. If the city takes no action to set the proposed rate change for hearing, said proposed rate change shall become effective upon the expiration of the thirty day notice. 
B.  If the city decides to hold a hearing on the proposed rate change, the hearing shall be held within forty-five days of the filing of the proposed rate change by operator. Following the hearing, the city shall take final action on the proposed rate change within thirty days of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 890, 8-2-10) 
Chapter 13.40 - POWER COMPANY 

13.40.010 - Purpose. 
    There is hereby granted to Otter Tail Power Company, a Minnesota Company, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the grantee, for a period of twenty years from and after the passage and approval of the ordinance codified in this chapter and during all of said time, subject to the conditions and requirements hereinafter set forth, permission to construct, install and maintain an electric light and power system and transmission lines and to operate and maintain the same within and through the city and to transmit electricity to and from other towns or cities for the purpose of light, power and heat and to erect, construct, install and maintain conduits, poles, wires, pipes and other necessary fixtures and attachments upon and under the streets, alleys, bridges and public grounds of said city for the purpose of furnishing and selling electricity for light, heat and power and such other purposes for which electricity may be used by the inhabitants of said city, said permission and franchise to become operative and continue under the conditions hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.020 - Safety standards. 
    Said grantee shall use poles, wires, crossarms, equipment and devices to conform with the standards of construction adopted by the National Electrical Safety Code of the United States, Department of Commerce and all apparatus connected therewith shall be located so as not to obstruct the avenues, streets, and alleys of said city or to endanger persons or property or to hinder or to obstruct the use of said avenues, streets, and alleys or public places by the inhabitants of said city, or public in general, or to interfere with any sidewalk, streets, curb, gutter or park improvements that the city may deem proper to make along the lines of said avenues, streets and public places. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.030 - Installation requirements. 
    All conduits, poles, wires and pipes installed by virtue of this chapter shall be installed in such places and in such manner as not unnecessarily to encroach upon streets, alleys, bridges or public grounds of said city, and so as not to unnecessarily obstruct the use thereof for the ordinary purpose of travel thereon, and the erection thereof shall be subject to the reasonable supervision and direction of the city commission of said city. Whenever practicable, all poles shall be set in alleys, and poles now in position upon or along the streets whenever practicable shall be removed, and the location of all of said poles shall be designated by the president under the supervision of the city commission of the said city. 
    All poles where set in alleys shall be set at or near the boundary line thereof and where set in streets shall be located at such distances as shall be directed by the city from the property line of the abutting owner, and shall be placed so as not to interfere with the construction or placing of any water pipes, sewers, or drains or the flow of water therefrom which have been or may be placed by authority of said city. In the event that said grantee shall make any unnecessary obstruction of said streets, alleys public grounds or places not designated by the city commission, the city may cause the removal of such obstructions and charge and collect from such grantee the actual cost of such removals. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.040 - Disturbances during construction, maintenance or enlargement. 
    During the construction, maintenance or enlargement of any part of said electric light and power system, said grantee shall not unnecessarily impede or block travel in said streets and highways in said city, and shall leave all streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lanes and public places and all grounds disturbed by said construction in good condition upon the completion of said work. 
    The city reserves the right for itself and its agents to make and adopt, and the rights and privileges hereby granted shall at all times be and remain subject to, such reasonable regulations of a police nature as it may deem necessary for the best interest of the city but the city will not by any such regulations or by acts of its own or agents do anything to prevent or interfere with the grantee carrying on its business in accordance with the franchise hereby granted. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.050 - Liability. 
    Whenever the said grantee in erecting, constructing and maintaining said lines or poles, shall take up any of the pavements, sidewalks crossings or curbs on any of the avenues, streets and alleys or public places in said city or shall make any excavations thereon; such excavations shall be refilled and the sidewalk, crossing or curb replaced under the direction of the said city and any excavation so made shall be properly lighted at night during the construction, and in case of the failure to do so on the part of the said grantee, then the said city may do the same at the expense of said grantee and said grantee agrees to pay said city for the reasonable cost or value of said work. Said grantee shall be liable for all loss or damage caused by the negligence of grantee, which may result to persons or property within the said city, caused by it, or its agents, servants, or employees in erecting, operating and maintaining the said electric system within said city, and shall at all times save the city harmless from any and all damages to persons or property in erecting, operating or maintaining said electric system. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.060 - Tree interference-Permission/authority to maintain. 
    There is granted to said grantee, its successors and assigns, during the term hereof, permission and authority to trim all trees in alleys, streets and public grounds of said city so as to remove all parts of said trees interfering with the proper erection, maintenance and operation of poles, cables, wires, masts or other fixtures, or appliances installed or to be installed pursuant to authority hereby granted. 
    Said grantee shall have full right and authority to assign to any person, persons, firm or corporation all the rights that are given it by this chapter, provided that the assignee of such rights by accepting such assignment shall become subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.070 - Nonliability from failure of service. 
    The grantee shall use due diligence and care in furnishing electric service as herein provided but shall not be liable for any loss or damage which may arise from failure of the service, either partial or total, but this shall not be construed to exempt said grantee from liability for negligence. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.080 - Rates. 
    The rates to be charged by said grantee in the said city shall be filed with the Public Service Commission of the state of North Dakota, and no increase or decrease in said rates shall be made except in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Public Service Commission. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.090 - Contract. 
    This contract shall be subject to any present or future laws of a regulatory nature enacted by the State of North Dakota, or any amendment or addition to such laws and further shall be subject to the rules and regulations laid down by the Public Service Commission of the state of North Dakota. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.100 - Franchise fee. 
    The city reserves the right during the term hereof to enact and assess a franchise fee such as it deems necessary, upon reasonable advance notice to grantee of not less than thirty days. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.110 - Selling or transferring of real property. 
    In the event the city should sell or transfer real property which is subject to grantee's franchise and should it become necessary to remove conduits, poles, wires or pipes installed by virtue of this chapter the removal shall be done at the expense of the grantee upon the request of the city. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
13.40.120 - Effective. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect and be in full force from and after its passage and approval by the city commission. The said grantee shall specify its acceptance of this franchise in writing, to be filed with the city auditor and in no event shall this chapter be binding on said grantee until the filing of such acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 908, 3-4-13) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
Chapter 15.04 - UNIFORM BUILDING CODE 
Sections: 

15.04.010 - Adoption of North Dakota State Building Code. 
    The North Dakota State Building Code (NDSBC) is adopted as the building code of the city. The NDSBC consists of the International Residential Code (IRC), the International Building Code (IBC), the International Mechanical Code (IMC), and the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) and includes a list of state approved amendments. The following amendments to the NDSBC, which provide as follows, are hereby adopted: 
A. Section 302.3.3 shall be amended to read: 
Exception #2. 
The private garage shall be separated from the residence and its attic area by not less than 1/2 inch type × gypsum board applied to the garage side. Door openings between the garage and the residence shall be equipped with either solid wood doors not less than 1 3/8 inches thick, solid or honeycomb core steel doors not less than 1 3/8 inches thick or doors in compliance with Section 714.2.3. Openings from private garage directly into a room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. 
B. Section 1009 shall be amended as follows: 
1009.2 Minimum size. 
Delete exception. 
C. Section 1206. 
    The NDSBC amendment to remove section 1206 of the IBC is to be deleted. 
D. Section 1608.2 shall be amended to read: 
1608.2 Ground snow loads. A ground snow load of 50 psf shall be used in determining the design snow load for roofs of buildings governed by the IBC. 
E. Section 1805.4 shall be amended as follows: 
    Delete table 1805.4.2 & tables 1805.5(1) thru 1805.5(4) of the IBC and replace with Tables 1805.5(1) thru 1805.5 (3). (See end of chapter.) 
F. Section 3303 of the IBC 
Add 
3303.7 All debris, rubbish and combustible material shall be removed from the premises upon completion of the demolition, except that the foundation need not be removed if at least twelve (12) inches below finished grade. Upon completion of the demolition, the site shall be filled and leveled with earth to conform to the grade of the adjacent properties. The Building Official may require the permittee to submit plans and a schedule for the demolition. Where such information is required, no work shall be done until such plans and/or specifications are approved by the Building Official. 
3303.8 The City shall approve, in writing and in advance of use, the proposed site for disposal of the debris from any demolition work. All loads of debris from demolition must be tarped except as permitted, in writing, by the City. 
3303.9 Measures shall be taken to the satisfaction of the City, in any event, to assure that no debris will be lost during transport to or from the site of demolition. 
Amendments to IRC 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. 
Building: 
1. One-story detached accessory structures, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet. 
Delete item 2 and renumber remaining items accordingly. 
Section R305 shall be amended as follows: 
1. R305.1 Minimum Height. Habitable rooms, hallways, corridors, bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundry rooms and basements shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches. The required height shall be measured from the finish floor to the lowest projection from the ceiling. 
Section 309.2 shall be amended as follows: 
R309.2 Separation required. The garage shall be separated from the residence and its attic area by not less than 1/2 inch type × gypsum board applied to the garage side. Where the separation is a floor-ceiling assembly, the structure supporting the separation shall also be protected by not less than 1/2 inch gypsum board or equivalent. 
Section 310 shall be amended as follows: 
R3 10.1.1 Minimum opening area. 
Delete Exception: 
Grade floor openings shall have a minimum net clear opening of 5 square feet. 
Section 403 shall be amended as follows: 
    Delete table 403.1 and tables R404.1.1(1) thru R404.l.1(4) of the IRC and replace with Tables 404.1(1) thru 404.1(3). (See end of chapter.) 
Section R404.2 Wood foundation walls is amended to read: 
The construction of wood foundations is governed by Technical Report No 7 of the National Forest Products Association (NFPA). The Design, Fabrication, and Installation Manual of NFPA and the Permanent Wood Foundation design and construction guide provided by the Southern Forest Products Association (SFPA) are approved design manuals. 
Subsection 801.2.1 shall be added to section 801.2: 
801.2.1 Snow Load. All buildings governed by the IRC shall be designed with a minimum live load of 30 psf. 
Table 1805.5(1) 
Foundations For Stud Bearing Walls- Minimum Requirements 1 2 3 4 
Under Conditions Not Requiring Special Design Number Of Floors Supported By The Foundation5 Thickness of Foundation Wall (inches) Height Of Wall (inches) Height Of Footing (inches) Thickness Of Footing (inches) Depth Of Foundation Below Finished Grade (inches) Depth Below Undisturbed Ground Surface (inches) Concrete Masonry 1 8 8 48 or less 16 8 48 12 8 10 48 or less 16 8 48 12 2 8 10 Max 108 16 8 48 18 3 10 10 Max 108 20 10 48 24 Table 1805.5(2) Minimum Reinforcement for Concrete Foundation Walls Wall Height Feet Wall Thickness Inches Vertical Reinforcing Horizontal Reinforcing6 4 8 #4 @ 48? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. 8 8 #4 @ 24? o.c. 
#5 @ 40? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. 10 #4 @ 30? o.c. 
#5 @ 50? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. 9 8 #4 @ 18? o.c. 
#5 @ 28? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. 10 #4 @ 24? o.c. 
#5 @ 36? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. Table 1805.5(3) Minimum Reinforcement for Masonry Foundation Walls Wall Height Feet Wall Thickness Inches Vertical7 Reinforcing Horizontal Reinforcing 4 8 #4 @ 48? o.c. Minimum 9-guage side and cross runs every third row 8 10 #4 @ 24? o.c. 
#5 @ 40? o.c. Minimum 9-guage side and cross runs every third row 12 #4 @ 32? o.c. 
#5 @ 40? o.c. 9 10 #4 @ 16? o.c. 
#5 @ 24? o.c. 12 #4 @ 16? o.c. 
#5 @ 24? o.c.  
1 Foundation walls greater than 9 feet in height shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer. 
2 Minimum requirements when an engineered foundation design is not provided. Foundations subject to excessive lateral pressures created by unstable soil or groundwater conditions shall be designed by a licensed engineer. 
3 Detached garage foundations may be constructed on concrete slabs provided such slabs are at least 4 inches thick and thickened to at least 12 inches at all edges, and thickened edges have a horizontal width of at least 8 inches at their base. Detached garage slabs constructed on compacted fill shall be provided with reinforcement conforming to the requirements of the latest edition of the Concrete Reinforced Steel Institute Design Handbook. 
4 All footings shall be reinforced with a minimum of two continuous horizontal No. 4 reinforcing. 
5 Foundations may also support a roof. A foundation supporting a roof only, shall be considered as supporting one floor. 
6 Top and bottom bars shall not be less than 3 inches or more than 8 inches from the top and bottom of the wall. 
7 Masonry foundation walls shall have all cells with vertical reinforcement filled solid with concrete. 
Table 404.1(1) 
Foundations For Stud Bearing Walls-Minimum Requirements 1 2 3 4 
Under Conditions Not Requiring Special Design Number Of Floors Supported By The Foundation 5 Thickness of Foundation Wall (inches) Height Of Wall (inches) Height Of Footing (inches) Thickness Of Footing (inches) Depth Of Foundation Below Finished Grade (inches) Depth Below Undisturbed Ground Surface (inches) Concrete Masonry 1 8 8 48 or less 16 8 48 12 8 10 48 or less 16 8 48 12 2 8 10 Max 108 16 8 48 18 3 10 10 Max 108 20 10 48 24 Table 404.1(2) Minimum Reinforcement for Concrete Foundation Walls Wall Height Feet Wall Thickness Inches Vertical 7 Reinforcing Horizontal Reinforcing6 4 8 #4 @ 48? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. 8 8 #4 @ 24? o.c. 
#5 @ 40? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. 10 #4 @ 30? o.c. 
#5 @ 50? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. 9 8 #4 @ 18? o.c. 
#5 @ 28? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. 10 #4 @ 24? o.c. 
#5 @ 36? o.c. #4 @ 24? o.c. Table 404.1(3) Minimum Reinforcement for Masonry Foundation Walls Wall Height Feet Wall Thickness Inches Vertical7 Reinforcing Horizontal Reinforceing 4 8 #4 @ 48? o.c. Minimum 9-guage side and cross runs every third row 8 10 #4 @ 24? o.c. 
#5 @ 40? o.c. 12 #4 @ 32? o.c. 
#5 @ 40? o.c. 9 10 #4 @ 16? o.c. 
#5 @ 24? o.c. 12 #4 @ 16? o.c. 
#5 @ 24? o.c.  
1 Foundation walls greater than 9 feet in height shall be designed by a licensed professional engineer. 
2 Minimum requirements when an engineered foundation design is not provided. Foundations subject to excessive lateral pressures created by unstable soil or groundwater conditions shall be designed by a licensed engineer. 
3 Detached garage foundations may be constructed on concrete slabs provided such slabs are at least 4 inches thick and thickened to at least 12 inches at all edges, and thickened edges have a horizontal width of at least 8 inches at their base. Detached garage slabs constructed on compacted fill shall be provided with reinforcement conforming to the requirements of the latest edition of the Concrete Reinforced Steel Institute Design Handbook. 
4 All footings shall be reinforced with a minimum of two continuous horizontal No. 4 reinforcing. 
5 Foundations may also support a roof. A foundation supporting a roof only, shall be considered as supporting one floor. 
6 Top and bottom bars shall not be less than 3 inches or more than 8 inches from the top and bottom of the wall. 
7 Masonry foundation walls shall have all cells with vertical reinforcement filled solid with concrete. 
  
(Ord. 857 (part), 2003) 
Chapter 15.08 - UNIFORM FIRE CODE 

15.08.010 - Adopted. 
    The 1991 Edition of the Uniform Fire Code, along with its Appendix chapters, is adopted, except that Article 4 and Appendix Chapters I-A, VI-C, AVICI, VIC2, VIC3, VIC4, and VIC5 are deleted therefrom. 
(Ord. 778 (part), 1993: Ord. 740 (part), 1989: Ord. 671 § 1(part), 1984; Ord. 619 (part), 1979: Ord. 597 (part), 1976: Ord. 579 § 1, 1975) 
15.08.020 - Standards specified. 
    Unless specifically provided for in other codes or ordinances of the city, the standards set forth in the Uniform Fire Code, edition of 1991, shall apply. A copy of the Uniform Fire Code shall be available for public examination at the office of the fire chief during business hours. 
(Ord. 778 (part), 1993: Ord. 740 (part), 1989: Ord. 671 § 1(part), 1984; Ord. 619 (part), 1979: Ord. 597 (part), 1976: Ord. 579 § 6, 1975) 
15.08.030 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of the code apply equally to both public and private property. It applies to all new structures and their occupancies including buildings, structures, equipment, etc., and, except as otherwise specified, to existing structures and their occupancies, including buildings, structures, equipment, etc., which constitute a clear and present hazard to life or to property. 
(Ord. 579 § 2, 1975) 
15.08.040 - Accordance with law. 
    This chapter shall be in accordance with the laws and regulations covering fire prevention of the city and county. 
(Ord. 579 § 3, 1975) 
15.08.050 - Police powers. 
    This chapter shall be deemed an exercise of the police powers of the city for the preservation and protection of the public health, peace, safety and welfare, and all its provisions shall be liberally construed for that purpose. 
(Ord. 579 § 4, 1975) 
15.08.060 - Administration. 
    The provisions of this act shall be administered by the chief of the fire department. 
(Ord. 579 § 5, 1975) 
15.08.070 - Violations unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any person to violate this chapter, to permit or maintain such violation, to refuse to obey any provision of it, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation except as variation may be allowed by action of the chief of fire department in writing. Proof of such unlawful act or failure to act shall be deemed prima facie evidence that the act is that of the owner. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner or the occupant shall not be deemed to relieve the other. 
(Ord. 579 § 7, 1975) 
15.08.080 - Expiration and renewal of building permits. 
    A building permit issued by the city of Devils Lake is valid for a period of twelve months for the renovation or repair of a structure and eighteen months for new construction. The permit can be renewed for an additional similar term. The cost to renew a permit for each additional term shall be double the fee charged for the preceding term unless waived by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 903, 9-17-12) 
Chapter 15.12 - ACCESSIBILITY TO HANDICAPPED 
Sections: 

15.12.010 - Standard adopted. 
    USAS A117.1-1961 USA Standard-Specifications for Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible to, and Usable by, the Physically Handicapped, is adopted as the standard for compliance with Section 15.12.020. 
(Ord. 501 § 3, 1970) 
15.12.020 - Compliance required for building permit issuance. 
A.  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building which is constructed in whole or in part by the use of state, county or municipal funds or the funds of any political subdivision, unless the design thereof has taken into consideration the needs of the handicapped and, as far as is feasible, has made the building and its facilities accessible to, and usable by, handicapped persons. 
B.  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building, whether constructed by public or private funds, which is designated for use or occupancy by a public agency, whether federal, state or municipal, unless the design thereof has taken into consideration the needs of the handicapped and, as far as is feasible, has made the building and its facilities accessible to, and usable by, handicapped persons. 
(Ord. 501 §§ 1, 2, 1970) 
Chapter 15.16 - UNIFORM HOUSING CODE 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Adopted. 
    There is adopted by reference and made a part of this chapter, a Uniform Housing Code adopted by the International Conference of Building Officials. 
(Ord. 479 § 1, 1968) 
15.16.020 - Conformance. 
    A Uniform Housing Code for the city is adopted to provide minimum requirements for the protection of life, limb, health, property, safety and welfare of the general public and owners and occupants of residential buildings. The code shall be governed by and conform to the standards of the 1976 edition of the Uniform Housing Code adopted by the International Conference of Building Officials, and rules and regulations adopted, or hereafter from time to time to be adopted by the board of city commissioners, all to be in conformity with the standards of the Uniform Housing Code. 
(Ord. 614(part), 1977: Ord. 479 § 2, 1968) 
Chapter 15.24 - SMOKE DETECTORS 
Sections: 

15.24.010 - Purpose. 
    This chapter is adopted to provide minimum requirements for the safety and protection of those persons inhabiting multiple-occupancy and single-occupancy structures, including structures built prior to the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord 795 (part), 1995) 
15.24.020 - Smoke detection systems for residential rental property. 
    All residential property with the exception of property covered by Section 15.24.030 must be equipped with smoke detection systems or other approved alarm systems for the protection of occupants of the property. Systems must be installed and maintained in compliance with applicable national fire protection standards as defined by rules adopted by the state fire marshal. The state fire marshal and the Devils Lake fire department shall provide information concerning the installation of smoke detection systems to owners of residential rental properties. A system installed in a single-family rental dwelling must be maintained and inspected by the tenant occupying the single-family rental dwelling. In other dwellings, the landlord is responsible for installation and insuring the proper operation of the system upon the occupancy of each new tenant. The tenant is responsible for maintaining the system during the tenant's occupancy. 
    Nothing in this section may be construed to alter the provisions of Chapter 15-21.3 of the North Dakota Century Code, of Chapters 15.04, 15.08, 15.12, or 15.16 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code regarding smoke detection systems or alarm systems for newly constructed residences. 
(Ord 795 (part), 1995) 
15.24.030 - Smoke detection devices or other approved alarm systems for hotels. 
    Each hotel, motel and lodging house shall install smoke detection devices or other approved alarm systems of a type and in the number approved by the State Department of Health and Consolidated Laboratories, in cooperation with the state fire marshal, and the Devils Lake fire department. The current rules and regulations adopted by the State Department of Health and Consolidated Laboratories, in cooperation with the state fire marshal, governing the spacing and minimum specifications for approved smoke detection devices or other approved alarm systems shall be followed by the Devils Lake fire department in establishing criteria to be followed in the city. The Devils Lake fire department shall provide all reasonable assistance required in complying with the provi- sions of this section. The rules and regulations required under this section shall be amended and modified as those issued by the State Department of Health and Consolidated Laboratories, in cooperation with the state fire marshal, are amended and modified. 
(Ord 795 (part), 1995) 
15.24.040 - Certificate of system. 
    A landlord shall require a tenant to sign a certificate provided by the Devils Lake fire department, which certificate shall include a provision that states that the smoke detection system or other approved alarm system is in proper working order, on taking occupancy of the property. The landlord may have additional items contained in the certificate, but it shall include at least what is contained in the certificate provided by the Devils Lake fire department. The landlord shall provide the Devils Lake fire department with a copy of the certificate signed by each tenant. 
(Ord 795 (part), 1995) 
15.24.050 - List of rental properties. 
    Prior to January 1st of each year each landlord shall provide the Devils Lake fire department with a list of all rental properties which that landlord does own within the city. 
(Ord 795 (part), 1995) 
15.24.060 - Tampering with systems. 
    It is unlawful to in any way tamper with any smoke detection system or other approved alarm systems, installed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord 795 (part), 1995) 
15.24.070 - Penalty provision. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who fails to comply, or who builds in violation of any plan submitted and approved thereunder, shall be subject to a fine of five hundred dollars and/or thirty days or both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. 
(Ord 795 (part), 1995) 
15.24.080 - Education course. 
    The Devils Lake fire department shall provide, on a monthly basis, an education course for tenants to address the safety and protection of tenants in rental units. In the certificate which each landlord is required to provide pursuant to Section 15.24.040, that certificate shall include a provision which encourages each tenant to attend the education course, and the date, time and location of when the education course is offered. It shall not be a violation of this chapter for the Devils Lake fire department to fail to have such an education course, and no tenant shall be in violation of this chapter by failing to attend such a course, but the penalty provisions of this chapter shall apply to a landlord who fails to include in the certificate required by Section 15.24.040 information regarding the offering of the education course. 
(Ord 795 (part), 1995) 
Chapter 15.28 - FLOODPLAIN REGULATIONS* 
Sections: 

15.28.010 - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
    The legislature of the State of North Dakota Century Code, Chapters 40-47, 11-33 and 58-03, delegated responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city commission of Devils Lake, North Dakota, does ordain as follows: 
A.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  The flood hazard areas of Devils Lake, North Dakota, are subject to closed basin lake inundation which can endanger life, result in loss of property, create health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, cause extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impair the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
2.  Flood losses caused by the cumulative effect of rising closed basin lakes in the special flood hazard areas, causes increases in wave and flood heights. Inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise unprotected structures can contribute to the flood loss. 
B.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
1.  To protect human life and health; 
2.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the alternative use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
7.  To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
C.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for: 
1.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in wave and flood heights; 
2.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Controlling the alteration of natural flood- plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate flood waters; 
4.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
5.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which could unnaturally divert flood waters or increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 2000) 
15.28.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    "Appeal" means a request for review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood Insurance Rate Map" (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of a structure including basement. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It includes recreational vehicles or travel trailers placed on a site for one hundred eighty consecutive days or more. 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "New construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
    "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally above ground. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either: 
1.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
2.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 2000) 
15.28.030 - General provisions. 
A.  Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city, including its extraterritorial zoning area. 
B.  Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Ramsey County, North Dakota, and Incorporated Areas dated December 20, 2000," with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study is on file in the office of the building official for the city. 
C.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
D.  Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, remedy or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 2000) 
15.28.040 - Administration. 
A.  Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.28-.030(B). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the building official and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill storage materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed; 
3.  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.28.050(B)(2); and 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
B.  Designation of the Building Official. The building official is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
C.  Duties and Responsibilities of the Building Official. Duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  Permit Review. 
a.  Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
b.  Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
c.  Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For purposes of this chapter, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
2.  Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.28.030(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements, or other development in the floodplain are administered in accordance with Section 15.28.050(B), Specific Standards. 
3.  Information to be Obtained and Maintained. 
a.  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
b.  For all new or substantially improved flood- proofed structures: 
i.  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed; 
ii.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in Section 15.28.040(A)(3). 
c.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
4.  Alteration of Watercourses. 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the North Dakota State Engineer prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
b.  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
5.  Interpretation of Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) Boundaries. Make interpretation where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection D of this section. 
D.  Variance Procedure. 
1.  Appeal Board. 
a.  The city commission as established by the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  The city commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
c.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the city commission, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the District Court, as provided in NDCC 40-47-11, 11-33-12 or 58-03-14. 
d.  In passing upon such applications, the city commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and: 
i.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
ii.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
iii.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
iv.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
v.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
vi.  The availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
vii.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
viii.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
ix.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
x.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
xi.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
e.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subdivisions i through xi of subsection (D)(1)(d) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
f.  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (D)(1)(d) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the city commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
g.  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
2.  Conditions for Variances. 
a.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
b.  Variances shall not be issued within the identified floodplain if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
c.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
d.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
i.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, cause fraud or victimization of the public as identified in subsection (D)(1)(d) of this section, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
e.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 2000) 
15.28.050 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  General Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
1.  Anchoring. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements, including additions, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
b.  All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
2.  Construction Materials and Methods. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
b.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
3.  Utilities. 
a.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
b.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the system into flood waters; and 
c.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
4.  Subdivision Proposals. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
d.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least fifty lots or five acres (whichever is less). 
5.  Encroachments. The cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
B.  Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in Section 15.28.030(B), Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, or Section 15.28.040(C)(2), Use of Other Base Flood Data, the following provisions are required: 
1.  Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated one foot above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. Construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of one foot above the base flood elevation; or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities shall: 
a.  Be floodproofed one foot above the base flood elevation so the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy; 
c.  Be certified by a registered, professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection (B)(2) are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 15.28.040(C)(3) (b). 
3.  Manufactured Homes. 
a.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Section 15.28.050(A)(1)(b). 
b.  All manufactured homes or those to be substantially improved shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is one foot above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 2000) 
15.28.060 - Penalties for violations. 
A.  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations on conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants or variances or conditional uses, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty days or by both such fine and imprisonment for each such offense, and in addition shall pay costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
B.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Devils Lake city commission from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 838 (part), 2000) 
Chapter 15.32 - PERMANENT LAND USE-AREA OF SPECIAL CONSIDERATION 
Sections: 

15.32.010 - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
A.  Constitutional Authorization. The Legislature of the state of North Dakota has in Chapters 40-47, 11-33 and 58-03, N.D.C.C. delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore the city commission of the city of Devils Lake in the state of North Dakota does ordain as follows: 
B.  Findings of Fact. 
1.  There is an area of special consideration (ASC) mapped within the jurisdiction of the city identified by the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated December 20, 2000. Structures located in this ASC have a potential for flood damage from continuous lake flooding of Devils Lake. 
2.  Devils Lake is a natural "closed basin lake," (up to the spill elevation of one thousand four hundred sixty feet mean sea level) from which water leaves primarily through evaporation and whose surface area now exceeds one square mile. 
3.  The city is a participating community in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and has enacted a floodplain management ordinance based on the one-percent chance event. 
4.  Participation in the NFIP under a closed basin lake endorsement requires adoption and enforcement of the Permanent Land Use Ordinance codified in this chapter limiting construction in the ASC. 
5.  The city has voluntarily elected to enact these special closed basin lake endorsement requirements. 
6.  Structures in the ASC are subject to actual damage and/or under imminent threat of flooding which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief. 
7.  The ASC designation is final, however, if a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) certified flood control project or otherwise certified flood control project later protects land within the ASC, FEMA will, upon request of the community, amend the ASC to remove areas protected by those projects. 
C.  Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote long-term floodplain management solutions to eliminate or minimize future flood losses in the ASC. This chapter, in compliance with the NFIP endorsement for closed basin lake flooding, provides the means for eligible homeowners and commercial business interests to relocate outside the ASC when they are flooded or under imminent threat of flooding. 
D.  Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes provisions for prohibiting the construction of any residential or commercial buildings within the ASC with limited exceptions. 
(Ord. 843(part), 2001) 
15.32.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "44 C.F.R. § 60.3" in part, refers to (a)(3)(ii) be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage, (iii) be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages; (c)(3)(ii) build the structure watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and (c)(4)(i) a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting these provisions. 
B.  "Area of special consideration (ASC)" means all areas subject to flooding from Devils Lake up to an elevation of one thousand four hundred sixty feet (National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929). The ASC accounts for continuing fluctuations in the water surface elevation of Devils Lake because of the closed basin lake phenomenon. The ASC excludes areas below one thousand four hundred sixty feet that are protected by certified projects. 
C.  "Closed basin lake (CBL)" means a natural lake from which water leaves primarily through evaporation and whose surface area now exceeds or has exceeded one square mile at any time in the recorded past. 
D.  "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazards, the ASC and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
E.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle that is: (1) built on a single chassis; (2) four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
F.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally above ground. 
G.  "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
H.  "Substantial improvement" means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure either: 
1.  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
2.  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
    For the purpose of this definition "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not include: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
I.  "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    Refer to the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance definitions section for additional terms. 
(Ord. 843(part), 2001) 
15.32.030 - General provisions. 
A.  Basis for Establishing the Area of Special Consideration (ASC). Using historical, scientific and engineering data, FEMA has established elevation levels at which flooding may occur from continuous lake flooding of Devils Lake. The area of special consideration (ASC), is identified by a scientific and engineering report entitled the Flood Insurance Study, Ramsey County, North Dakota and Incorporated Areas dated December 20, 2000, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), is adopted by reference and declared to be part of this chapter. The flood insurance study with FIRM is on file at the city building official office located at 423 - 6th Street, P.O. Box 1048, Devils Lake, ND 58301-1048, and is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
B.  Lands To Which This Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all land in the ASC within the jurisdiction of the city as shown on the FIRM dated December 20, 2000. 
C.  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
D.  Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: considered as necessary to prevent future lake flood damages; liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. This chapter does not imply that land outside the ASC or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or FEMA for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter. 
(Ord. 843(part), 2001) 
15.32.040 - Administration. 
A.  Establishment of Development Permit. A permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within the ASC as established in Section 15.32.030(A). 
    Application for a permit shall be made on forms provided by the city building official. 
B.  Designation of The Floodplain Administrator. The city building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. 
C.  Variance Procedures. 
1.  Appeal Board. 
a.  The Devils Lake city commission, as the designated appeal board, established by the city, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  The Devils Lake city commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city building official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
c.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the Devils Lake city commission or any taxpayer, may appeal such decisions to the District Court of Ramsey County, North Dakota. 
d.  In passing upon such applications, the Devils Lake city commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter and: 
i.  The requirements for the community to maintain eligibility for the NFIP closed basin lake endorsement benefits; 
ii.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
iii.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
iv.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; and 
v.  The future availability and costs of providing governmental services before, during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
e.  The city building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the FEMA Regional Director. 
D.  Conditions for Variances. 1. Variances in the ASC may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
2.  Variances will not be issued on property governed by a closed basin lake conservation easement or closed basin lake deed restriction. 
3.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
4.  Variances may be issued for reconstruction of substantially damaged structures from origins other than flooding, provided the conditions in this section are met. 
5.  Variances may only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; and 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant. The hardship must be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the parcel of property involved, and not to the structure, inhabitants, or property owners. Economic or financial reasons, inconvenience, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or disapproval of neighbors, cannot, as a rule, qualify as exceptional hardships. 
(Ord. 843(part), 2001) 
15.32.050 - Restrictions on construction in ASC. 
A.  Specific Standards. 
1.  Residential and Nonresidential Construction. 
a.  Fill for new structures can be placed only where natural ground elevations of one thousand four hundred fifty-five feet msl or higher exist. Any area of fill for structures must be certified as compacted (ninety-five percent of the maximum density obtainable with the standard proctor test method) and certified as elevated to or above one thousand four hundred sixty feet msl by a registered professional engineer. Compacted fill placement must be contiguous to an area 5 acres or larger that is above an elevation of one thousand four hundred sixty feet msl, be armored against erosion, and have an access road and utilities at or above an elevation of one thousand four hundred sixty feet msl. Isolated islands of fill are not allowed. 
b.  New construction and substantial improvements on land in the ASC shall be prohibited except for structures placed on fill that meet the requirements of paragraph 15.32.050(A)(1)(a) and certain simple agricultural and recreational structures. These structures must meet NFIP requirements for wet-floodproofing, (or dry-floodproofing, or elevation, where practicable), pursuant to 44 C.F.R. § 60.3 and are restricted to the following: 
i.  Simple agricultural structures used exclusively for agricultural purposes in connection with the production, harvesting, storage, drying, or raising of agricultural commodities, including livestock, and limited to the following: 
(A)  General purpose barns, which are open on at least one side, for the temporary feeding of livestock; 
(B)  Pole frame buildings with open or closed sides used exclusively for storage of farm machinery and equipment, and related agricultural items; and 
(C)  Steel grain bins and steel frame corn cribs. 
ii.  Simple recreational structures such as open bleachers, docks, and recreational vehicles that are fully licensed and ready for highway use. Highway use means the vehicle is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Ord. 843(part), 2001) 
15.32.060 - Severability, Penalties. 
A.  Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or part of this chapter is for any reason held invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the chapter and the application of those provisions to any persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
B.  Penalties for Violations. 
1.  Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations on conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants or variances or conditional uses, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars; or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty days; or by both such fine and imprisonment for each such offense; and in addition shall pay costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
2.  Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
C.  Notification to FEMA of Violations. The local administrator shall declare and report unresolved violations of this chapter to the FEMA Regional Director for submittal to the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of FEMA so that flood insurance can be denied to the affected building pursuant to Section 1316 of the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
(Ord. 843(part), 2001) 
Chapter 15.34 - CERTIFICATE OF TENANCY 

15.34.010 - Certificate of tenancy for leased premises-Required. 
    No dwelling house, apartment or other premises of similar nature shall be occupied in any part for living purposes, by a renter unless or until a certificate of tenancy has been issued by the city of Devils Lake fire department. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.020 - Application. 
    Any owner or lessor or agent desiring to rent, lease, release, or sublet any dwelling house, apartment or other premises of a similar nature for living purposes shall make application for a certificate of tenancy to the city of Devils Lake fire department upon forms furnished by the city. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.030 - Inspection. 
    Upon the filing of such application with the city, the city fire department, the city building official, and the Lake Region District Health Unit shall issue a certificate of tenancy to such owner or lessee or agent stating that the premises in question are fit for occupancy. If after inspection it is found that such premises complies with the provisions of the public health laws of the state of North Dakota, with the rules and regulations of the state department of health, with the provisions of the city of Devils Lake building and fire codes, and all other requirements, laws or ordinances of the city of Devils Lake pertaining to sanitation and safety such certificate of tenancy shall be issued by the City of Devils Lake Fire Chief, the City of Devils Lake Building Official, and the Lake Region District Health Unit. Such certificate shall be registered in the Devils Lake City offices and be subject to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.040 - Unsatisfactory condition of premises-Posting of notice. 
    If, after inspection of such premises, the fire chief, building inspector, or county health officer find such premises unsanitary or unhealthy or unsafe for human habitation, they shall cause the following notice, signed by the fire chief to be posted on said premises and a like notice mailed to the owner, lessee of said premises, or agent if said owner, lessee, or agent are known. The notice shall be in the following form: 
NOTICE 
These premises do not meet the requirements of the health laws and health ordinances and other requirements of laws or ordinances pertaining to sanitation and safety and are not fit for living purposes. It is hereby ordered that occupancy of said premises is strictly forbidden unless or until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the City of Devils Lake Fire Chief. 
Given pursuant to authority of law this ____ day _____________, 201____. 
15.34.050 - Violation to remove notice. 
    Said notice provided for in Section 15.34.040 of this chapter shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the fire chief, or his agent. Any person violating this provision shall be punished by a fine in no less than the sum of five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.060 - Penalty for noncompliance. 
    Any owner or lessee or agent continuing to rent, lease, release, or sublet any dwelling house, apartment or other premises for living purposes without a certificate of tenancy shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred dollars for each rental unit. Every day the occupancy continues without a certificate of tenancy is a separate violation resulting in one hundred dollars penalty for each day. A certificate of tenancy will not be issued until all penalties have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.070 - Assessment of penalty. 
    Any penalty assessed under Section 15.34.060, and not paid within sixty days, shall be assessed against the property where the premises are located by the city auditor in the same manner as an unpaid utility bill. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.080 - Responsibility to obtain application. 
    It is the responsibility of the owner or lessee or agent seeking to rent, lease, release, or sublet any dwelling house, apartment, or other premises to obtain and submit to the city the application described in Section 15.34.020 above, and to contact the Devils Lake fire department to arrange for the inspection as provided on Section 15.34.030. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.090 - Fee for inspection. 
    There is no fee charged for the inspection, unless the party arranging the inspection fails to be present on the day and time set for the inspection. In such event, an inspection fee of one hundred dollars charged for each rescheduled inspection. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.100 - Term of certificate. 
    A certificate of tenancy shall be valid for one year, unless extended for good cause by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
15.34.110 - Effective date for compliance. 
    Within one year from the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, any dwelling house, apartment or other premises which requires a certificate of tenancy shall be in compliance of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 902, 9-17-12) 
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS* 
Chapters: 
Chapter 16.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.04.010 - Title for citation. 
    These regulations shall be known, cited and referred to as the Devils Lake land subdivision regulations. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.04.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  To insure the orderly development of the city and environ, within one mile of the corporate limits; 
B.  To provide for a proper arrangement of streets in relation to other existing and planned streets for convenient access to the adjoining lands; 
C.  To provide for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, fire fighting equipment, recre ation, light and air; 
D.  To facilitate adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and open space; 
E.  To avoid undue concentration of population and traffic; 
F.  To avoid development in unsuitable areas because of soil, drainage, elevation and other physical limitations; 
G.  To complement the zoning regulations for implementing the comprehensive plan to guide the future growth and development of the city; 
H.  To facilitate further subdivision of larger parcels into smaller parcels and lots. 
I.  To meet the criteria set forth in all applicable ordinances including but not limited to the Mailbox/Newspaper Box Ordinance No. 846, codified as Chapter 12.30 of this code, and the Flood Plain District Ordinance No. 838, codified as Chapter 15.28 of this code. 
(Ord. 846(part), 2001; Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.04.030 - Adoption authority. 
    These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Chapters 40-48 and 40-50 of the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.04.040 - Jurisdiction. 
    These regulations shall apply to the use and enjoyment of all lands within the city and two miles outside of the city corporate limits as provided by Chapter 40-47 of the North Dakota Century Code. The extraterritorial planning area and regulation of subdivisions apply not only to all property within the corporate limits of the city, but shall extend a distance of two miles from the corporate limits of the city, as provided in North Dakota Century Code Section 40-48-18(1), as amended. 
(Ord. 836, 2000: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.04.050 - Compliance required. 
    Any person, firm or corporation dividing land in the city and its extraterritorial planning area shall prepare a plat of subdivision and shall comply with all applicable regulations, codes, ordinances and policies of the city and the laws and regulations of the state of North Dakota. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.04.060 - Interpretation. 
    These regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for promotion of purposes cited in Section 16.04.020. Whenever the requirements of these regulations are at variance with the requirements of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive shall govern unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.04.070 - Severability. 
    If any part, provision or portion of these regulations is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this title shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.04.080 - Comprehensive plan-Objectives. 
    These regulations are administered and enforced to implement the comprehensive plan of the city, a document adopted by the board of city commissioners as a guide for the physical development of the city including the following objectives: 
A.  To conserve and enhance the taxable value of land and buildings in the city and environ; 
B.  To encourage the most appropriate use of land in the city and environ; 
C.  To preserve and increase the amenities of the city and environ; 
D.  To protect residential, commercial and manufacturing areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses; 
E.  To protect the character and maintain the stability of residential, commercial and industrial areas and to promote orderly development; 
F.  To regulate and restrict the location and intensity of use of buildings and land for residential, commercial, industrial and other uses; 
G.  To separate and control unavoidable nuisance-producing uses to minimize the adverse impacts on the surrounding areas or uses; 
H.  To minimize the expenditure of public funds through selecting cost-effective alternatives for expansion of the city services; 
I.  To minimize business interruption; 
J.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water mains, sewer mains and streets. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.04.090 - Effective date. 
    These regulations shall be effective upon adoption by the board of city commissioners as provided by the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.08 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

16.08.010 - Rules of construction. 
    In construction of these regulations, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
A.  Words used in present tense shall include the future. 
B.  Words used in singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural number the singular. 
C.  Shall is a mandatory word and not discretionary. 
D.  May is a permissive word. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.08.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this title: 
    "Alley" means a public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    "Applicant" means the owner of land to be subdivided or his/her representative. 
    "Block" means a group of lots, tracts or parcels of land bounded by streets, parks, railroad rights-of-way, shoreline of water ways, lakes or the city corporate limits. 
    "Building" means any structure designed or intended for shelter, housing, business, office and accommodation of persons, animals, chattel or property. 
    "Building area" means that portion of the lot that can be occupied by the principal building, excluding the front, rear and side yards. 
    "Building line" means a line establishing the minimum distance that structures may be placed from lot lines or street rights-of-way. 
    "Capital improvement program" means a proposed schedule of future infrastructure including water, sewer, street, curb, gutter and sidewalk together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each part. 
    "Channel" means a natural or manmade water course conducting the flowing water. 
    "City planning commission" means a body of citizens appointed by the board of city commissioners under the authority of Chapter 40-47 of the North Dakota Century Code to review the planning issues, prepare plans, review the zoning requests, amendments and conditional uses and make recommendations to the city commission for final decisions. The city planning commission shall have the authority to review and approve all preliminary and final plats and replats within the city and in the extraterritorial planning area. 
    "Comprehensive plan" means a guide for physical development of the city as provided by Section 16.04.080. 
    "Cul-de-sac" means a local street with one open end to traffic and the other end terminated by a vehicular turnaround. The length of a cul-de-sac shall not exceed five hundred feet. 
    "Dedication" means deliberate appropriation of land by the owner to any public use. 
    "Developer" means the owner of land to be subdivided or his/her representatives. 
    "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures, the construction of additions or alternations to buildings or structures, ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation and drilling operations. 
    "Development plan" means a document, including maps and data, for physical development of an area as provided by Section 16.16.050. 
    "Dwelling" means any building or portion thereof, used exclusively for human habitation including single-family and multiple-family units but not including hotels or motels. 
    Dwelling, Detached. "Detached dwelling" means a single-family residential unit surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
    Dwelling, Multiple-Family. "Multiple-family dwelling" means a single building or portion thereof, containing two or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, Single-Family. "Single-family dwelling" means a building containing one dwelling unit only. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms designed for occupancy for one or more persons living as a house keeping unit. 
    "Easement" means a right to use land for a specific purpose, such right being held by someone other than the owner who holds the title to the land. 
    "Encroachment" means any fill, building, structure or use including accessory uses projecting into the required yard areas or public and private property. 
    "Establishment" means a place of business for processing, production, assembly, sales, service of goods and materials. 
    "Family" means two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit. A family may include not more than two unrelated persons by blood, marriage or adoption. 
    "Final plat" means the map, plan or record of a subdivision and any accompanying material prepared in conformance with these regulations. 
    "Floodplain" means an area which may be covered by flood water including but not limited to regional floods. 
    "Floor area" means the total square footage of floor space within the exterior walls of a building excluding garages and carports. 
    "Frontage" means the front part of a lot abutting a public street. 
    "Frontage street" means any street in which the development shall take place for access to abutting lots. 
    "Grade" means the slope of a road, street or lot defined in percentage. 
    "Improvements" means street grading, surfacing, installation of sidewalks, curb, gutter, water, sanitary and storm sewer systems, culverts, bridges, trees or other such installations as may be required by the city planning commission. 
    "Lot area" means the area within the lot lines. 
    "Lot" means a piece, parcel, lot or area of land of continuous assemblage established by survey, plat or deed. 
    Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot abutting two public streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, Depth. "Depth lot" means the average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 
    Lot, Double Frontage. "Double frontage lot" means a lot having frontage on two separately designated streets. 
    Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot located in the interiors of a block and not a corner lot. 
    "Lot lines" means the property lines bounding the lot. 
    "Lot of record" means a lot which is a part of a subdivision which has been recorded in the office of Ramsey County Register of Deeds, or a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the office of Ramsey County Register of Deeds. 
    "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the front building setback line. 
    "Major plat" means a plat of a subdivision containing four or more lots. 
    "Minor plat" means a plat of subdivision containing less than four lots. 
    "Nonresidential plat" means a plat whose intended use is other than residential such as commercial or industrial. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or legal entity. 
    "Planned development" means a grouping of buildings and structures on a site of five or more acres in single ownership which is not limited by the yard or building height limitations but is based on a detailed development plan and recorded in the office of Ramsey County Register of Deeds upon approval by the board of city commissioners. 
    "Preliminary plat" means the preliminary plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material prepared in accordance with the requirements of these regulations. 
    "Premises" means a lot together with all buildings and structures on it. 
    "Public roadway or public way" means any recorded right-of-way including alleys, sidewalks, streets, roads, highways, viaducts, tunnels, bridges and public easements. 
    "Regional flood" means a flood determined by the city, state and federal authorities which is representative of large floods known to have occurred in Ramsey County, North Dakota. 
    "Replat" means a change in an approved or recorded plat requiring changes in street layout, lot lines or blocks. 
    "Right-of-way" means a strip of land designated or dedicated for streets, sidewalks, railroad, electric transmission line, telephone and telegraph lines, oil or gas pipeline, sanitary and storm sewer, or water systems. 
    "Sign" means any emblem, name, identification, description or illustration which is used for outdoor advertising having permanent location on the ground or attached to or painted on a building including bulletin boards, billboards and poster boards, flags, but excluding real estate for-sale signs, political campaign signs, public information and traffic signs. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then space between the floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story, if more than one-half of it is above grade. 
    "Street" means any public way which affords traffic circulations and a principal means of access to abutting property. Streets include alleys, highways, roads, viaducts, tunnels, bridges. 
    Street, Arterial. "Arterial street" means public way which provide for movement of large volumes of traffic as designated by the city. 
    Street, Collector. "Collector street" means a public way intended to carry traffic to and from minor streets and to and from the major streets as designated by the city. 
    "Street line" means the outer boundary of any public right-of-way. 
    Street, Local. "Local street" means a public way intended for low volume of traffic which provides access to collector and arterial streets. 
    Street, Major. "Major street" means a public way, arterial or collector streets, used primarily for carrying a large volume of traffic. 
    Street, Minor. "Minor street" means a public way intended to provide pedestrian and vehicular access to the abutting properties. 
    "Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent location on the ground including advertising signs and billboards. 
    "Subdivider" means any person, group, corporation, entity or agency dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots for the purpose whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development, and any plat or plan which includes the creation of any part of one or more streets, public easement, or other rights-of-way, whether public or private, for access to or from such lots and the creation of new or enlarged parks, playgrounds, plazas or open spaces. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.12 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

16.12.010 - Land suitability. 
    No land shall be divided or subdivided for a use which is held unsuitable by the city for reasons of flooding, potential, soil limitations, drainage or any other condition likely to be harmful to the health, safety or welfare of the future residents or poses difficulty for the city. A developer or subdivider may as a part or preapplication procedures, request a determination of land suitability, provided that he shall submit all necessary data and information to the city for such a determination. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.12.020 - Dedication of land for streets. 
    Whenever a parcel of land to be subdivided as a subdivision contains a street or public way, such street or public way shall be dedicated to the city at the location and details shown on the final plat. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.16 - APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND REVIEW PROCESS 
Sections: 

16.16.010 - Preapplication procedure. 
    Prior to preparing a preliminary plat, the subdivider may consult with the code administrator and the city engineer concerning the regulations governing the division or subdivision of land in the city, access to the city utilities, services and conformance with the comprehensive plan. Specifically the areas for consultation shall include: 
A.  Feasibility of development related to the land suitability, elements of the comprehensive plan, efficient use of utilities and public services. 
B.  Review of the subdivision regulations for required improvements, developers agreement and the bonding needs. 
C.  Responsibility of the city for extension of services, acceptance of dedication for street rights-of-way, drainage courses and open spaces. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.020 - Preliminary plat-Application. 
    The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval by the city planning commission. The preliminary plat shall cover the entire contiguous area owned or controlled by the subdivider if it is under forty acres even though only a small portion of it is proposed for the development at the time. The subdivider may be required to submit a development plan if he owns or controls more than forty contiguous acres of land. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.030 - Preliminary plat-Content. 
    The preliminary plat shall include the following requirements, data and information: 
A.  The preliminary plat drawn at a scale of not smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet; 
B.  Name and location of the subdivision; 
C.  Date, graphic scale and north point; 
D.  Boundary line of the proposed subdivision indicated by a solid heavy line, accurately drawn to scale and showing distances and bearings; 
E.  Total acreage within the subdivision; 
F.  Location, right-of-way width and names of any existing or proposed streets including type and width of surfacing or public ways, easement, railroad, utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings or structures, corporate boundaries and section lines within or adjacent to the subdivision; 
G.  Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, streams, water courses, wooded areas and drainage ways; 
H.  Existing water mains, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, culverts, bridges and other utility structures within the tracts, indicating pipe size, grades and location as obtained from public records; 
I.  Existing zoning of the proposed subdivision and the zoning of the adjacent tracts of land; 
J.  Boundary line of adjacent tracts of land or lots showing owners' name(s); 
K.  Contour at vertical intervals of not more than two feet; 
L.  Location and dimension of any site to be reserved or dedicated for public uses including drainage ways, parks and open spaces; 
M.  Layout of the proposed streets, alleys, crosswalks and easements, showing widths and street names; 
N.  Layout, number and dimensions of all lots and blocks; 
O.  Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or reserved for public use or set aside for the use of property owners within the subdivision; 
P.  Building setback lines, showing dimensions; 
Q.  A key map at a scale of one inch equals four hundred feet or less, showing the boundary of the proposed subdivision and covering an area within one half mile around the subdivision. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.040 - Preliminary plat-Submission requirements. 
A.  The subdivider shall apply on appropriate forms provided by the city engineer to the city planning commission at least fifteen days prior to its regularly-scheduled meeting. 
B.  The subdivider shall submit six prints of the preliminary plat to the city engineer at the time the application is made. The plat shall comply with the provisions of these regulations. The city engineer may refuse to accept the preliminary plat, if he finds the plat in conflict with one or more provisions of these regulations. Fees charged for the filing of the subdivision plat shall be paid in full at the time of application in accordance with Section 16.36.010 of these regulations. 
C.  The subdivider may submit any instrument whereby he/she proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision for protecting the proposed development. 
D.  The subdivider shall provide other data related to drainage, soil suitability, financing of improvement and other related information which the city engineer or the code administrator request. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.050 - Development plan. 
    Where a development plan is required for a tract of land, the following shall be included in the plan. 
A.  Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, streams, wooded areas and other significant natural features. 
B.  General layout of proposed streets and location of blocks for designated uses. 
C.  Location of open spaces and facilities for public uses. 
D.  Existing drainage pattern based on the available topographic information from the U.S. Geological Survey Maps and other similar information. 
E.  The development plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equaling four hundred feet. 
F.  The city planning commission may require other information as a part of the development plan. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.060 - Preliminary plat-Review process. 
A.  The city engineer shall retain one copy of the preliminary plat and submit copies with a request for comment within five days to the county health officer, school district, the utility companies. He/she shall appoint a time for staff review to determine if all requirements of these regulations are met and the preliminary plat is consistent with the comprehensive plan as well as policies of public agencies and the private utility companies. For lands within the extraterritorial planning area, a representative of Creel Township be invited to the staff review meeting. The public agency may include any of the city agencies as well as the concerned county or state agencies. 
B.  If the city engineer finds the preliminary plat in substantial conformity with these regulations and the comprehensive plan he/she shall submit the preliminary plat together with the review comments of public agencies and private agencies to the city planning commission. 
C.  The city planning commission shall review the preliminary plat and the comments of the public and private agencies upon which it may approve, approve conditionally or deny the application and the preliminary plat. The city planning commission may require additional information before it takes action. The city planning commission shall cite the reasons for denying the application. 
D.  The conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall clearly state the nature and extent of the conditions which shall be met before a final plat is submitted for review and approval. Tentative approval of a preliminary plat by the city planning commission is not an acceptance of a subdivision plat, but is an expression of approval of a general plat as a guide to preparation of a subdivision for final plat review and approval. 
E.  The city planning commission may require the subdivider to submit a revised preliminary plat before the subdivider proceeds with the preparation of the final plat. 
F.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of twelve months within which a final plat shall be prepared. If the final plat is not submitted within this time period, the city planning commission may require the subdivider to resubmit the preliminary plat for review and approval. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.070 - Final plat-Generally. 
    The final plat shall cover the area which is realistically designated for transfer or sale of lots. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.080 - Final plat-Content. 
    The final plat shall conform to all provisions of these regulations and conditions set forth by the city planning commission: 
A.  Name of subdivision and date of tentative approval by the city planning commission; 
B.  Location by section, township and range, or other legal description; 
C.  Names of owners and surveyor or other professional person preparing the plat; 
D.  Scale which shall be one inch equals one hundred feet or less; 
E.  Date, graphic scale and north point; 
F.  Boundary line of subdivision based on an accurate traverse, showing distances and bearings; 
G.  Exact location, width and name of all streets within and adjoining the subdivision, and the exact location of all alleys and crosswalks; 
H.  True bearing and distances to the nearest established street lines or official monuments which shall be accurately described on the plat; 
I.  City, township, county or section lines accurately tied to the boundary lines of the subdivision by bearing and distance; 
J.  Radii, internal angles, points of curvature, tangent bearings and lengths of all arcs; 
K.  All easements for right-of-way provided for public services and public utilities; 
L.  All lot number and lot lines, with accurate dimensions in feet and hundredths; 
M.  Accurate location of all monuments, which shall be of material and size in accordance with the standards of the city and the state; 
N.  Accurate outlines and legal descriptions of any areas (not including streets, alleys or public utility easements) to be dedicated or reserved for public use; with the purposes indicated thereon; and of any area to be reserved by deed covenant for common use of all property owners; 
O.  Building setback lines, accurately shown with dimensions; 
P.  Where required, detailed engineering drawings, cross-sections or profiles of street, utility lines, catch basins or other installations of improvements as installed; 
Q.  Certification by registered surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him, and that the monuments shown thereon exist as located and that all dimensional and geodetic details are correct; 
R.  Notarized certification by the owners of the land of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of sewers, water distribution lines and other improvements and of streets and other public areas; 
S.  Proper form for the approval by the city planning commission and for acceptance of plat and amendment of master street plan by the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.090 - Final plat-Submission requirements. 
    The subdivider shall apply on appropriate forms to the city planning commission for approval of the final plat, if he/she holds a valid approval of the preliminary plat. 
A.  The subdivider shall submit the final plat plan in two plastic or cloth tracings and five prints to the city engineer at least two weeks before the regularly-scheduled meeting of the city planning commission. 
B.  The final plat shall comply with all provisions of these regulations and conditions and requirements set forth as a part of review and approval of the preliminary plat. All filing fees shall be paid to the city at the time of filing the final plat for approval in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.36.010. 
C.  The city engineer may require the subdivider to submit detailed drawings for grading of the lots, blocks, streets, detailed drawings for pavement, curb, gutter and sidewalk, drawings for installation of water, sanitary and storm sewer facilities. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.100 - Final plat-Review process. 
A.  The city engineer shall review the final plat with other city agencies and other agencies including the county health officer, school district and the utility companies as prescribed in Section 16.16.050 of these regulations. 
B.  If the city engineer finds the final plat in conformance with the requirements stipulated for approval of the preliminary plat, he/she shall submit the final plat to the city planning commission with the review comments of the public and private agencies. The city engineer shall review the detailed drawings and specifications for the required improvements. 
C.  For subdivisions outside of the city corporate limits, a print of the final plat shall be submitted to the Ramsey County planning commission. The approval of the county planning commission is necessary for all plats outside of the city. 
D.  Upon receipt of the final plat by the city engineer, the secretary of the city planning commission shall give notice of public hearing on the proposed subdivision by date, time and place of hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five days prior to the date of hearing. 
E.  The subdivider shall furnish the name and address of the owner of the land, or his/her agent, at the time of application, who should be notified of the public hearing, date, time and place by registered mail at least five days before the hearing. 
F.  The city engineer shall prepare an estimate of the cost of providing the required improvements based on the city design standards for street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water lines. The city engineer shall make a determination for adequacy of posted deposit or surety bond for the required improvements. 
G.  The city planning commission after the public hearing shall determine that: 
1.  The requirements of these regulations for preparation of a plat have been met; 
2.  The necessary fees have been collected or paid; 
3.  All taxes and assessments on the property have been paid, evidenced by a certificate or receipt; 
4.  Detailed design and specifications for improvements have been approved by the city engineer; 
5.  Other requirements by the city planning commission have been met. 
H.  If all conditions and requirements have been met, the city planning commission shall approve the final plat by entering the signature of the secretary and chairman of the city planning commission on the original. The city planning commission shall act on the request for approval of the final plat within thirty days. Failure to act within such period shall be deemed as approval of the subdivision if an extension of time is not negotiated. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.110 - Amendment of comprehensive plan. 
    Upon final approval of a subdivision involving the creation of new streets, the widening, decreasing or vacation of existing streets or alleys, or the creation, enlargement or decrease of other lands devoted to public use, the city planning commission shall at the time and without further public hearing, approve such change in streets, alleys or public lands as an amendment to the comprehensive plan. The city planning commission shall transmit notice of such action to the board of city commissioners together with appropriate recommendations concerning the acceptance of the dedicated streets and alleys or the vacation thereof, and of the acceptance of other dedicated lands. In the case of streets, alleys and public lands outside of the city corporate limits, notice of action of the city planning commission and appropriate recommendations shall be forwarded to the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.16.120 - Filing of subdivision plat. 
    The subdivider, upon approval of the final plat, shall file the plat with the Register of Deeds of Ramsey County. Sale of any lot prior to filing of the final plat is in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.20 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Sections: 

16.20.010 - Conformance with provisions required. 
    The subdivider shall prepare the preliminary and final plat in conformance with the standard set forth herein. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.020 - Street design. 
A.  The arrangement, character, classification, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the comprehensive plan and shall be designed in relation to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions, existing natural features, public convenience and safety and the proposed uses of land served by such streets and to the most advantageous development of adjoining uses. 
B.  Where it is not shown on the comprehensive plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing collector or arterial streets in surrounding areas or conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved by the city planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographic or other physical conditions make conformance to the existing street pattern impractical. 
C.  Local streets shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic. 
D.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street or highway, the city planning commission may require service streets, reverse frontage lots with screen planting in a reservation strip along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys abutting the primary street or highway, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and for separation of through and local traffic. 
E.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the city planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land. Such distances shall be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
F.  Reserve strips in private ownership controlling access to streets are prohibited. 
G.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty feet shall be avoided. 
H.  A tangent at least one hundred feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on major and collector streets. 
I.  When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than four hundred feet for local and collector streets, and of such greater radii as the city planning commission shall determine for special cases. 
J.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than eighty degrees. 
K.  Curb radii on all block corners shall be ten feet and a five-foot radius shall be used at intersections of streets and alleys. 
L.  Urban street rights-of-way shall be as shown on the comprehensive plan, where not shown on the plan, shall be not less than the following: 
1.  Primary arterial streets, one hundred feet; 
2.  Secondary arterial streets, one hundred feet; 
3.  Collector streets, eighty feet; 
4.  Local streets, sixty feet; 
5.  Cul-de-sac, one hundred ten feet in diameter for a turnaround; 
6.  Alleys, residential district, sixteen feet; 
7.  Sidewalks, four feet; 
8.  Graded widths of rural roadways shall be as shown on the comprehensive plan but shall be not less than the following: 
a.  Primary arterial streets, forty-eight feet, 
b.  Secondary arterial streets, forty-four feet, 
c.  Collector streets, forty feet, 
d.  Local streets, thirty-two feet, 
e.  Cul-de-sac, eighty-five feet in diameter for a turnaround, 
f.  Alleys, sixteen feet, 
g.  Sidewalks, four feet. 
M.  Half streets are prohibited except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations and where the city planning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever an existing half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
N.  Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than five hundred feet. 
O.  General considerations for intersection design are that: 
1.  Intersections of more than two streets at a point shall not be permitted. 
2.  Alleys shall be discouraged in residential districts but may be provided in commercial and industrial districts. 
P.  Dead-end streets without a suitable turnaround are prohibited. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.030 - Block design. 
    The length, width and shape of blocks shall be suited to the planned use of land, zoning requirements, needs for convenient access, control of safety of street traffic, and the topographic conditions. 
A.  Residential block length shall not exceed nine hundred feet. The length of blocks is considered to be the distance from one street centerline to opposite street centerline and is measured through adjacent back lot lines or through the center of the block. 
B.  Pedestrian crosswalks not less than ten feet wide may be required in blocks longer than six hundred feet where the crosswalks are deemed by the city planning commission to be essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities. 
C.  The width of the blocks shall generally be sufficient to allow two tiers of lots and shall be at least two hundred feet wide. 
D.  Blocks intended for commercial and industrial use shall be specifically designated for such purposes with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities. The city planning commission may require service drives or frontage roads along arterial and collector streets for commerce and industry. 
E.  Where frontage is on an arterial street, the long dimension of the block should front it. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.040 - Lot design. 
A.  The shape, size and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision. The lots should be designed to provide an aesthetically pleasing building site. For residential low density a north-south lot orientation is encouraged. Residential lot dimension within the city corporate limits shall be: 
1.  Minimum width at building line, fifty feet; 
2.  Minimum depth, one hundred feet; 
3.  Minimum lot area, seven thousand square feet. 
For nonresidential lots, the provisions of appropriate zoning districts stipulated in Title 17 of this code shall apply. 
B.  Residential lot dimensions within the extraterritorial planning area shall be: 
1.  Minimum width at building line, one hundred feet; 
2.  Minimum depth, two hundred feet; 
3.  Minimum lot area, twenty thousand square feet. 
C.  Residential lots abutting arterial and collector streets shall have extra depth of at least twenty feet to allow for proper setbacks. 
D.  All lots shall front a public street. 
E.  Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles. 
F.  Residential corner lots shall have an extra width of ten feet to permit adequate building setbacks from the side streets. 
G.  In case a parcel is subdivided into smaller parcels, such parcels shall be arranged as to allow the resubdivision of any such parcels into normal lots in accordance with these regulations. 
H.  Lot lines shall follow the city corporate limits. 
I.  Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of development from arterial streets. 
J.  Depth and width of lots reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial uses shall be adequate to provide for off-street parking and service facilities required by the type of use and development and the provisions of the appropriate zoning district. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.050 - Street names. 
A.  The city planning commission may disapprove the name of any street shown on the plat which has already been used elsewhere in the area, or because of similarity that may cause confusion. 
B.  Where a street maintains the same general direction, except for curvilinear changes for a short distance, the same name shall continue for the entire length of the street. 
C.  A name assigned to a street, which is not presently a through street, shall be continued for the separate part of a through street. 
D.  Street designation shall be limited to the following conditions: 
1.  Boulevard, meaning a divided pavement; 
2.  Circle or court, meaning a cul-de-sac or circle; 
3.  Drive, meaning a through street; 
4.  Lane, meaning a street one block long. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.060 - Utility easements. 
A.  Easements across lots or along rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least five feet wide on each side of the lot line and shall be designated as "utility easements." 
B.  All lots shall be served by underground electric, cable television and telephone lines unless waived by the city planning commission due to topographic conditions or excessive costs. 
C.  All utility lines for electric power, cable television and telephone service carried overhead shall be placed in utility easement. 
D.  Utility lines installed in the utility easement shall not be closer than one foot to the property line or three feet to any monument. The utility easement grade shall be set by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.070 - Grading and drainage. 
A.  When required, the subdivider shall provide a detailed grading and drainage plan showing the grades of streets and drainage improvements. 
B.  The drainage shall not discharge into any sanitary sewer facility. 
C.  When required, the subdivider shall provide suitable drainage facilities for any surface run-off affecting the subdivision. The drainage facilities shall be located in street right-of-way or in drainage easements. 
D.  The grading and drainage system shall be approved by the city engineer. 
E.  Grading established in any subdivision shall not be changed without approval of the city engineer. 
F.  Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 
1.  Arterial streets (primary and secondary), four percent; 
2.  Collector streets, five percent; 
3.  Local streets, six percent. 
G.  No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent. 
H.  Flat grades are preferred extending fifty to one hundred feet from an intersection, but in no case shall grades exceed four percent for a distance of at least fifty feet from an intersection. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.080 - Drainage way easement. 
    Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course or drainage way an adequate drainage way easement shall be provided. The location, width, alignment and grading of such easement shall be set by the city engineer to accommodate the anticipated discharge from the property being subdivided and also the anticipated run-off from the adjoining properties. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.090 - Public use dedication. 
A.  Where a park, playground, school or other site for public use shown on the comprehensive plan is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the city planning commission may require the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision. 
B.  Where deemed essential by the city planning commission upon consideration of the type of development proposed in the subdivision, and especially in large-scale developments not anticipated in the comprehensive plan, the city planning commission may request the dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a character, extent or location suitable to the needs created by the development for schools, parks and other neighborhood facilities. 
C.  When required, all subdivisions shall be assessed an equitable amount in dollars and/or land to implement the public sites and open space segments of the comprehensive plan. The form and amount of assessment shall be fixed by the city planning commission at the meeting when the preliminary plat is reviewed. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.100 - Tree planting. 
    The planting of trees of an appropriate species and at appropriate locations may be required by the city planning commission in accordance with the standards established by the shade tree committee master plan. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.20.110 - Street lights. 
    Street lights and their location shall be in accordance with the minimum design standards established by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.24 - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
Sections: 

16.24.010 - Generally. 
    Before installation of improve-ments in any subdivision, the city engineer shall make a determination for improvements required, based on a schedule of improvements including the standards, and class of construction. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.020 - Completion assurance. 
    To cover the cost of improvements, as determined by the city engineer, the subdivider may either provide a certified check for twenty-five percent of the cost or post a bond or submit a letter of credit from an acceptable financial institution in an amount sufficient to construct such improvements. The form and surety of the bond shall be approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.030 - Survey monuments. 
    The subdivider shall install survey monuments in all lots and block corners in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the city and state of North Dakota. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.040 - Public water. 
A.  Water mains shall be installed so as to provide individual service to each lot within the subdivision. 
B.  Water mains shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision, except where in the opinion of the city engineer, it is deemed impractical. 
C.  A rural water supply shall comply with the requirements of Ramsey County and state of North Dakota. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.050 - Sanitary sewer. 
A.  All subdivisions shall be provided with sanitary sewers to each lot. 
B.  Sanitary sewer shall be extended to the boundary of the subdivision, except where in the opinion of the city engineer it is deemed impractical. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.060 - Storm sewer. 
    The storm sewer drainage facilities shall be installed in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.070 - Grading and surfacing. 
    The full width of all rights-of-way shall be graded and all streets shall be paved in accordance with the city street classification and pavement standards. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.080 - Curbs, gutters and sidewalks. 
    Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed in all subdivisions in accordance with the city standards. Where the city requires construction of a sidewalk, it shall be in accordance with the design standards established by the city engineer. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.090 - Installation of improvements. 
A.  Construction of all improvements is contingent on approval by the city engineer. The subdivider shall be responsible for furnishing the necessary data required for such approval. 
B.  At the time the plans, profiles and specifications are submitted for review, the city engineer shall prepare an estimate for cost for all improvement. All work done by the city engineer in connection with checking, computing and review of plans for improvement and in connection with field inspection of the construction thereof shall be charged to the deposit. If, during the progress of the work, it appears that the cost will exceed the amount so deposited, the city engineer shall notify the subdivider of this fact and shall do no further work in connection with the review of field inspection until the subdivider has deposited the additional amount of money necessary to cover the cost of the work. 
C.  Upon completion of the work of checking plans and inspecting the construction of improvements, the city engineer shall forward to the city auditor a statement of the amount of the engineering and inspection costs to be charged against the deposit made by the subdivider. The city auditor shall thereupon refund to the subdivider any unexpected balance of the deposit. If the engineering and inspection charges shall for any reason exceed the amount of the deposit, the city auditor shall collect the balance due and issue a statement that the charges have been paid. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.24.100 - Certification of final approval. 
    At the time of filing an application for installation of improvements, the subdivider shall submit: 
A.  A certificate signed by the city engineer that plans, specifications and profiles for the improvements have been filed with and approved by him/her. 
B.  A certificate signed by the city auditor that a certified check, or satisfactory surety bond, or a letter of credit from an acceptable financial institution has been posted for completion of improvements. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.28 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
Sections: 

16.28.010 - Organization. 
    Administration of these regulations is vested in three offices of the city: 
A.  The office of the code administrator; 
B.  The office of the city engineer; 
C.  The city planning commission. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.28.020 - Office of the code administrator. 
    The code administrator is a duly appointed city official authorized by the board of city commissioners and is responsible to administer zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, building code and housing code and to assist and make recommendations to the city planning commission and to the board of city commissioners on any matter to planning for and development of the city. 
A.  Duties and Responsibilities. The code administrator shall be specifically responsible for interpretation and enforcement of these regulations including assisting the city engineer in facilitating the review and approval of the plat. 
1.  Receive, file and forward to the city planning commission all applications for preliminary and final plats and the supporting documents; 
2.  Forward all recommendations of the city plan-ning commission to the board of city commissioners for final action; 
3.  Notify in writing the property owner or user upon finding violation of these regulations and cite the nature of violation clearly and require compliance within a reasonable time. If the notification is not replied to or steps are not taken to correct the violations within thirty days, the code administrator shall make a report of the findings to the city attorney, and the board of city commissioners. 
B.  Interpretation of regulations. All questions of interpretation of these regulations shall be first presented to the code administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the city planning commission only on appeal from the decision of the code administrator and that the recourse from the city planning commission shall be made to the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.28.030 - Office of the city engineer. 
    The city engineer is a duly appointed city official authorized by the board of city commissioners and is responsible for review and coordination of the review and approval process for the preliminary and final plats. 
    Duties and Responsibilities. The city engineer shall be specifically responsible for the design of engineering standards for the city improvement programs and coordination with the code administrator to assure compliance. 
A.  Review the plans and specifications provided by the subdivider and make recommendations to the city planning commission; 
B.  Coordinate the review process of the preliminary and final plats among the city, county, state agencies and utility companies; 
C.  Prepare cost estimate for all improvement and coordinate the financing mechanism with the city auditor; 
D.  Design and prepare the appropriate utility plans for improvements of the subdivisions the cost of which shall be born by the subdivider; 
E.  Conduct inspection of the subdivision to assure compliance with the terms and conditions of subdivision approval. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
16.28.040 - The city planning commission authority. 
    The city planning commission, a citizen body, nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the board of city commissioners, is vested with authority and jurisdiction to review planning, annexation, zoning, subdivision plat approval and city development matters and make recommendation to the board of city commissioners. 
A.  The city planning commission shall consist of no more than ten members, with two members who reside outside of the city corporate limits but within the extraterritorial zoning area and to be appointed by the Ramsey County board of commissioners. Five citizen members are nominated by the mayor and approved by the board of city commissioners. The other three voting members shall consist of the mayor, city attorney and the city engineer. 
(Chapter 2.24.020 of Devils Lake Municipal Code) 
    The term of office for members representing the city shall be three years and overlapping which may be reviewed by the board of city commissioners. The term of office for members appointed by the county: one shall be for five years and one for three years. 
B.  Duties and Responsibilities. 
1.  To hear, review and act on all applications for preliminary and final plats of subdivisions; 
2.  To hear and act on all other matters referred to by the board of city commissioners; 
3.  To study, examine and make recommendations to the board of city commissioners regarding comprehensive planning for the future development of Devils Lake; 
4.  To hear and decide all appeals forwarded by the code administrator related to the subdivision regulations. 
C.  Officers. The city planning commission shall elect its own officers according to its by-laws and may establish rules and procedures for all cases before it. The code administrator may serve as nonvoting secretary. 
D.  Notice of Hearings. The city planning commission shall fix a reasonable date for hearing of applications for preliminary and final plats and other matters before it, and give public notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least one week prior to the hearing. The notices shall state the purpose of the hearing and that the applications and supporting documents for preliminary and final plats are available for public inspection in the office of the city engineer during the normal working hours. 
E.  Meetings. Meetings of the city planning commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the city planning commission may determine. All meetings shall be open to the public and any person may testify for or against an application for preliminary or final plat approval. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.32 - VARIANCES 
Sections: 

16.32.010 - Procedure. 
A.  Upon application by the subdivider, and where it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of these regulations would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, or other such conditions, thus retarding the achievement of the objective of these regulations, the city planning commission may vary, modify or waive requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided, that the variance, modification or waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of these regulations or of the comprehensive plan. 
B.  In no case shall any variance, modification or waiver be more than a minimum of the requirements, and in no case shall it have the effect of reducing the traffic capacity of any major or secondary streets, and in no case shall it be in conflict with existing zoning regulations. 
C.  In granting variances, modifications or waivers, the city planning commission may require any condition that will secure substantially the objectives of these regulations and the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.36 - FEES 
Sections: 

16.36.010 - Fees. 
    In order to cover the costs of advertising, holding public hearings and other expenses incidental to the review and approval of a subdivision, the subdivider shall pay a fee at the time of application for tentative approval of a preliminary plat. The fee will be based upon the square footage of the land to be subdivided. If the subdivider fails to submit a final plat within twelve months after receiving tentative approval of a preliminary plat, it may be necessary to resubmit a preliminary plat for approval. 
A.  The fees for approval of a subdivision shall be charged and collected as established by resolution of the board of city commissioners, and revised as it may see fit. 
B.  All fees collected for the approval of subdivision shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
C.  All fees established by this chapter are in addition to any sums paid to cover the costs of review of improvement plans and field inspection of construction required under the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 16.40 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 
Sections: 

16.40.010 - Violations-Penalties. 
    Any owner, or the agent of any owner or land located within the territory of a subdivision that is subject to the approval of the city planning commission, who transfers, sells, agrees to sell or negotiates to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of a plat of a subdivision, or by any use thereof, before the plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded as approved in the office of the county register of deeds, shall forfeit and pay a penalty of one hundred dollars for each lot or parcel transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold. The description of the lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling of transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies provided in this chapter. The governing jurisdiction may enjoin the transfer, sale or agreement by an action for injunction, or it may recover the penalty by civil action. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Title 17 - ZONING* 
Chapter 17.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

17.04.010 - Title for citation. 
    These regulations shall be known, cited and referred to as the Devils Lake zoning regulations. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.04.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  To promote public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the city and environs; 
B.  To lessen congestion in the streets; 
C.  To secure safety from fire, panic, noxious fumes and other dangers; 
D.  To promote adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to property; 
E.  To prevent the overcrowding of land; 
F.  To avoid undue concentration of population; 
G.  To facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public facilities; 
H.  To promote orderly development of land and water resources and to prevent conflict among land uses and structures. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.04.030 - Adoption authority. 
    These regulations are adopted under the authority granted by Chapter 40-47 of the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.04.040 - Jurisdiction. 
    These regulations shall apply to the use and enjoyment of all lands within the city and two miles outside of the corporate limits of the city as provided by Chapter 40-47 of the North Dakota Century Code. The city zoning regulations apply to not only all property within the corporate limits of the city, but shall extend a distance of two miles from the corporate limits of the city, as provided in North Dakota Century Code Section 40-47-01.1 as amended. 
(Ord. 819, 1998: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.04.050 - Interpretation of provisions. 
    These regulations shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for promotion of purposes cited in Section 17.04.020. Whenever the requirements of these regulations are at variance with the requirements of other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive shall govern unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.04.060 - Severability. 
    If any part, provision or portion of these regulations is adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this title shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.04.070 - Comprehensive plan-Objectives. 
    These regulations are administered and enforced to implement the comprehensive plan of the city, a document adopted by the board of city commissioners as a guide for the physical development of the city including the following objectives: 
A.  To conserve and enhance the taxable value of land and buildings in the city and environ; 
B.  To encourage the most appropriate use of land in the city and environ; 
C.  To preserve and increase the amenities of the city and environ; 
D.  To protect residential, commercial and manufacturing areas alike from harmful encroachment by incompatible uses; 
E.  To protect the character and maintain the stability of residential, commercial and industrial areas and to promote orderly development of such areas; 
F.  To regulate and restrict the location and intensity of use of buildings and land for residential, commercial, industrial and other uses; 
G.  To separate and control unavoidable nuisance producing uses to minimize the adverse impacts on the surrounding areas or uses; 
H.  To minimize the expenditure of public funds through selecting cost-effective alternatives for expansion of the city services; 
I.  To minimize business interruption; 
J.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water mains, sewer mains and streets. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.04.080 - Effective date. 
    These regulations shall be effective upon adoption by the Board of City Commissioners as provided by the North Dakota Century Code. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 17.08 - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 

17.08.010 - Rules of construction. 
    In construction of these regulations, the rules and definitions contained in this chapter shall be observed and applied except when the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
A.  Words used in present tense shall include the future. 
B.  Words used in singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the singular. 
C.  Shall is a mandatory word and not discretionary. 
D.  May is a permissive word. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.08.020 - Definitions. 
    "Accessory building and uses" means a subordinate building or portion of the main building the use of which is clearly incidental to and serves exclusively the principal building or principal use. The accessory building or use shall be located on the same zoning lot and it is established to contribute to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the principal building or principal use. 
    "Accessory dwelling unit" means an auxiliary or subordinate dwelling unit on the same lot/parcel or within an existing detached single family structure. The unit includes its own independent living provisions for sleeping, cooking, and sanitation, designed for residential occupancy independent of the primary dwelling unit. 
    "Airport" means any area designated for the landing and take-off of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are used or intended for use for airport buildings and structures including runways, taxi ways, aircraft storage and tie down areas, hangars and other related facilities and open spaces. 
    "Alley" means a public right-of-way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
    "Animal confinement operation" means an agricultural operation in which all animals are kept and raised within a completely enclosed structure. 
    "Animal rescue operation" means any facility used to house and distribute for adoption as pets any stray, homeless, abandoned or unwanted animals, operated or maintained by a public body, an established humane society, animal welfare society, society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or other nonprofit organizations, or by a person or persons devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
    "Apartment" means a room or suite of rooms in a multiple-family dwelling used or designed for human occupancy. 
    "Basement" means a story partly underground with more than one-half of its height below grade. A basement is not included in computing the number of stories for the purpose of measuring the building height unless more than one-half of its height is above grade. 
    "Bed and breakfast" means any place of temporary lodging that provides more than four rooms for rent and is the owners' personal residence. 
    "Board of adjustment" means the body appointed by the board of city commissioners to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged errors or inequities in the literal administration or enforcement of these regulations exist. 
    "Boarding house" means any dwelling in which unrelated persons are housed for rent with or without meals. 
    "Building" means any structure designed or intended for shelter, housing, business, office, and accommodation of persons, animals, chattels or property. 
    "Building area" means that portion of the zoning lot that can be occupied by the principal use, excluding the front, rear and side yards. 
    "Building height" means vertical distance from the grade to the highest point to the roof. 
    "Building line" means a line establishing the minimum distance that structure may be placed from the lot lines or street right-of-way. For the purposes of these regulations the building line is the same as setback line. 
    Building, Principal. "Principal building" means a building in which the principal use of the lot is conducted including single-family and multifamily dwellings, and offices, shops, stores and other uses. 
    "Campground" means any parcel of land containing three or more lots intended for occupancy by travel trailers or tents. 
    "Central area" means that part of the city bounded by Sixth Street, Sixth Avenue and the Burlington Northern Railroad right-of-way. 
    "Channel" means a natural or manmade water course for conducting the flowing water. 
    "City planning commission" means a body of citizens appointed by the board of city commissioners under the authority of Chapter 40-47 of the North Dakota Century Code to review the planning issues, prepare plans, review the zoning requests, amendments and conditional uses and make recommendations to the city commission for final decisions. 
    "Comprehensive plan" means a guide for physical development of the city as provided by Section 17.04.070. 
    "Conditional use" means use for a special nature not automatically permitted in a zoning district and which requires review and approval of the board of city commissioners after public hearing. 
    "Conforming building or structure" means a building or structure which complies with all requirements of these regulations and other regulations adopted by the city. 
    "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to the construction of buildings, structures or accessory structures, the construction of additions or alterations to buildings or structures, ditching, lagooning, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation and drilling operations. 
    "Development plan" means a document including maps and data for physical development of an area as provided by Section 17.60.040. 
    "District" means a section or sections of the city for which regulations governing the use of building and premises, the building height, size of yards, lot area, lot width and the intensity of use are uniform. 
    "Dwelling" means any building or portion thereof, used exclusively for human habitation including single-family and multiple-family units but not including hotels or motels. 
    Dwelling, Detached. "Detached dwelling" means a single-family residential unit surrounded by open space on the same lot. 
    Dwelling, Multiple-Family. "Multiple-family dwelling" means a single building or portion thereof, containing two or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling-Single Family. "Single-family dwelling" means a building containing only one dwelling unit designed to be located on a permanent foundation as defined in this section and, if site built, constructed in accordance with the provision of the applicable city codes governing construction; or, if manufactured off-site, constructed in accordance with either the city codes governing construction or the HUD manufactured home construction and safety standards (24 CFR 3280). All single-family dwellings shall be considered and taxed as real property, as provided by law. All single-family dwellings shall have minimum overall front width of twenty-four feet, minimum overall depth of twenty feet, and minimum main floor living space square footage of nine hundred square feet, and a minimum ceiling height of seven feet. 
    Dwelling, Two-Family. "Two-family dwelling" means a building containing two dwelling units only. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms designed for occupancy for one or more persons living as a housekeeping unit. 
    "Efficiency unit" means a dwelling containing one principal room in a dwelling unit for human occupancy excluding bathroom, kitchen hallway and closets. 
    "Emergency medical air transport services" means a service in conjunction with a hospital and/or clinic used to transport patients by helicopter in need of emergency medical care at a medical facility either in Devils Lake or other medical facilities throughout the region. 
    "Encroachment" means any fill, building, structure or use including accessory uses projecting into the required yard areas or public and private property. 
    "Establishment" means a place of business for processing, production, assembly, sales, service of goods and materials. 
    "Family" means two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or child foster care occupying a dwelling unit. A family may include not more than two unrelated persons by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
    "Feed lot" means a parcel of land which contains a commercial operation for feeding and raising animals that are provided feed with little or no vegetation for forage and/or grazing. 
    "Floodplain" means an area which may be covered by flood water including but not limited to regional floods. 
    "Floor area" means the total square footage of floor space within the exterior walls of a building excluding garages and car ports. 
    "Frontage" means the front part of a lot abutting a public street. 
    Garage, Private. "Private garage" means an accessory building or portion of a principal building designed and used for the storage of not more than four vehicles owned and used by the occupant of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, Public. "Public garage" means a building or portion thereof, designed and used for repair, maintenance, sale, service and storage of motor vehicles. 
    Garage, Storage. "Storage garage" means a building or portion thereof, designed and used exclusively for accommodating more than four motor vehicles. 
    "Grade" means the land elevation at the horizontal intersection of the ground and the building. 
    "Home occupation" means any occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by a member or members of the family and which meets these requirements: 
1.  The occupation is conducted within the principal building or an accessory building; such occupations operated in an accessory building shall be limited to activities that do not generate objectionable noise, dust or fumes. Operations such as body shops and auto repair shall not be permitted. All home occupancy activities shall be conducted inside the home or accessory building and all supplies and materials shall be stored indoors; 
2.  That the occupation is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit; 
3.  That only the members of the immediate family residing on the premises may be employed, unless authorized by the board of adjustment by a variance; 
4.  That no stock-in-trade is kept or commodities sold other than those produced on the premises unless authorized by the board of adjustment; 
5.  That samples may be kept but not sold on the premises; 
6.  That no more than twenty-five percent of the floor area of the dwelling is devoted to such home occupation; 
7.  That no sign or display other than a name plate not more than two square feet in area shall be used outside of the premises. 
    "Hotel or motel" means a building in which lodging accommodations, with or without meals, are provided for compensation. 
    Hotel, Apartment. "Apartment hotel" means a building in which some of the accommodations are dwelling units or are occupied by permanent residents. 
    "Institution" means building or buildings occupied by a nonprofit private corporation or a public body for public use. 
    "Junk or salvage yard" means an open area where waste or scrap material, including parts of used motor vehicles, appliances and farm implements are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, parked, disassembled or handled. 
    Kennel, Animal. "Animal kennel" means any premises where dogs, cats and other household pets are boarded, bred and maintained for compensation. 
    "Lodging house" means a residential building or portion thereof which accommodates three or more unrelated persons with meal privileges for compensation. 
    "Lodging room" means a room rented as a sleeping and living quarters without kitchen facilities or meals. 
    "Lot" means a piece, parcel, lot or area of land of continuous assemblage established by survey, plat or deed. 
    "Lot area" means the area within the lot lines. 
    Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot abutting two public streets at their intersection. 
    "Lot depth" means the average horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line. 
    Lot, Double Frontage. "Double frontage lot" means a lot having frontage on two separately designated streets. 
    Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot located in the interior of a block and not a corner lot. 
    "Lot lines" means the property lines bounding the lot. 
    "Lot of record" means a lot which is a part of subdivision which has been recorded in the Office of Ramsey County Register of Deeds, or a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the Office of Ramsey County Register of Deeds. 
    "Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at the front building setback line. 
    Lot, Zoning. "Zoning lot" means a single lot, parcel, tract of land located within a single block developed or to be developed as a single unit. 
    "Manufactured home" means a factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation, which is not constructed with or equipped with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than to a permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built in compliance with the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act 1974 (24 CFR 3280) which became effective June 15, 1976, promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
    "Medical marijuana dispensary" means a facility that has been approved by the North Dakota State Health Department, as per Chapter 19-24.1 NDCC and Article 33-44 of the North Dakota Administrative Rules, to house, dispense, and sell approved marijuana products for medical purposes. 
    "Medical marijuana manufacturing" means the process of preparing legal medical marijuana products as per Chapter 19-24.1 NDCC and Article 33-44 of the North Dakota Administrative Rules, for distribution and sale at approved medical marijuana dispensaries. 
    "Mobile home" means a transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Home Constructed and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (24 CFR 3280), which became effective June 15, 1976. A mobile or portable structure constructed to be towable on its chassis, connected to utilities and used for year-round living. It can consist of one or more units that can be telescoped when towed, or two or more units separately towable, but designed to be joined into one integral unit. 
    "Mobile home lot" means a lot or parcel of land platted or planned to accommodate a mobile home. 
    "Mobile home park" means a parcel of land for which a detailed plan indicating the location of lots, blocks, streets, neighborhood facilities and parks and playgrounds exists. 
    "Nonconforming building" means any building which does not comply with any or all of these regulations. 
    "Nonconforming use" means any principal use of land or building which does not comply with any or all of these regulations. 
    "Nursing home or convalescent home" means a home for the aged or infirm in which unrelated persons are accommodated for compensation. 
    "Outdoor storage" means the keeping of vehicles with current license and registration, recreational vehicles, boats, ATVs, snowmobiles, trailers, equipment and storage containers for an extended period of time without usage, outside of a completely enclosed building. Storage containers shall comply with Chapter 17.78 of the zoning regulations. Outdoor storage does not pertain to the lawful display of retail goods and equipment for sale on commercially zoned properties. Outdoor storage of junk and/or rubbish shall not be allowed and shall be governed by Title 8 of the municipal code. 
    "Permanent foundation" means a foundation designed and placed in compliance with the North Dakota State Building Code as adopted by the City of Devils Lake. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or legal entity. 
    "Planned development" means a grouping of buildings and structures on a site of five or more acres in single ownership which is not limited by the yard or building height limitations but is based on a detailed development plan and recorded in the Office of Ramsey County Register of Deeds upon approval by the board of city commissioners. 
    "Premises" means a lot together with all buildings and structures on it. 
    "Public roadway or public way" means any dedicated and recorded right-of-way including alleys, sidewalks, streets, roads or highways. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a travel trailer. 
    "Regional flood" means a flood determined by the city, state and federal authorities which is representative of large floods known to have occurred in Ramsey County, North Dakota. 
    "Service station" means any building or premises where automotive fuels, automotive related services, lubricants, parts and supplies are made available to the motorist. 
    "Sign" means any emblem, name, identification, description or illustration which is used for outdoor advertising having permanent location on the ground or attached to or painted on a building including bulletin boards, billboards and poster boards, flags, but excluding real estate for-sale signs, political campaign signs, public information and traffic signs. 
    "Site plan" means a detailed plan for making improvements to parcel(s) of land for the purpose of building and development as provided in Section 17.32.040. 
    "Special use" means use of a special nature not automatically permitted in a district and not listed among the conditional uses. Approval of any special use requires the review and approval of the board of adjustment. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then space between the floor and the ceiling above it. A basement shall be counted as a story, if more than one-half of it is above grade. 
    Story, Half. "Half story" means that part of a building between the eaves and the ridge line of pitched roofs, not for human occupancy unless approved by the board of adjustment. 
    "Street" means any public way which affords traffic circulations and a principal means of access to abutting property. 
    "Street line" means the outer boundary of any public right-of-way. 
    "Structural alterations" means any change in the supporting elements of a building including bearing walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, roofs and exterior walls. 
    "Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which require permanent location on the ground including advertising signs and billboards. 
    "Tavern" means any place in which alcoholic beverages are sold primarily for consumption on the premises, whereas a liquor store is a place where alcoholic beverages are sold exclusively for consumption off the premises. 
    "Tent" means a collapsible shelter of canvas or other fabric stretched and sustained by poles and used for camping outdoors. 
    "Travel trailer" means any portable unit designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel or recreational purposes. The term travel trailer includes the following: 
1.  An independent travel trailer, which is a travel trailer containing toilet and lavatory facilities. 
2.  A dependent travel trailer, which is a travel trailer containing either toilet or lavatory facilities or having neither facility. 
    "Used or occupied" means intended, arranged or designed to be used for occupancy. 
    "Variance" means the relaxation of the terms of the zoning regulations in relationship to building height, size of the front, rear and side yards, and use of a property, where the literal enforcement of these regulations could create unreasonable hardship, but it is not contrary to the purposes of the city comprehensive plan and these regulations. 
    "Yard" means an open space on the zoning lot which is unoccupied or unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward. 
    Yard, Front. "Front yard" means an open space extending across the front of the lot between the side lot lines and extending from the front lot line to the front of the principal building or any projection thereof. 
    Yard, Rear. "Rear yard" means an open space extending along the full length of the rear lot line between the side lot line and extending from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building or projection thereof. 
    Yard, Side. "Side yard" means an open space extending along a side lot line from the front lot line to the rear lot line extending from the side lot line to the side of the principal building or projection thereof. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003; Ord. 822, 1998; Ord. 818 (part), 1997; Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 933, 3-7-16; Ord. No. 941, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 945, 12-5-16; Ord. No. 950, 12-18-17; Ord. No. 954, 5-21-18) 
Chapter 17.12 - DISTRICT BOUNDARIES AND MAP 

17.12.010 - Districts established. 
    In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of these regulations, the following zoning districts are established: 
17.16 R-SF Single-family residential district 17.20 R-LD Low-density residential district 17.24 R-MD Medium-density residential district 17.28 R-HD High-density multiple family residential district 17.32 R-MHP Planned mobilehome park district 17.36 R-MFH Manufactured home residential district 17.38 R-SU Suburban single-family residential district 17.40 C-NGH Neighborhood commercial district 17.44 C-CAC Central area commercial district 17.48 C-HWY Highway commercial district 17.52 I-LT Limited industrial district 17.56 I-HVY Heavy industrial district 17.60 PUD Planned urban district 17.64 AG Agricultural district 17.68 FP Floodplain district 17.72 PUB Public facilities district  
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.12.020 - District map established. 
A.  Zoning Districts. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning district map on file in the office of the code administrator. The zoning district maps, together with all information shown thereon and all amendments thereto, shall be an integral part of these regulations. 
B.  Public Street as Boundary. Where zoning district boundary lines are indicated as following streets or alleys, or extension thereof, such boundary line shall be construed to be the center line of said streets or alleys or extension thereof unless clearly shown to the contrary. 
C.  Lot Line as Boundary. Where a zoning district boundary line coincides approximately but not exactly with a lot line, the zoning boundary shall be construed to be the lot line at that location. 
D.  District Description for Unsubdivided Lands. For unsubdivided property, zoning district boundaries are determined by metes and bounds description or by legal description as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.12.030 - Vacated areas. 
    Where a public way is vacated by the official action of the board of city commissioners, the zoning district boundaries shall be extended to the center of the vacated public way. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.12.040 - Annexation of land. 
    Any newly-annexed area shall be placed in AG agricultural district, unless the area is targeted and scheduled for development, in which case the area shall be placed in the appropriate zoning district subject to the zoning district changes and zoning district amendments provided in these regulations. 
(Ord. 837 (part), 2000: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.12.050 - Zoning district boundary interpretation. 
    Where any uncertainty exists as to the exact location of the zoning district boundary lines, the Planning Commission shall determine the location of such boundary lines. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
17.12.060 - Certification of map. 
    The official map shall bear the date of adoption of the zoning map as an integral part of these regulations. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 17.16 - R-SF SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.16.010 - Purpose. 
    The R-SF single-family residential district is primarily established to promote a suitable residential environment and to accommodate low-density detached single-family residential units uninterrupted by conflicting uses and incompatible activities. For the R-SF single-family residential district, in promoting the general purposes of this title, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the construction or placement of, and the continued use of the land for single-family dwellings in the city and extraterritorial area; 
B.  To prohibit high-density residential, commercial and industrial use of the land to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or continuation of single-family dwellings in the district; 
C.  To discourage any use which would generate traffic on minor streets other than normal traffic to serve residents on those streets. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.16.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Single-family detached dwelling units; 
B.  Neighborhood playgrounds and open spaces; 
C.  Accessory buildings and structures; 
D.  Home occupation; 
E.  Home day-care facilities accommodating eighteen or less children. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.16.030 - Conditional uses. 
    Public facilities such as public library, parks, golf courses except miniature courses or driving ranges operated for commercial purposes. 
A.  Public and private schools; 
B.  Churches, cemeteries and related uses; 
C.  Colleges and universities; 
D.  Home day-care facilities accommodating more than eighteen children; 
E.  Fire stations; 
F.  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations. 
G.  Attached and detached accessory dwelling units as provided in Section 17.76.130. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 945, 12-5-16) 
17.16.040 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent of the total area of the lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.16.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  A lot shall contain no less than eight thousand square feet of area per dwelling unit in the city limits and sixteen thousand square feet of area per dwelling unit in the extraterritorial planning area. 
B.  The minimum lot width shall be no less than sixty-five feet. 
(Ord. 837 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.16.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet on local streets and fifty feet for collector and arterial streets. 
B.  The minimum rear yard, measured from the rear lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard, measured from the side lot line, shall be no less than eight feet on each side of a lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.16.070 - Building height. 
    No building shall be more than two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet high. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.16.080 - Parking. 
A.  There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces provided for each residential dwelling unit. 
B.  The parking need for the conditionally permitted uses shall be subject to the requirements of Section 17.76.020. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.16.090 - Signs. 
A.  There shall be no more than one identification sign per residential dwelling structure not exceeding two square feet in area. The sign may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type but it shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
B.  Temporary signs including "For Sale," "For Rent," political campaign signs, greeting signs and rally signs are permitted. 
C.  For nonresidential uses, the provisions of Section 17.76.030 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.20 - R-LD LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.20.010 - Purpose. 
    The R-LD low-density residential district is primarily established to promote a suitable residential environment and to accommodate low-density residential uses largely consisting of single-family detached dwelling units and two-family dwelling units uninterrupted by conflicting uses and incompatible activities. For the R-LD low-density residential district, in promoting the general purposes of this title, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the construction or placement of, and the continued use of the land for single-family dwellings in the city and extraterritorial area; 
B.  To prohibit high-density residential, commercial and industrial use of the land and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or continuation of single-family dwellings in the district; 
C.  To discourage any use which would generate traffic on minor streets other than normal traffic to serve residents on those streets; 
D.  To discourage any use which because of its character or size would create requirements and costs for public services such as water supply and sewerage, substantially in excess of such requirements and costs if the districts were developed solely for single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.20.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Single-family detached dwellings units; 
B.  Two-family dwelling units; 
C.  Neighborhood playgrounds and open spaces; 
D.  Accessory buildings and structures; 
E.  Home occupation; 
F.  Home day-care facilities accommodating eighteen or less children. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.20.030 - Conditional uses. 
    Public facilities such as public library, parks, golf courses except miniature courses or driving ranges operated for commercial purposes. 
A.  Public and private schools; 
B.  Churches, cemeteries and related uses; 
C.  Colleges and universities; 
D.  Home day-care facilities accommodating more than eighteen children; 
E.  Fire stations; 
F.  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations. 
G.  Attached and detached accessory dwelling units as provided in Section 17.76.130. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 945, 12-5-16) 
17.20.040 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty-five percent of the total area of the lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.20.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  A lot shall contain no less than seven thousand square feet of area per dwelling unit in the city limits and fourteen thousand square feet of area per dwelling unit in the extraterritorial planning area. 
B.  The minimum lot area for duplexes shall be ten thousand square feet in the city limits and twenty thousand square feet in the extraterritorial planning area. 
C.  The minimum lot width shall be no less than fifty feet. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.20.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet on local streets and fifty feet for collector and arterial streets. 
B.  The minimum rear yard, measured from the rear lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard, measured from the side lot line, shall be no less than eight feet on each side of a lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.20.070 - Building height. 
    No building shall be more than two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet high. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.20.080 - Parking. 
A.  There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces provided for each residential dwelling unit. 
B.  The parking need for the conditionally permitted uses shall be subject to the requirements of Section 17.76.020. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.20.090 - Signs. 
A.  There shall be no more than one identification sign per residential dwelling unit not exceeding two square feet in area, or there shall be no more than one identification sign for structures with more than four dwelling units not exceeding thirty-six square feet in area. The sign may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type but it shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
B.  Temporary signs including "For Sale," "For Rent," political campaign signs, greeting signs and rally signs are permitted. 
C.  For nonresidential uses, the provisions of Section 17.76.030 shall apply. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.24 - R-MD MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 788 and 818. 

17.24.010 - Purpose. 
    The R-MD medium-density residential district is primarily established to promote a suitable residential environment and to accommodate town houses and apartments of medium density to meet the needs of various income or age groups in the city. For the R-MD medium-density residential district, in promoting the general purposes of this title, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the construction or placement of, and the continued use of the land for residential purposes on urban lots; 
B.  To prohibit high density residential, and industrial use of the land and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with development or continuation of single-family dwellings in the district; 
C.  To discourage any use which because of its character or size would generate traffic or require municipal services substantially in excess of traffic and services that would exist if the district were developed solely for multifamily dwellings. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.24.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Single-family detached dwelling units; 
B.  Two-family dwelling units; 
C.  Multiple-family attached dwelling units, including townhouses, garden apartments and multiple-dwelling unit structures not exceeding eight dwelling units in a structure; 
D.  Neighborhood playgrounds and open spaces; 
E.  Accessory buildings and structures; 
F.  Home occupation; 
G.  Home day-care facilities accommodating eighteen or less children. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 837 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.24.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Churches, cemeteries and related uses; 
B.  Home day-care facilities accommodating more than eighteen children; 
C.  Public and private schools; 
D.  Public facilities such as parks, golf courses except miniature golf courses and driving ranges operated for profit; 
E.  Parking lots; 
F.  Public or private utility structures; 
G.  Hospitals and clinics; 
H.  Colleges and universities; 
I.  Municipal facilities such as fire stations, city hall, police stations and museums; 
J.  Bed and breakfast establishments. 
K.  Attached and detached accessory dwelling units as provided in Section 17.76.130. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 945, 12-5-16) 
17.24.040 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal and all accessory buildings shall not exceed fifty percent of the total area of the lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.24.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  The minimum lot area for each multifamily dwelling unit in the city shall be three thousand five hundred square feet area. The minimum lot area in the extraterritorial planning area shall be seven thousand square feet per dwelling unit. 
B.  For single-family dwelling units, the minimum lot area shall be seven thousand square feet in the city and fourteen thousand square feet in the extraterritorial area. The minimum lot area for duplexes shall be ten thousand square feet in the city limits and twenty thousand square feet in the extraterritorial planning area. 
C.  For multiple-family uses the minimum lot width shall be sixty five feet. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.24.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet on local streets and fifty feet for collector and arterial streets. 
B.  The minimum rear yard, measured from the rear lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard, measured from the side lot line, shall be no less than eight feet on each side of a lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.24.070 - Building height. 
A.  No building shall be more than two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet high. 
B.  Nonresidential buildings permitted as conditional uses shall not be more than three stories high excepting church steeples and other similar structural elements. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.24.080 - Parking. 
A.  There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces provided for each residential dwelling unit. 
B.  The parking need for the conditionally permitted uses shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 17.52. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.24.090 - Signs. 
A.  There shall be no more than one identification sign per residential dwelling unit not exceeding two square feet in area, or there shall be no more than one identification sign for structures with more than four dwelling units not exceeding thirty-six square feet in area. The sign may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type but it shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
B.  Temporary signs including "For Sale," "For Rent," political campaign signs, greeting signs and rally signs are permitted. 
C.  For nonresidential uses, the provisions of Section 17.76.030 shall apply. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.28 - R-HD HIGH-DENSITY MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.28.010 - Purpose. 
    The R-HD high-density multiple-family district is primarily established to promote a suitable residential environment and to accommodate high-density residential district to meet the needs of various income and age groups. For the R-HD, in promoting the general purposes of this title, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for residential purposes; 
B.  To prohibit commercial and industrial use of the land and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of residential structures in this district; 
C.  To discourage any use which because of its character or size would create requirements and cost for public services, such as water supply and sewerage substantially in excess of such requirements if the district were developed solely for multifamily dwellings and limited business development. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.28.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Single-family dwelling units; 
B.  Two-family dwelling units; 
C.  Multiple-family dwelling units; 
D.  Home occupation; 
E.  Accessory buildings and structures; 
F.  Parks and playgrounds; 
G.  Parking lots; 
H.  Municipal facilities such as City Hall, fire station, police station, library, and museum; 
I.  Parks and open spaces, including golf courses and outdoor sports facilities; 
J.  Home day-care facilities accommodating eighteen or less children. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.28.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Colleges and universities; 
B.  Churches and cemeteries; 
C.  Home day-care facilities accommodating more than eighteen children; 
D.  Nursing homes; 
E.  Public and private schools; 
F.  Group homes, group quarters, lodging houses and rooming houses; 
G.  Professional offices; 
H.  Private clubs and fraternal organizations including residential uses for caretaker or custodian; 
I.  Bed and breakfast establishments; 
J.  Clinics and hospitals. 
K.  Emergency medical air transport services with supporting structures, i.e. hangers, landing pads, etc. 
L.  Attached and detached accessory dwelling units as provided in Section 17.76.130. 
(Ord. 837 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 941, 8-1-16; Ord. No. 945, 12-5-16) 
17.28.040 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed sixty percent of the total lot area. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.28.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  A minimum lot area for each dwelling unit in a multiple-family structure of nine or more units in the city shall be two thousand five hundred square feet. The minimum lot area for each dwelling unit in the extraterritorial planning area shall be five thousand square feet. For multiple-family structures of eight or less units the minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be three thousand five hundred square feet in the city limits and seven thousand square feet in the extraterritorial planning area. 
B.  The minimum lot area for a single-family unit shall be seven thousand square feet in the city limits and fourteen thousand square feet in the extraterritorial planning area. The minimum lot area for duplexes shall be ten thousand square feet in the city limits and twenty thousand square feet in the extraterritorial planning area. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 837 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.28.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet on local streets and fifty feet for collector and arterial streets. 
B.  The minimum rear yard, measured from the rear lot line, shall be twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard, measured from the side lot line, shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.28.070 - Building height. 
A.  No residential building shall be more than three stories or forty-five feet high. 
B.  Nonresidential buildings shall be no more than four stories or forty-five feet high excepting church steeples and similar structural elements. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.28.080 - Parking. 
A.  There shall be no less than two off-street parking spaces for each residential dwelling unit. For efficiency apartments there shall be at least one space per dwelling unit. 
B.  There shall be no less than one off-street parking space for each ten beds in the nursing homes and group homes. 
C.  For nonresidential uses the provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.28.090 - Signs. 
A.  There shall be no more than one identification sign per residential dwelling unit not exceeding two square feet in area, or there shall be no more than one identification sign for structures with more than four dwelling units not exceeding thirty-six square feet. The sign may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type but it shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
B.  Temporary signs including "For Sale," "For Rent," political campaign signs, greeting signs and rally signs are permitted. 
C.  For nonresidential uses, the provisions of Section 17.76.030 shall apply. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.32 - R-MHP PLANNED MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.32.010 - Purpose. 
    The R-MHP planned mobile home park district is primarily established to promote a suitable mobile home rental spaces for permanent occupancy or for recreational uses. The placement of mobile homes shall meet the requirements of the City Code. A building permit is required for any unit added in the park. For the R-MHP planned mobile home park district, in promoting the general purposes of this title, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To prohibit commercial and industrial uses of the land; 
B.  To encourage suitable and proper development of mobile home parks. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.32.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Single-wide mobile homes; 
B.  Double-wide manufactured homes set on temporary foundation; 
C.  Accessory buildings such as garages and storage buildings; 
D.  Neighborhood parks and playgrounds; 
E.  Home occupation; 
F.  Home day-care facilities accommodating eighteen or less children; 
G.  Recreational vehicles. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.32.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Churches and places of worship; 
B.  Public utilities and structures; 
C.  Schools; 
D.  Home day-care facilities accommodating more than eighteen children. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.32.040 - Site plan. 
    A site plan prepared by a registered engineer, architect or a qualified planner is required to include the following: 
A.  Topographical map showing the original and final contours; 
B.  Proposed storm water drainage system; 
C.  Layout of lots, block, street and walkway systems including the location of entrances and exits to and from the park; 
D.  Location and capacity of water and sanitary sewer systems including distribution and collection systems; 
E.  Park and playground areas and location of the park service buildings; 
F.  Fencing and screen planting; 
G.  Provision for garbage collection; 
H.  Statement of conformance with the Federal Housing Administration's Minimum Property Standards for Mobile Home Courts. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.32.050 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent of the total area of the lot. 
(Ord. 856 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.32.060 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  The minimum park area shall be no less than two acres. 
B.  The minimum lot area for each rental site shall be five thousand square feet for single-wide mobile home and seven thousand square feet for double-wide manufactured home. Each lot shall directly front on a roadway. 
C.  The minimum lot width for each rental site shall be forty feet for single-wide mobile home and fifty feet for double-wide mobile home. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.32.070 - Yard requirements. 
    For determining the yard requirements in this district the placement of the unit shall be considered regardless of the entrance to the unit. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front property line on public rights-of-way shall be twenty feet. This distance is to be measured from the property line. 
B.  The minimum rear yard from a mobile home park's exterior property lines shall be fifteen feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard for units, additions, sheds and garages abutting public rights-of-way or a mobile home park's exterior property lines shall be ten feet. For interior lots the minimum distance between the units and any additions shall be twenty feet. 
D.  Detached garages and sheds shall be a minimum five feet from the unit and a minimum ten feet from an adjacent unit and five feet from a neighboring accessory structure. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 900, 4-16-12) 
17.32.080 - Building height. 
    No building or structure shall be more than two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet high. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.32.090 - R-MHP Mobile home park requirement. 
A.  Roadways within the parks shall be hard-surfaced, either concrete or bituminized. 
B.  All provisions for water supply, laundry, sewage and fire protection to be provided in any R-MHP district shall have been approved by the appropriate city department and shall meet city service standards. 
C.  Recreation area shall be provided within each mobile home park for the exclusive use of the park occupants. Such recreation site or sites shall have a minimum area of six percent of the lot area. 
D.  All mobile home parks shall have near their main entrance, a park office in which there shall be an up-to-date list of park residents along with their address and a diagram of the park layout. 
E.  Each mobile home shall be anchored to the ground for purposes of withstanding wind pressures specified for such mobile/manufactured homes prior to occupancy of the unit. 
F.  Existing R-MHP shall not be enlarged or extensively altered unless such alteration complies with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 900, 4-16-12) 
17.32.100 - Parking. 
    There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.32.110 - Signs. 
A.  There shall be no more than one identification sign per mobile/manufactured home unit exceeding two square feet in area. 
B.  The location and size of identification signs for the manufactured home park shall be approved by the code administrator but in no event the size of the sign shall exceed forty square feet. Signs may be wall, pedestal, ground or projection type but shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
C.  Temporary signs such as "For Sale," "For Rent," political campaign signs, greeting signs and rally signs are permitted. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 17.36 - R-MFH MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The R-MFH manufactured home residential district is primarily established to promote a suitable and affordable residential housing environment and to accommodate site-built, detached, single-family dwelling units and manufactured home units on sites owned individually. A building permit is required for any unit added in the district. For the R-MFH residential district, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the construction or placement of single-family homes and the continued use of land for single-family residential purposes; 
B.  To prohibit commercial and industrial uses of the land. 
(Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.36.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Single-family residential dwelling units; 
B.  Manufactured home units with a minimum overall front width of twenty-four feet, minimum overall depth of twenty feet, and minimum main floor living space square footage of nine hundred square feet; 
C.  Neighborhood playgrounds and open spaces; 
D.  Accessory buildings and structures; 
E.  Home occupation; 
F.  Home day-care facilities accommodating eighteen or less children. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.36.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Public facilities such as public library, parks, golf courses except miniature courses or public driving ranges operated for commercial purposes; 
B.  Public and private schools; 
C.  Churches, cemeteries and related uses; 
D.  Home day-care facilities accommodating more than eighteen children; 
E.  Public and private utilities and structures; 
F.  Fire stations; 
G.  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.36.040 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent of the total area of the lot. 
(Ord. 856 (part), 2003: Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.36.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  The minimum area for each lot shall be no less than eight thousand square feet in the city limits and sixteen thousand square feet in the extraterritorial planning area. 
B.  The minimum lot width shall be sixty-five feet. 
(Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.36.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front lot line, shall be twenty feet in the city and fifty feet in the extraterritorial planning area. 
B.  The minimum rear yard, measured from the rear lot line, shall be twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard, measured from the side lot line, shall be eight feet on each side of a lot. 
(Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.36.070 - Building height. 
    No building shall be higher than two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet high, except church steeples and similar structural elements. 
(Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.36.080 - Parking. 
A.  There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit. 
B.  For nonresidential uses the provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.36.090 - Signs. 
A.  There shall be no more than one identification sign per dwelling unit not exceeding two square feet in area. Signs may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type but shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
B.  Temporary signs such as "For Sale," "For Rent," political campaign signs, greeting signs and rally signs are permitted. 
C.  For nonresidential uses, the provisions of Section 17.76.030 shall apply. 
(Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
17.36.100 - Special provisions. 
    The code administrator shall have the authority to approve the provisions of this section. 
A.  All manufactured dwelling units shall be covered with an exterior material used in conventional dwelling units. The exterior covering shall extend to the ground, except when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation. 
B.  All manufactured dwelling units shall have a roof with a pitch of not less than two and one-half inches vertical rise for each twelve inches of horizontal run and consisting of shingles or other material customarily used for conventional dwelling units. 
C.  For compatibility with the surrounding dwelling units, the manufactured dwelling units may be required to have porches and eaves and roofs with eaves. 
D.  A manufactured dwelling unit shall be subject to all provisions of these regulations except that it shall be constructed according to the specifications of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.36.110 - Foundation requirements. 
    Foundations for manufactured homes must be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Ord. 834 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.38 - R-SU SUBURBAN SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

17.38.010 - Purpose. 
    The R-SU suburban single-family residential district is primarily established to promote a suitable residential environment and to accommodate low density, large lot, limited agriculture, and limited equine husbandry. For the R-SU suburban single-family residential district, in promoting the general purposes of this title, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the construction or placement of, and the continued use of the land for single-family dwellings on large lots and for limited agricultural uses; 
B.  To prohibit general commercial and industrial uses of the land and to prohibit any use with the development or the continuation of single-family dwellings and limited agricultural uses; 
C.  To discourage any use which would generate traffic on the streets of the district other than normal traffic to serve the suburban single-family residences of the area. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.38.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Single-family detached dwelling units; 
B.  Manufactured home units with a minimum overall front width of twenty-four feet, minimum overall depth of twenty feet, and minimum main floor living space square footage of nine hundred square feet; 
C.  Playgrounds and open spaces; 
D.  Accessory buildings and structures; 
E.  Family foster home for adults; 
F.  Home day-care facilities accommodating eighteen or less children; 
G.  Home occupation. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 937, 3-7-16) 
17.38.030 - Conditional uses. 
    Public facilities such as public library, parks, golf courses except miniature courses or driving ranges operated for commercial purposes. 
A.  Churches, cemeteries and related uses; 
B.  Colleges and universities; 
C.  Home day-care facilities accommodating more than eighteen children; 
D.  Fire stations; 
E.  Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations and sewer lift stations. 
F.  Keeping of animals as provided in Section 17.76.120 of this title. 
G.  Attached and detached accessory dwelling units as provided in Section 17.76.130. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13; Ord. No. 937, 3-7-16; Ord. No. 945, 12-5-16) 
17.38.040 - Density. 
    The maximum allowable density is one unit per acre. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
17.38.050 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty percent of the total area of the lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.38.060 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  A subdivided platted lot shall contain no less than forty thousand square feet. A lot that is not divided and not platted must contain a minimum of four acres. 
B.  The minimum lot width shall be no less than one hundred feet. 
C.  The lot area for properties with an approved conditional use permit for the keeping of animals shall be a minimum of two acres. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 937, 3-7-16) 
17.38.070 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front lot line, shall be no less than thirty feet on local streets and fifty feet for collector and arterial streets. 
B.  The minimum rear yard, measured from the rear lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard, measured from the side lot line, shall be no less than twenty feet on each side of a lot. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.38.080 - Building height. 
    No building shall be more than two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet high. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.38.090 - Parking. 
A.  There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces provided for each residential dwelling unit. 
B.  The parking need for the conditionally permitted uses shall be subject to the requirements of Section 17.76.020. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.38.100 - Signs. 
A.  There shall be no more than one identification sign per residential dwelling structure not exceeding two square feet in area. The sign may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type but it shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
B.  Temporary signs including "For Sale," "For Rent," political campaign signs, greeting signs and rally signs are permitted. 
C.  For nonresidential uses, the provisions of Section 17.76.030 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.40 - C-NGH NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 788 and 818. 

17.40.010 - Purpose. 
    The C-NGH neighborhood commercial district is primarily established to accommodate basic shopping needs of a neighborhood largely consisting of residential uses. The commercial uses, however, shall not adversely affect the residential uses from the standpoint of noise, traffic, parking and convenience of the residents. For the C-NGH neighborhood commercial district, in promoting the general purpose of this article, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the continued use of the land for neighborhood commercial and service uses; 
B.  To prohibit heavy commercial and service uses and industrial uses of the land, and to prohibit any other use which would substantially depreciate the value of residential districts surrounding the C-NGH neighborhood commercial districts; 
C.  To encourage the discontinuance of mixed uses and uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.40.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Single-family and two family units; 
B.  Multiple-family dwelling units not exceeding the requirements of R-HD high density multifamily residential district; 
C.  Barber shops and beauty parlors; 
D.  Churches and religious buildings; 
E.  Home day-care facilities accommodating eighteen or less children; 
F.  Clinics and hospitals; 
G.  Fraternal organizations; 
H.  Gas stations and stop-and-go-type stores; 
I.  General retail stores; 
J.  Home occupations; 
K.  Libraries, museums, fire stations, police stations and City Hall; 
L.  Professional offices and businesses; 
M.  Retail uses and service compatible with the surrounding uses which will not adversely affect the residential properties. Such uses include taverns, liquor stores, laundry and dry cleaning establishments employing not more than five persons on the premises. 
N.  Accessory uses. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 895, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.40.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Automobile service stations and services employing more than five persons; 
B.  Public utility and service uses such as electric substations, railroad right-of-way, sanitary sewer lift stations, telephone exchange and water pumping stations; 
C.  Storage and processing of agricultural products; 
D.  Cable TV establishment including towers, dishes and major accessories. 
E.  Campgrounds. 
F.  Home day-care facilities accommodating more than eighteen children. 
(Ord. 837 (part), 2000: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 889, 8-2-10; Ord. No. 915, 8-5-13) 
17.40.040 - Lot coverage. 
A.  Commercial Use. The lot coverage of a commercial building and its accessory buildings shall not exceed seventy percent of the total lot area. In computing the lot coverage of a commercial building and its accessory buildings, sufficient area shall be added to its ground coverage for each off-street parking space as required by Section 17.76.020 of this title. 
B.  Residential Use. The ground area occupied by the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed sixty percent of the total area. In computing the lot coverage, sufficient area shall be added to the actual area of the principal building and all accessory buildings to provide off-street parking spaces as required by Section 17.76.020 of this title if such spaces are not furnished within a building. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.40.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
    The minimum lot area for each multiple-family dwelling unit shall be the same as those required for R-HD multiple-family high density multiple-family residential district. 
A.  The minimum lot(s) area for neighborhood commercial uses shall be seven thousand square feet. In the event the commercial uses are located in the same structure as residential uses, there shall be additional two thousand five hundred square feet for each dwelling unit. 
B.  The minimum lot width shall be fifty feet. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.40.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front lot line, shall be twenty feet. 
B.  The minimum rear yard, measured from the rear lot line, shall be twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard, measured from the side lot line, shall be eight feet on each side. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.40.070 - Building height. 
    No building or structure shall be more than three stories or forty-five feet high. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.40.080 - Parking. 
A.  There shall be a minimum of two off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit except for efficiency apartments for which there shall be one off-street parking space. 
B.  For commercial uses the provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.40.090 - Signs. 
A.  For residential uses separate from the commercial uses there shall be not more than one identification sign per dwelling unit not exceeding two square feet in area. Signs may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type but shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
B.  For residential and commercial uses situated in the same building the commercial sign provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 895, 6-6-11) 
Chapter 17.44 - C-CAC CENTRAL AREA COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

17.44.010 - Purpose. 
    The C-CAC central area commercial district is primarily designed to accommodate a cohesive and compact range of commercial uses traditionally found in the city center, commonly known as downtown, together with residential uses above the ground floor areas. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.44.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Accessory uses; 
B.  Advertising signs and billboards; 
C.  Amusement places including bowling alleys, athletic clubs, pool halls, theaters and similar indoor facilities; 
D.  Antique shops, art galleries and museums; 
E.  Automobile accessory stores and automobile dealerships; 
F.  Banks and financial institutions; 
G.  Boarding and rooming houses; 
H.  Business machine sales and service; 
I.  Carpet and rug stores; 
J.  Catering businesses; 
K.  Churches; 
L.  City halls and related municipal facilities; 
M.  Clothing and costume rental stores; 
N.  Day care facilities; 
O.  Department stores; 
P.  Dry good stores; 
Q.  Employment agencies; 
R.  Florist shops; 
S.  Fraternal and philanthropic organizations; 
T.  Funeral homes; 
U.  Furniture stores; 
V.  Grocery stores; 
W.  Hospitals and clinics; 
X.  Hotel and motels; 
Y.  Household appliance stores, including radio and television sales and repair; 
Z.  Interior decorating, including upholstering and drapery shops; 
AA.  Jewelry stores; 
BB.  Laboratories for research and testing provided that all operations are conducted indoors; 
CC.  Leather goods and luggage stores; 
DD.  Locksmith shops; 
EE.  Meat markets and lockers; 
FF.  Musical instrument sales and repair; 
GG.  Optical sales and service; 
HH.  Orthopedic and medical supply stores; 
II.  Paint and wallpaper stores; 
JJ.  Photographic and printing operations; 
KK.  Picture framing stores; 
LL.  Professional offices for businesses and services without limitation; 
MM.  Publishing and book binding shops; 
NN.  Radio and television stations and recording studios but not the towers, dishes and major accessories; 
OO.  Restaurants, including all types of eating and drinking establishments; 
PP.  Schools, public and private; 
QQ.  Second hand stores and rummage stores; 
RR.  Sporting good stores; 
SS.  Tailor shops; 
TT.  Taverns and liquor stores; 
UU.  Taxidermists; 
VV.  Travel agencies and ticket sales. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 856 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.44.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Animal rescue operations; 
B.  Board and marine equipment sales and service; 
C.  Bus terminals; 
D.  Car washes; 
E.  Drive-in establishments; 
F.  Farm implement sales and service; 
G.  Garages for repair and service of passenger motor vehicles; 
H.  Multiple-family dwelling units; 
I.  Parking lots; 
J.  Single-family dwelling units. 
K.  Storage facilities for rent; 
L.  Warehouses and wholesaling distributorships. 
M.  Medical marijuana dispensaries. Subject to Chapter 19-24.1 NDCC, Article 33-44 of the North Dakota Administrative Rules, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 895, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 950, 12-18-17; Ord. No. 954, 5-21-18) 
17.44.040 - Lot area, lot width and yard requirements. 
A.  No minimum setback or side yard is required for the existing buildings. For new buildings, the board of adjustment shall make a determination of need based on the nature of the proposed uses and compatibility with the adjoining uses. 
B.  No minimum lot area is required for the existing building. For the new buildings, the board of adjustment shall make a determination of needs based on the nature of the proposed uses and compatibility with the adjoining uses. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.44.050 - Building height. 
    The building height requirement in C-CAC district shall be subject to the provisions of the airport ordinance. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.44.060 - Parking. 
    For C-CAC district the parking provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
    Exemption: Parcels in this district which are part of the parking authority assessment district shall be subject to the requirements of and approval by the parking authority before a building permit for renovation, alteration or new construction is issued. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.44.070 - Signs. 
    For C-CAC district the sign provisions of Section 17.76.030 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 17.48 - C-HWY HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT* 
Section: 

17.48.010 - Purpose. 
    The C-HWY highway commercial district is primarily established to accommodate those highway oriented commercial uses which by nature and operational characteristics such as direct access, large number of parking spaces, require separation from other uses because of the intensity and frequency of consumer travel. The C-HWY district is established to promote the general purpose of this chapter, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To provide an orderly and comprehensive expansion of commercial facilities without creating undue increased vehicular congestion in the C-HWY business district; 
B.  To encourage the regional commercial activities, and to protect and enhance property value of the commercial district through the provision of landscape and beautification of an individual commercial lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.48.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Accessory uses; 
B.  Advertising signs and billboards; 
C.  Amusement places such as bowling alleys, athletic clubs, pool halls, theaters, miniature golf courses and similar outdoor or indoor facilities; 
D.  Animal hospitals and kennels, including outdoor dog runs or exercise pens when located not less than two hundred feet from any residential district; 
E.  Bakeries and confectioneries; 
F.  Banks and financial institutions; 
G.  Battery and tire service establishments; 
H.  Building material and supply establishments; 
I.  Carpet and rug stores; 
J.  Catering businesses; 
K.  Churches and places of assembly; 
L.  Day care facilities; 
M.  Department stores; 
N.  Dry cleaning establishment and laundromats; 
O.  Express parcel delivery establishments; 
P.  Feed and seed stores; 
Q.  Frozen food lockers, but not slaughtering on the premises; 
R.  Fuel sales establishments; 
S.  Funeral homes; 
T.  Furniture and refinishing and upholstering; 
U.  Garages for repair and service of motor vehicles, including towing and wrecker service but not salvage operations; 
V.  Greenhouses; 
W.  Highway maintenance shops; 
X.  Hospitals and clinics; 
Y.  Machinery and equipment sales and service, including farm machinery and accessories; 
Z.  Marine vehicle sale and service; 
AA.  Meat product sales and locker rentals; 
BB.  Mobile home sales and services; 
CC.  Monument sales; 
DD.  Motels; 
EE.  Motor vehicle sales and rental; 
FF.  Offices; 
GG.  Office and supply stores and business machine sales and services; 
HH.  Packing and crating operations; 
II.  Plumbing shops and yards; 
JJ.  Radio, television, and electronic equipment sales and service; 
KK.  Restaurants, including all types of eating and drinking establishments; 
LL.  Shopping malls, including the retail services customarily accommodated therein; 
MM.  Sporting goods stores and bait shops; 
NN.  Taverns and liquor stores; 
OO.  Watchman and caretaker living areas. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.48.030 - Conditional uses. 
    Unless approved by the planning commission, conditional uses will not be located less than two hundred feet from a residential district. It is determined by the planning commission the conditional use will not be injurious to the surrounding premises or residential neighborhood, the planning commission may approve such conditional use or stipulate special conditions and restrictions as deemed necessary. 
A.  Animal rescue operations; 
B.  Contractors yard; 
C.  Machine shops and fabrication of metal products with less than ten employees; 
D.  Processing and packing of material with less than ten employees; 
E.  Radio and television stations and towers; 
F.  Fenced outdoor storage yards for vehicles with current license and registration, recreational vehicles, boats, ATVs, snowmobiles, trailers, equipment, and storage containers. 
G.  Storage garages and warehouses; 
H.  Campgrounds. 
I.  Medical marijuana dispensaries. Subject to Chapter 19-24.1 NDCC, Article 33-44 of the North Dakota Administrative Rules, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 856 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 895, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 934, 3-7-16; Ord. No. 950, 12-18-17; Ord. No. 954, 5-21-18) 
17.48.040 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  The minimum lot area for C-HWY district shall be twenty thousand square feet for all properties adjacent to U.S. Highway 2, and seven thousand square feet for all other properties. 
B.  The minimum lot width for C-HWY district shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.48.050 - Lot coverage. 
    The principal and accessory uses excluding parking shall not cover more than fifty percent of the lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.48.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front building line, measured from the front lot line, shall be fifty feet for all projects fronting U.S. Highway 2. For properties fronting on other streets the minimum front building line shall be twenty feet in the city and fifty feet in the extraterritorial planning area. 
B.  The minimum rear building line, measured from the rear lot line, shall be twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side building line, measured from the U.S. Highway 2 right-of-way shall be twenty-five feet and the minimum side yard for interior side of the lot shall be ten feet. The minimum side building line measured from other rights-of-way shall be ten feet in the city and twenty-five feet in the extraterritorial planning area. 
D.  The minimum front building line for stored items and storage buildings with outdoor storage areas with frontage on any right-of-way in the City of Devils Lake shall be two hundred fifty feet from that right-of-way. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 895, 6-6-11; Ord. No. 934, 3-7-16) 
17.48.070 - Landscape requirement. 
A.  A minimum of ten percent of the total plot area is recommended for landscaping purposes, and a minimum fifty percent of the ten percent landscape area is recommended to cover with a minimum of five gallon tree. 
B.  A landscape buffer yard of twenty feet is recommended when the adjacent property is residential. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.48.080 - Building height. 
    The building height requirement in C-HWY district shall be subject to the provisions of the airport ordinance. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.48.090 - Parking. 
A.  The front yard and the rear yard spaces may be used for parking. 
B.  For parking in C-HWY district the provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.48.100 - Signs. 
    For signs in C-HWY district the provisions of Section 17.76.030 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.52 - I-LT LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.52.010 - Purpose. 
    The I-LT limited industrial district is primarily established to accommodate light industrial facilities and to encourage grouping of industrial uses which due to their nature pose conflict with other adjoining uses. For I-LT industrial districts, in promoting the general purposes of this article, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the construction of and the continued use of the land for commercial and industrial buildings; 
B.  To prohibit the use of the land for heavy industrial or any other use which would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of commercial and industrial establishments in the district. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.52.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Accessory uses; 
B.  Agricultural chemical production and storage provided all operations are conducted entirely in enclosed buildings in order to contain fume, odor or other hazards; 
C.  Animal hospitals and kennels; 
D.  Any production, processing and treatment of products such as battery and tire service, dairy processing, bottling works, ice and cold storage plans, machine and sheet metal shops provided that all operations be conducted entirely in enclosed buildings; 
E.  Enclosed operations of building material and supply establishments; 
F.  Enclosed contractors yards and construction shops; 
G.  Feed and seed stores; 
H.  Frozen food lockers; 
I.  Electric power production and substations; 
J.  Fuel sales establishment including bottled gas; 
K.  Public utility buildings including water and waste water facilities and accessories; 
L.  Radar stations and towers; 
M.  Radio and television stations and studios; 
N.  Storage and warehousing establishments; 
O.  Storage yard but not salvage yards; 
P.  Watchman and caretaker living areas; 
Q.  Weighing stations; 
R.  Wholesaling establishments. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.52.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Animal rescue operations. 
B.  Airports and accessory facilities. 
C.  Medical marijuana manufacturing. Subject to Chapter 19-24.1 NDCC, Article 33-44 of the North Dakota Administrative Rules, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
    Unless approved by the planning commission, conditional uses will not be located less than five hundred feet from a residential district. If it is determined by the planning commission the conditional use will not be injurious to the surrounding premises or residential neighborhood, the planning commission may approve such conditional use or stipulate special conditions and restrictions as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 950, 12-18-17; Ord. No. 954, 5-21-18) 
17.52.040 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings excluding parking shall not exceed sixty percent of the total area of the lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.52.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  The minimum lot area for I-LT district shall be twenty thousand square feet. 
B.  The minimum lot width for I-LT district shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.52.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum setback, measured from any street right-of-way, shall be fifty feet. 
B.  The minimum rear building line, measured from the rear lot line, shall be twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side building line, measured from the side lot line, shall be ten feet on each side of the lot. 
D.  No building or structure shall be located within two hundred feet of a residential district. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.52.070 - Landscape requirement. 
A.  A minimum of ten percent of the total plot area is recommended for landscaping purposes, and a minimum fifty percent of the ten percent landscape area is recommended to cover with a minimum of five gallon trees. 
B.  A landscape buffer yard of twenty feet is recommended when the adjacent property is residential. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.52.080 - Building height. 
    The building height requirement in I-LT district shall be subject to the provisions of the airport ordinance. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.52.090 - Parking. 
A.  For industrial uses, there shall be one off-street parking space for every two employees. 
B.  Additional spaces shall be provided to accommodate trucks and other motor vehicles. 
C.  For nonindustrial uses, the provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.52.100 - Signs. 
    The sign requirements in I-LT district shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.030. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.56 - I-HVY HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.56.010 - Purpose. 
    The I-HVY heavy industrial district is primarily established to accommodate industrial uses and facilities. It is planned to encourage grouping of related industrial uses for preventing intrusion on other uses to maintain an orderly, functional and efficient industrial land use system. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.56.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Accessory uses; 
B.  Agricultural chemical production and storage; 
C.  Animal hospitals and kennels; 
D.  Any industrial or manufacturing operations provided that: (1) Dust, fumes, odors, smoke, vapor, noise, lights and vibration shall be confined within the I-HVY district, and (2) Outdoor storage, equipment and refuse areas shall be concealed from view from abutting rights-of-way and adjoining residential districts; 
E.  Any production, processing and treatment of products such as battery and tire service, concrete and asphalt products, dairy processing, bottling works, ice and cold storage plants, machine and sheet metal shops provided that all operations be conducted entirely in enclosed buildings; 
F.  Building material and supply establishments; 
G.  Contractors yards and construction shops; 
H.  Asphalt and concrete patching plants and concrete casting; 
I.  Feed and seed stores; 
J.  Frozen food lockers; 
K.  Electric power production and substations; 
L.  Fuel sales establishment including bottle gas; 
M.  Public utility buildings including water and waste water facilities and accessories; 
N.  Radar stations and towers; 
O.  Radio and television stations and studios; 
P.  Salvage yards provided with appropriate solid fencing material at least six feet high and shall not be located within five hundred feet of any residential area; 
Q.  Storage and warehousing establishments; 
R.  Storage yard but not salvage yards; 
S.  Watchman and caretaker living areas; 
T.  Weighing stations; 
U.  Wholesaling establishments. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.56.030 - Conditional uses. 
A.  Animal rescue operations; 
B.  Local and regional sanitary landfills, compost sites and incinerators; 
C.  Sand and gravel operation; 
D.  Oil refineries and petrochemical plants. 
E.  Medical marijuana manufacturing. Subject to Chapter 19-24.1 NDCC, Article 33-44 of the North Dakota Administrative Rules, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
    Unless approved by the planning commission, conditional uses will not be located less than five hundred feet from a residential district. If it is determined by the planning commission the conditional use will not be injurious to the surrounding premises or residential neighborhood, the planning commission may approve such conditional use or stipulate special conditions and restrictions as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 925, 3-2-15; Ord. No. 950, 12-18-17; Ord. No. 954, 5-21-18) 
17.56.040 - Lot coverage. 
    The ground area occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings excluding parking shall not exceed sixty percent of the total area of the lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.56.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  The minimum lot area for I-HVY district shall be one acre. 
B.  The minimum lot width for I-HVY district shall be one hundred feet. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.56.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum setback from any street, measured from the right-of-way, shall be fifty feet. 
B.  The minimum rear building line, measured from the rear lot line, shall be twenty feet. 
C.  The minimum side building line, measured from the side lot line, shall be ten feet. 
D.  No building or structure shall be located a minimum of two hundred feet from the boundary of a residential district. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.56.070 - Landscape requirement. 
A.  A minimum of six percent of the total plot area is recommended for landscaping purposes, and a minimum of fifty percent of the six percent landscape area is recommended to cover with a minimum of five gallon tree. 
B.  A landscape buffer yard of twenty feet is recommended when the adjacent property is residential or commercial. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.56.080 - Building height. 
    The building height requirement in I-HVY district shall be subject to the provisions of the airport ordinance. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.56.090 - Parking. 
A.  For industrial uses there shall be one off-street parking space for every two employees. 
B.  Additional spaces shall be provided to accommodate trucks and other related motor vehicles. 
C.  For nonindustrial uses the provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.56.100 - Signs. 
    The size and placement of the signs in I-HVY district shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.030. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.60 - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

17.60.010 - Purpose. 
    The PUD planned unit development district is primarily established to encourage and promote environmental quality of Devils Lake by allowing for greater freedom, imagination and flexibility in the development of land while complying with the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations, other municipal codes and the city comprehensive plan. It is further the purpose of PUD district to encourage more rational, efficient and cost-effective development with relationship to public services while enhancing and improving the environmental quality of the area. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.60.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Any group of permitted uses in any zoning district in these regulations, provided that there is distinct compatibility and harmony among the uses, with no adverse effects on the adjoining use. 
B.  No use shall be permitted in the PUD district except in conformity with the city comprehensive plan and the precise development plan prepared to meet the requirement of this district. 
C.  In a PUD district the uses and their intensity, appearance and arrangement shall be of such visual and operational character which: (1) Are compatible with the physical nature of the site or area; (2) Would not adversely affect the provisions for public services; (3) Would not create a traffic or parking demand incompatible with the existing or proposed facilities. 
D.  The PUD district shall not adversely affect the economic prosperity of Devils Lake or its extraterritorial planning area. 
E.  The PUD district shall include assurances that the proposed plan would be completed in a manner that would not adversely affect the city or the area as a result of termination. The terms of the assurances shall address financial and development considerations in sufficient detail as may be required by the city. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.60.030 - Site requirements. 
A.  There shall be no predetermined requirements for lot area, lot width, building height and yards, but such requirements are made a part of an approved, recorded, and detailed development plan: 
B.  The minimum land parcel for PUD district shall be five acres. 
C.  In PUD district the location, number and configuration of parking spaces shall be a part of the detailed development plan. 
D.  In PUD district the location, type and size of signs shall be a part of the detailed development plan. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.60.040 - Development plan. 
A.  Where a development plan is required for a tract of land, the following shall be included in the plan: 
B.  Location of existing property lines, buildings, drives, streams, wooded areas and other significant natural features; 
C.  General layout of proposed streets and location of blocks for designated uses; 
D.  Location of open spaces and facilities for public uses; 
E.  Existing drainage pattern based on the available topographic information from the U.S. Geological Survey Maps and other similar information; 
F.  The development plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equaling four hundred feet; 
G.  The city planning commission may require other information as a part of the development plan. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.60.050 - Data submission requirements. 
A.  A general map of the area showing existing land use, zoning, street pattern and traffic data; 
B.  Detailed development plan showing: 
1.  Lot layout and street pattern, 
2.  Grading and storm water drainage plan, 
3.  Location of open spaces and recreational areas, 
4.  Location and description of any areas to be dedicated to the public; 
C.  Proof of financial capability; 
D.  Analysis of economic impacts; 
E.  Agreements, by-laws, provisions and covenants which insures the timely and satisfactory completion of the project without posing a burden on the city or adjoining properties. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.60.060 - Review and approval procedure. 
A.  The city planning commission shall review the proposed plan and it may require additional information and may require modification of the plan before it makes its recommendations to the board of city commissioners after a public hearing. 
B.  The board of city commissioners upon holding a public hearing may approve, deny or further modify the development plan. A developer's agreement spelling out all financial responsibilities of the developer and the city to be approved subsequently. 
C.  Upon approval of the board of city commissioners, the detailed development plan shall be recorded with the Ramsey County Register of deeds and the original plan be kept on file in the office of the code administrator. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 17.64 - AG AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.64.010 - Purpose. 
    The AG agricultural district is primarily established to continue the agricultural uses customarily found on agricultural lands. The AG agricultural district is to serve as an interim step for change to an appropriate zoning district as the land becomes feasible for development. For an AG agriculture district, in promoting the general provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the specific intent of this section is: 
A.  To encourage the continued use of land for agricultural use; 
B.  To prohibit scattered commercial and industrial use of land, and to prohibit any other use which would interfere with an integrated and efficient development of the land for more intensive urban uses as the city and townships in the extraterritorial area expands. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.64.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Accessory family buildings and uses; 
B.  General farming and dairying, including any uses incidental to farming; 
C.  Home occupation; 
D.  Manufactured home units with a minimum overall front width of twenty-four feet, minimum overall depth of twenty feet, and minimum main floor living space square footage of nine hundred square feet; 
E.  Single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.64.030 - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses shall not be within five hundred feet of any residential district. 
A.  Churches and cemeteries; 
B.  Golf Courses; 
C.  Parks and playgrounds; 
D.  Public and private schools; 
E.  Stockpiling of sand and gravel for road construction and maintenance. Rock crushers, concrete and asphalt mixing plants, sand and gravel pits or any other such excavation shall comply with regulations as established by the engineering department; 
F.  Construction and maintenance of drainage systems to manage the water run-off; 
G.  Utility lines and pipes including substations for transformers, pumping stations and lift stations; 
H.  Water reservoirs and waste water treatment facilities; 
I.  Radio and television stations and towers; 
J.  Storage of agricultural products and chemicals including anhydrous ammonia storage tanks and fuel tanks for commercial purposes. 
K.  Fairgrounds. 
L.  Medical marijuana manufacturing. Subject to Chapter 19-24.1 NDCC, Article 33-44 of the North Dakota Administrative Rules, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
    Unless approved by the planning commission, conditional uses will not be located less than five hundred feet from a residential district. If it is determined by the planning commission the conditional use will not be injurious to the surrounding premises or residential neighborhood, the planning commission may approve such conditional use or stipulate special conditions and restrictions as deemed necessary. 
(Ord. 856 (part), 2003: Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 954, 5-21-18) 
17.64.040 - Density. 
    One single-family dwelling shall be allowed for each tract of land not less than a quarter-quarter section in size provided that such tract shall contain at least thirty-five acres. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.64.050 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  The lot area in AG district shall not be less than thirty-five acres. 
B.  The lot width in AG district shall not be less than three hundred feet. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.64.060 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front yard, measured from the front lot line, shall not be less than fifty feet. 
B.  The minimum rear yard, measured from the rear lot line, shall not be less than thirty feet. 
C.  The minimum side yard, measured from the side lot line, shall not be less than ten feet. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.64.070 - Building height. 
    The building height in AG district shall not exceed two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet except farm-related and communication structures. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.64.080 - Parking. 
    For nonfarm uses the provisions of Section 17.76.020 shall apply. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.64.090 - Signs. 
A.  Signs in AG agricultural district shall be no larger than twenty square feet in area for permitted uses. 
B.  Signs for conditional uses shall be no larger than thirty square feet in area. 
C.  Signs may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type but shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 17.68 - FP FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 788. 

17.68.010 - Applicability of chapter. 
    The FP floodplain district consists of the lands which have been or may be covered by flood water as delineated on the maps for the city of Devils Lake and the Township of Creel, in Ramsey County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for administration of the National Flood Insurance Program or other maps and information provided by the state of North Dakota. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.68.020 - Purpose. 
    The FP floodplain district is primarily established to designate those areas which need to accommodate the run-off water and to protect the public and private property from the adverse effects of flooding by prohibiting development on the lands prone to flooding. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.68.030 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Agricultural uses including general farming, pasture, grazing and related uses provided that the buildings and structures for human habitation are flood proofed; 
B.  Nonstructural uses including ponding of run-off water and treated waste water; 
C.  Public utilities including railroads, streets, channels, and pipelines; 
D.  Outdoor recreational uses including golf course, bicycle trails, picnic areas and board launching ramps. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.68.040 - Conditional uses. 
    Temporary buildings and structures not related to flood control and farming such as stands, fences, shelters, temporary signs and temporary parking. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.68.050 - Building height. 
    No building shall be more than two and one-half stories or thirty-five feet high excepting farm silos. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
17.68.060 - Signs. 
    Temporary signs shall be no larger than thirty square feet in area. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999) 
Chapter 17.72 - PUB PUBLIC FACILITIES DISTRICT 

17.72.010 - Purpose. 
    The PUB public facilities district is primarily established to accommodate public buildings and facilities and assist in orderly development of the city. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.72.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Accessory buildings and uses; 
B.  Airports and heliports; 
C.  Cemeteries; 
D.  Churches; 
E.  City and municipal buildings; 
F.  Colleges; 
G.  Community centers; 
H.  Golf courses; 
I.  Governmental buildings and uses; 
J.  Grade schools and kindergartens; 
K.  High schools; 
L.  Middle schools; 
M.  Parks and open spaces; 
N.  Private schools; 
O.  Radio and television stations and towers; 
P.  Waste water lift stations; 
Q.  Waste water pumping stations; 
R.  Waste water treatment facilities; 
S.  Water pumping stations; 
T.  Water reservoirs; 
U.  Water towers and treatment facilities. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.72.030 - Lot area and lot width. 
A.  The minimum lot area for PUB district shall be five acres. 
B.  The minimum lot width for PUB district shall be three hundred feet. 
C.  The maximum lot coverage excluding parking area shall be fifty percent of the lot. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.72.040 - Yard requirements. 
A.  The minimum front building line, measured from the front lot line, shall be fifty feet. 
B.  The minimum rear building line, measured from the rear lot line, shall be fifty feet. 
C.  The minimum distance between buildings and structures shall be thirty feet for a two-story building, forty feet for buildings higher than four stories. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.72.050 - Building height. 
    The building height in PUB district shall be subject to the provisions of the airport ordinance. 
(Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.72.060 - Signs. 
    Signs in PUB district shall be no larger than sixty square feet in area. Signs may be wall, pedestal, ground or projection type but shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 827 (part), 1999: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 17.74 - COFFEE KIOSKS 

17.74.010 - Purpose. 
    To regulate and permit the establishment of coffee kiosks within the city of Devils Lake and its extra territorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 859 (part), 2003) 
17.74.020 - Definition. 
    A "coffee kiosk" means a freestanding structure designed and commercially constructed to allow drivers to remain in their motor vehicles while purchasing coffee, espresso, tea, other beverages and approved pre-packaged beverages and/or baked goods from approved facilities from a drive-up window for consumption off premises and that provides no indoor or outdoor seating. 
(Ord. 859 (part), 2003) 
17.74.030 - Permit required. 
    A "temporary use" permit must be obtained from the code administrator before establishing a coffee kiosk. 
(Ord. 859 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
17.74.040 - Uses permitted. 
    Coffee kiosks or other drive-up food and beverage facilities are subject to special conditions in Section 17.74.050. 
(Ord. 859 (part), 2003) 
17.74.050 - Special conditions. 
A.  The applicant shall submit an application for a temporary use which will include: 
1.  Name and address of applicant; 
2.  Address of proposed site; 
3.  Proof off ownership or statement from owner allowing use/lease agreement; 
4.  Proposed site layout showing proposed location of building or use area; 
5.  Written description of use(s); 
6.  General description of goods or services sold and times of operation; 
7.  Proposed signing/advertising locations and sizes; 
8.  Site circulation, traffic flows or pattern and off-street parking stalls and drive isles; 
9.  Dimensions of all parking stalls and drive isles; 
10.  Setbacks and property lines on public and private streets; 
11.  Size and dimensions of kiosk. 
B.  No kiosk shall block, impede or hinder the flow of traffic on or surrounding the lot in which the kiosk is proposed to be located. The kiosk shall not cause congestion on or near any lot access approaches. No fire lane can be blocked by either the structure or patrons of the kiosk. 
C.  The structure must be located on a paved surface. 
D.  A minimum of five off-street parking spaces is required, as well as a space allowed for four stacked vehicles or fifty feet. 
E.  Business signs, limited to flat wall signs are permitted on the structure. No sign attached to the structure shall extend above the roof or extend past the wall to which it is attached. The sign may be illuminated by stationary white lighting only. 
F.  The design and operation of the structure shall comply with all codes, rules and regulations imposed or enforced by the City of Devils Lake fire department, engineering department and building department. 
G.  All fees imposed by the City of Devils Lake shall be paid before application will be processed. 
H.  Any permit issued for the operation of a coffee kiosk is valid for one year only and may be renewed on an annual basis. A non-refundable fee shall be set by the fees and rates to be adopted by the Devils Lake city commission. 
I.  The structure may not exceed one hundred fifty square feet. 
J.  The structure will not be permanent but rather shall be a moveable structure having skids or wheels. 
(Ord. 859 (part), 2003) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
Chapter 17.76 - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

17.76.010 - Nonconforming uses. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the regulations of nonconforming buildings and uses and to specify those circumstances and conditions which adversely affect the maintenance, development, use or taxable value of other property in the area and whether shall be permitted to continue or shall be discontinued. 
B.  Authority to Continue. Any nonconforming building or use which existed lawfully and conforming at the time of adoption of these regulations and which has become nonconforming upon adoption of these regulations may be continued. But if the nonconforming use or occupancy is discontinued for a period of more than twelve consecutive calendar months any subsequent use or occupancy of the premises shall be a conforming use or occupancy. 
C.  Change or Expansion of Use. Whenever the use of a building becomes a nonconforming use through a change in zoning regulations or change in district boundaries, the use may be continued if no structural alterations are made. A nonconforming building which is nonconforming as to bulk, shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such changes are made to conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
D.  Repairs and Alterations. Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming building, provided that no structural alterations be made except to make the building or use conforming to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
E.  Restoration of Damaged Building. Whenever a building is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty to the extent of more than sixty percent of its replacement cost (as determined by the Marshall & Swift cost manual, it shall not be restored unless said building and use shall conform to all of the regulations of the district in which it is located. In the event such damage or destruction is less than sixty percent of such replacement cost, repairs or construction may be made within one year from the date of destruction. 
F.  Residential Uses in Nonresidential Districts. The other provisions of this section notwithstanding, any structure that is devoted to a nonconforming residential use may be sold, remodeled, extended, expanded, enlarged or rebuilt, provided that after the remodeling, extension, expansion, enlargement, or rebuilding, the structure may not be used to accommodate a greater number of dwelling units than the structure accommodated prior to the improvement. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 946, 9-18-2017) 
17.76.020 - Off-street parking. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the off-street parking regulations to: 
1.  Increase the safety and capacity of public streets by requiring off-street parking or loading facilities; 
2.  Minimize adverse effects of off-street parking and off-street loading facilities on the adjacent properties; 
3.  Lessen congestion and preventing the overtaxing of public streets by regulating the location and capacity of off-street parking or off-street loading facilities. 
B.  General Requirements. 
1.  An off-street parking space shall be at least nine feet wide and twenty feet long, exclusive of access drives or ramps and have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet. 
2.  All open off-street parking areas with four or more spaces and all loading berths shall be: 
a.  Improved with all-weather surface to provide a durable and dust-free surface; 
b.  Graded to dispose of all surface water run-off but not be diverted to adjoining properties; 
c.  Arranged and marketed to provide for orderly and safe parking; 
d.  Provided with access road of eight feet if a residence or fifteen feet if a nonresidential building; 
e.  Screened by wall, fence or landscaping from the street or from any residential or industrial property. 
3.  Off-street parking or loading facilities requirements shall be met on the same lot as the building served unless the adjoining lot is exclusively used for meeting the parking requirements of a building or use. 
C.  Special Requirements. No building shall be erected or enlarged to the extent of increasing the floor area by as much as fifty percent without meeting these requirements: 
1.  Bowling alley, four parking spaces for each alley. 
2.  Office uses: 
a.  Business, professional or public office building, studio, bank, medical or dental clinics, three parking spaces plus one additional space for each four hundred square feet of floor area over one thousand square feet; 
b.  Any high density office space such as, but not limited to, telemarketing establishments employing more than one person per one hundred square feet of total office area, three parking spaces plus one additional space for each two employees on any maximum working shift. 
3.  Church or a place of worship, one parking space for each four seats in the main building. 
4.  College, one parking space for each two employees. 
5.  Community center, library or museums, ten parking spaces, plus one additional space for each three hundred square feet of floor area in excess of two thousand square feet. 
6.  Funeral home, one parking space for each fifty square feet of floor space in the parlor and service rooms. 
7.  Hospital, one parking space for each bed. 
8.  Hotels, one parking space for each three rooms plus one space for each two hundred square feet of eating and drinking establishments or restaurants. 
9.  Industrial or manufacturing establishments, research or testing laboratories, dairies, bottling plants, warehouses or similar uses, one parking space for every two employees on the maximum working shift, plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection thereof. 
10.  Motels, one parking space per room. 
11.  Private club or lodge, one parking space for every ten members. 
12.  Residential uses: 
a.  Single-family, two spaces per unit. 
b.  Duplexes, two spaces per unit. 
c.  Multiple-family, one space for efficiency unit and two spaces for one bedroom or larger units. 
d.  Mobile home park, two spaces per unit. 
e.  Manufactured home district, two spaces per unit. 
13.  Restaurant, eating and drinking establishment, one parking space for each one hundred square feet of floor area. 
14.  Retail store and service establishment, one parking space for each two hundred square feet of floor area. 
15.  Rooming houses, boarding houses and lodging houses, one parking space for each two beds. 
16.  Sport arena, stadium, one parking space for each five seats. 
17.  Theater or auditorium, one parking space for each five seats. 
(Ord. 853 (part), 2003; Ord. 818 (part), 1997; Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.76.030 - Signs. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of regulating signs in the city is to provide for a visually-pleasant urban environment and minimize potentially unsafe street, highway and sidewalk conditions for all age groups, but yet offer many opportunities for public and private information and advertising. 
B.  General Requirements. 
1.  No sign shall be located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or structurally altered without obtaining a permit from the code administrator. Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the provisions of Section 17.76.010 of these regulations. 
2.  All signs, canopies, awnings and marquees shall be structurally safe and securely anchored, fastened or supported in order to protect the safety of persons or property. 
3.  No revolving beacon or fountain signs are permitted in any district, except such signs connected with the operation of the airport or public facilities. 
4.  No sign, canopy, awning or marquee in any district shall conflict in any manner with public devices controlling public traffic. 
5.  Publicly owned and maintained ground signs shall not be erected on the public right-of-way until reviewed by the planning commission and approved by the city commission. 
6.  Signs, canopies, awnings and marquees projecting over a street, public way or other public space shall project not more than two feet. Clearance below such signs shall be a minimum of nine feet. 
7.  Awnings that are collapsible, retractable or capable of being folded against the face of the supporting building, may in fully open position extend over public way no more than seven feet from the face of the supporting buildings, but no portion shall extend nearer than two feet to the face of the nearest curb line measured horizontally. In no case shall the awning extend over a public way greater than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the nearest curb in front of the building site. 
8.  Signs may be wall, pedestal, ground or projection type but shall not project into the public right-of-way or public property. 
C.  Special Requirements. 
1.  Signs in residential districts shall be limited to: 
a.  One sign per dwelling structure not exceeding two square feet in area which may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type; 
b.  One sign per lot or complex for identifying the apartment building, or condominiums with more than four residential units, or one sign per business not exceeding thirty-six square feet; 
c.  One temporary sign such as "For Sale," "For Rent," not exceeding six square feet in area; 
d.  Other temporary signs such as political campaign signs, greeting signs or rally signs. 
2.  Signs in the C-NGH and C-CAC districts and only for commercial uses shall be limited to: 
a.  Signs not exceeding fifty square feet in area which may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type; 
b.  Temporary signs, including "For Sale," "For Rent," political campaign signs, greeting signs and rally signs not exceeding thirty square feet in area. 
3.  There shall be no restriction for signs in C-HWY, I-LT and I-HVY districts. 
4.  Signs in special districts, excepting PUD district shall be limited to: 
a.  One sign per use not exceeding twenty square feet in area which may be wall, pedestal, ground or projecting type; 
b.  Location and size of the signs for PUD district shall be a part of the detailed site plan. 
5.  Signs for conditional uses shall be consistent with the provisions for the district in which they are located and the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008; Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
17.76.040 - Accessory buildings. 
A.  Accessory buildings serving as private garages may be built in a rear yard but shall not occupy more than thirty percent of the rear yard and shall not be nearer than three feet to any side lot line or rear lot line, except that when a garage is entered from an alley at a right angle, it shall not be located closer than ten feet to the alley line. If the private garage is located closer than ten feet to the main building the garage shall be regarded as a part of the main building for the purposes of determining side yards and rear yards. Accessory buildings serving as storage garages shall not be nearer than five feet to any side or rear lot line. 
B.  No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot without a habitable dwelling or until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes. 
C.  Total combined area of all detached accessory buildings on lots less than forty thousand square feet in size shall not occupy more than ten percent of the lot area nor be larger than one thousand two hundred square feet. 
    The maximum total sidewall height shall not exceed ten feet. When lot sizes are forty thousand square feet or greater in size, building coverage of detached accessory structures shall not exceed the size as shown on Table 17.76.040. The first seven hundred twenty square feet of attached garage is exempt from these limitations. 
Table 17.76.040 
Lot Size Maximum Size of Accessory Structure Maximum Wall Height Maximum Overall Height Minimum Distance to Property Lines 40,000 sq. ft. to 2 Ac. 2,400 sq. ft. 14 feet 25 feet 15 feet +2 Ac. to 3 Ac. 3,200 sq. ft. 14 feet 25 feet 15 feet +3 Ac. to 4 Ac. 4,000 sq. ft. 14 feet 25 feet 15 feet +4 Ac. to 5 Ac. 5,000 sq. ft. 14 feet 25 feet 15 feet +5 Act. to 10 Ac. 6,000 sq. ft. 14 feet 25 feet 15 feet  
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 856 (part), 2003: Ord. 853 (part), 2003; Ord. 837 (part), 2000: Ord. 818 (part), 1997; Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.76.050 - Front yard adjustments. 
    The front yards established in these regulations shall be adjusted in the following cases: 
A.  Where forty percent or more of the frontage on the same side of streets between two intersecting streets is developed with two or more buildings that have, with a variation of five feet or less, a front yard greater in depth than required in these regulations, new buildings shall not be erected closer to streets than the front yard so established by the existing building nearest the street line. 
B.  Where forty percent or more of the frontage on one side of street between two intersecting streets is developed with two or more buildings that have a front yard of less depth than required in these regulations, the following shall govern: 
1.  Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land is within one hundred feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard shall be a line drawn between the two closest front corners of the adjacent building on each side. 
2.  Where a building to be erected on a parcel of land that is within one hundred feet of an existing building on one side only, the building may be erected as close to the street as the existing adjacent building. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.76.060 - Yards for corner lots. 
    The required side yard on a corner lot shall be one-half the required front yard provided that no adjacent structures front along the side yard street, in which case, the entire required front yard must be provided and no accessory building shall project beyond the required front yard on either side. 
(Ord. 818 (part), 1997) 
17.76.070 - Porch, terrace or vestibule. 
A.  Projection into Front Yard. An open, unenclosed porch or deck may project into a required front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet. 
B.  Projection into Side Yard. An open, unenclosed porch or deck that does not extend more than three feet above the floor level of the ground story may project into the required side yard provided they are at least two feet from the adjacent side lot line. 
(Ord. 856 (part), 2003: Ord. 818 (part), 1997) 
17.76.080 - Aboveground fuel tanks. 
    The installation of any aboveground fuel tanks in any district within the city shall not be allowed without successful completion of the procedures outlined in Chapter 17.84, including Section 17.84.020, Conditional use permits. 
(Ord. 818 (part), 1997) 
17.76.090 - Moving permits. 
    Prior to issuance of a moving permit, the owner of the house or structure to be moved within or into the city or extraterritorial planning area shall comply with the following: 
A.  Submit a map indicating the streets over which said house or structure is to be moved. Secure approval from the building official showing that he had previously inspected the house or structure and the requirements for construction, alteration or repairs necessary to place said building in conformance with the building code and other pertinent ordinances of the city. 
B.  If the house or structure that will be moved is located within the city, the owner shall also agree that he will remove all rubbish and material from the present site, fill all excavations to existing grade, and discontinue water and sewer services to the satisfaction of city regulations. 
C.  The owner shall contact both the police and fire departments notifying them of the proposed move and obtaining from them a written statement that the move would not hinder the normal performance of their responsibilities to the citizens of the city. 
D.  The owner shall also agree that he will notify the building official prior to moving the house or structure and prior to any construction or alteration thereon and request inspection as required by such building code as adopted by the city of Devils Lake. 
E.  The owner shall obtain a petition signed by seventy-five percent of the property owners within three hundred feet of the proposed building site waiving objection to the proposed placement of the house or structure. Said petition shall include a photo or photos of the house or structure. Wording of the petition shall include reference to the attached photo(s) to ensure that signers have viewed the photo(s). 
F.  The owner shall have secured all permits and licenses necessary to accomplish the move. The owner may be required to display required permit by the building official. 
G.  The owner shall demonstrate that he or his representative has secured insurance in the amounts necessary to indemnify any parties involved for any loss as a result of the move. 
H.  If any house or structure is to be moved into the limits of the city's jurisdiction from outside the city's jurisdiction, the owner shall deposit sufficient money with the city auditor to cover the cost to the city for conducting required inspections to the structure to be moved into the city. Such costs shall include, but not be limited to: mileage, meals, lodging (if required), and the inspector's salary. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008: Ord. 853 (part), 2003: Ord. 823 (part), 1998: Ord. 783 (part), 1994: Ord. 751 (part), 1990: Ord. 687 (part), 1986) 
17.76.100 - Fences, hedges and walls in residential districts. 
A.  The maximum height of any residential fence shall be six and one-half feet. 
B.  All fences shall be constructed of approved fencing material. 
C.  Fences adjacent to public sidewalks must be held back a minimum of two feet from the sidewalk edge. 
D.  Placement of sight-obscuring fences, hedges or walls along intersections, alleys, and driveways is regulated to prevent sight restrictions and promote safety for vehicles and pedestrians. In any case fences, hedges, walls and obstructions shall not interfere with traffic and must comply with: 
1.  Sight obscuring fences exceeding thirty-six inches in height (forty-eight inches if seventy-five percent light permeable) will not be permitted to extend beyond established front yard setbacks. 
2.  No sight obscuring fence, hedge, wall or obstruction greater than twenty-four inches in height, measured from the top of the nearest curb, may be placed within the sight triangle formed from the corner of a right-of-way intersection in each direction for a distance of twenty feet. This distance is to be measured from the face of the curb. 
3.  No sight obscuring fence, hedge, wall or obstruction greater than twenty-four inches in height, measured from the top of the nearest curb, shall be placed within the sight triangle formed from the corner of the intersection with an alley a distance of ten feet in each direction. These distances are to be measured from the alley right-of-way line and the street right-of-way line. 
4.  No sight obscuring fence, hedge, wall or obstruction greater than twenty-four inches in height, measured from the top of the nearest curb, shall be constructed within the sight triangle formed from the corner of a driveway and a public right-of-way for a distance of ten feet. These distances shall be measured from the driveway and property line. 
5.  A fence must be completely installed on the owner's property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to know the location of property lines. 
(Ord. 879 (part), 2008) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10) 
17.76.110 - Excavating permits. 
    There shall be no excavation or reclamation of areas disturbed by activities whose intent is the removal of earthen materials (borrow, sand, gravel, rock, or any other surface minerals) within the city's zoning jurisdiction, without first obtaining from the city an excavating permit. The requirements to obtain an excavating permit, will be set by the Devils Lake city commission. The fee to obtain an excavating permit will be set by the fees and rates of the City of Devils Lake. 
(Ord. No. 891, 8-16-10) 
17.76.120 - Provisions for allowing animals in suburban residential district. 
A.  The type and number of animals that will be allowed are as follows: 
1.  Small Animals. Include hen chickens, rabbits, ducks, geese, or other small animals as approved by the city. Properties shall be allowed five small animals for the first two acres and one small animal per additional acre of lot area. 
2.  Large Animals. Include cows, horses, sheep, goats, or other large animals as approved by the city. Properties shall be allowed two large animals for the first two acres and one large animal for each additional three acres of lot area. 
B.  Animals shall only be allowed on the same parcel as an owner-occupied single family residence. 
C.  Nuisance factors such as dust, odor, noise, clutter, etc. must be managed as not to negatively impact neighboring properties. 
D.  The area where animals are to be kept shall be fenced. 
E.  Large animals shall not be located within one hundred feet of neighboring residence(s). 
(Ord. No. 936, 3-7-16) 
17.76.130 - Provisions for allowing accessory dwelling units in residential zoning districts. 
A.  No more than one accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on each lot or parcel. 
B.  Accessory dwelling units will only be permitted on lots or parcels that are zoned for and contain a detached single family residential structure as the principal use. 
C.  An accessory dwelling unit must be contained completely within a primary structure, or contained within a detached structure that meets the size and setback requirements of this Code. 
D.  Either the principal structure or accessory dwelling unit must be occupied by the owner of the property. Occupants of both structures must be members of the same family or providers of home and/or medical support services. 
E.  One off street parking space must be provided for an accessory dwelling unit. Parking spaces are required to be located on an improved surface approved by the City. Parking spaces may be located in an existing driveway. 
F.  Size requirements of accessory dwelling units (ADU): 
1.  Units within primary structure: The floor area of an ADU may not exceed forty percent of the gross floor area of the main floor living area of the primary structure. Living areas exclude attached garages, decks, etc. Total square footage of the ADU may not exceed eight hundred square feet and must be a minimum of three hundred square feet. 
2.  An ADU within a principal structure may not reduce the required minimum square footage (nine hundred square feet) of the main floor of a single-family home. 
3.  ADU located in detached structure: the maximum square footage of an ADU may not exceed eight hundred square feet and must be a minimum of three hundred square feet. 
4.  The combined square footage of the primary structure and an ADU may not exceed the maximum lot coverage for the underlying zoning district. 
G.  Minimum setback requirements for detached accessory dwelling units (ADU): 
1.  Front - must meet the minimum front yard setback of underlying zoning district and must meet or exceed the front setback of the principal structure. 
2.  Side - must meet current side yard setback requirements for principal structure in the underlying zoning district. 
3.  Rear - minimum setback for structure will be ten feet from rear property line. 
H.  Detached ADU are limited to a single story with no basement. 
I.  An ADU on any lot that does not conform to minimum lot size of the underlying zoning district will not be allowed. 
J.  Accessory dwelling units must be connected to public utilities, if available, either through connection to principal structure utilities or through direct connection to ADU structure. If public utilities are not available, the applicant must show that sufficient sewage treatment and disposal is available on-site. 
K.  An accessory dwelling unit must comply with all residential building code requirement in Title 15 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code. 
L.  An accessory dwelling unit may be occupied by no more than one family as defined in Title 17 of the Devils Lake Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 945, 12-5-16) 
17.76.131 - Conditional use permit submittal for accessory dwelling units. 
A.  A building plan that demonstrates compliance with all requirements of the residential building code. 
B.  For all new construction of an accessory structure, a site plan is required. The site plan must show, to scale, the location and dimensions of the building, all required setbacks, and any easements on the property. 
C.  For all accessory dwelling units that would not comply with required parking, a parking plan must be submitted to the City for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Commission. 
D.  Termination of Conditional Use Permit. A conditional use permit for an accessory dwelling shall automatically expire if the permitted dwelling unit is substantially altered and no longer in conformance with these provisions, the owner of the property no longer occupies one of the units, the required parking is no longer maintained and available for use by the occupant, or the permit is not put to use within twelve months of approval. 
(Ord. No. 945, 12-5-16) 
Chapter 17.78 - TEMPORARY USES 

17.78.010 - Purpose. 
    Intended to permit and regulate occasional, temporary uses and structures within the corporate limits of the City of Devils Lake that are consistent with the zoning code and are compatible with other nearby land uses. Such uses as defined must prove to be an accessory to the principal use on the parcel in which it is located. 
(Ord. 862 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-7-18) 
17.78.020 - Definition. 
A.  A "temporary use" means the use of land for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of permitted time period. 
B.  A "temporary structure" means a structure without any foundation or footings and does not require a building permit. Such building is constructed with the understanding that it will be taken down when the permitted time period has expired. Such structure(s) may not exceed five percent of the total parcel square footage. 
C.  A "temporary membrane structure" means a structure without any foundation or footings that does not require a building permit that is comprised of a support frame and a removable exterior membrane. Such building is constructed with the understanding that the membrane will be removed from the frame when the permitted time period has expired. The frame may remain up. Such structure(s) may not exceed five percent of the total parcel square footage. 
(Ord. 862 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-7-18) 
17.78.030 - Authority to approve. 
    Temporary uses are prohibited, except that the code administrator shall have the authority and responsibility to grant permits for certain temporary uses as provided in this section. 
(Ord. 862 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 953, 5-7-18) 
17.78.040 - Permit required. 
    A permit must be obtained from the code administrator before establishing a temporary use and/or structure. One temporary use permit, for a time period of one hundred eighty days, will be allowed per parcel for any calendar year, January 1 to December 31. Only one permit will be approved per parcel regardless of the number of temporary structures. 
(Ord. 862 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 953, 5-7-18) 
17.78.050 - Application procedure and requirements-Fee. 
    A complete application for a temporary use permit must be submitted to the engineering and planning department along with a non-refundable fee. No application will be processed until it is completed in full and the fee has been paid. 
A.  The completed application shall include: 
1.  Name and address of applicant; 
2.  Address of proposed site; 
3.  Proof of ownership or statement from owner allowing use; 
4.  Written description of use(s); 
5.  General description of goods or services sold and times of operation; 
6.  Proposed signing/advertising locations and sizes; 
7.  Proposed length of use and reasoning for it; 
8.  Proposed site layout showing location of temporary structure(s) or use area; 
9.  Parcel size and temporary structure(s) and/or use setbacks and measurements. 
B.  The following will not require an application, unless a temporary structure will be used, and are exempt from all fees: 
1.  Fund raising for public or non-profit organization; 
2.  Yard and garage sales, no longer than three days; 
3.  Auctions sales; 
4.  Storage containers in place for fewer than thirty days. 
C.  Structures used in conjunction with the sale of fireworks will not require a permit as stated in the ordinance codified in this chapter if used between June 25 and July 7 only. 
D.  Events sponsored by the City of Devils Lake chamber of commerce will not require an application and are exempt from all fees. 
E.  Application fees as stated in resolution of fees and rates. 
(Ord. 862 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 887, 7-6-10; Ord. No. 953, 5-7-18) 
17.78.060 - Permitted uses. 
    The following described temporary uses may be permitted in I-LT, I-HVY, C-HWY, C-CAC, and C-NGH zoning districts within the city provided such uses meet a minimum three-foot setback from property lines unless otherwise specified: 
A.  Greenhouses; 
B.  Plant and produce stands; 
C.  Sales tents, trailers, or other structures used to sell goods and services; 
D.  On-site storage tents and/or trailers to house inventory during construction or other unusual business interruptions; 
E.  Seasonal sales, ex. Christmas tree sales; 
F.  Temporary office trailers are allowed if a building permit for a permanent structure on the site is submitted to the city within ninety days of siting the temporary office trailer. A temporary office trailer may remain on the development site until the construction is completed. 
G.  Storage containers (Connex boxes, TriCons, Milvans, etc.) are allowed if located a minimum of three hundred feet from residentially zoned land or are completely screened from view by means of a privacy fence. 
(Ord. 862 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-7-18) 
17.78.070 - Time limit. 
    Temporary uses will be permitted for a total of one hundred eighty days (as per adopted state building code) in a calendar year, January 1 to December 31. Upon expiration of a temporary use permit, another permit may not be acquired for the same premises for thirty days. 
    Upon expiration of temporary use permit all temporary structures must be removed within fifteen days of expiration. Any applicant who does not comply with said removal will be cited in violation and may be subject to financial penalties. 
(Ord. 862 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-7-18) 
17.78.080 - Emergency uses. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title temporary activities and structures needed as the result of a natural disaster or other health and safety emergencies are allowed for the duration of the emergency. 
(Ord. 862 (part), 2004) 
(Ord. No. 953, 5-7-18) 
Chapter 17.80 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

17.80.010 - Organization. 
    Administration of these regulations is vested in three offices of the city: 
A.  The office of the code administrator; 
B.  The city planning commission; 
C.  The board of adjustment. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.80.020 - Office of the code administrator. 
    The code administrator is a duly appointed official authorized by the board of city commissioners and is responsible to administer zoning regulations, subdivision regulations, building code and housing code and to assist and make recommendations to the city planning commission, to the board of adjustment and to the board of city commissioners on any matter related to planning for and development of the city. 
A.  Duties and responsibilities. The code administrator shall be specifically responsible for interpretation and enforcement of these regulations including the issuance of zoning permits, building permits and occupancy permits. 
1.  Issue all zoning certificates and maintain records thereof; 
2.  Issue all building and repair permits; 
3.  Issue all certificates of occupancy for all buildings including mobile homes and manufactured homes; 
4.  Inspect all buildings, structures and use of land to determine compliance with these and other applicable regulations of the city; 
5.  Maintain zoning-related records and zoning district map including records of all amendments, conditional uses and variances; 
6.  Receive, file and forward the city planning commission all applications for zoning amendments and conditional uses; 
7.  Receive, file and forward to the board of adjustment all appeals for variances and special use permits; 
8.  Forward all recommendations of the city planning commission to the board of city commissioners for final action; 
9.  Notify in writing the property owner or user upon finding violation of these regulations and cite the nature of violation clearly and require compliance within a reasonable time. If the notification is not replied to or steps are not taken to correct the violations within thirty days, the code administrator shall make a report of the findings to the city attorney, and the board of city commissioners. 
B.  Interpretation of Regulations. All questions of interpretation of the regulations shall be first presented to the code administrator and that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the code administrator and that the recourse from the decision of the board of adjustment may be made by an appeal to the board of city commissioners. 
C.  Building Permit Application. Any person or persons intending to construct or reconstruct or relocate a building or make alteration, shall, before proceeding with the work, or commencing any excavation in connection with it, shall obtain a permit from the code administrator. All mobile homes and manufactured homes are required to comply with the manufactured housing and building code and are required to obtain a permit from the code administrator for placement and relocation thereof. 
1.  Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a legal description and a map showing the actual dimension of the lot to be built upon, the size, shape and location of the building for observing the yard requirements of these regulations. 
2.  The application shall specify the type of the building, structure, material of which it is composed, the part or portion of the lot to be occupied by the principal building and accessory buildings and the probable building cost, together with such additional plans and specifications as may be required by the code administrator. 
3.  The edition of the Uniform Building Code as published by the International Conference of Building Officials and adopted by the board of city commissioners, together with any amendments made hereafter are incorporated and made a part of these regulations. In the event there is a conflict between the Uniform Building Code and the regulations, these regulations shall supersede. 
D.  Building Permit. The code administrator shall issue a building permit if the proposed building or structure conforms to zoning and building provision of these regulations. If the code administrator denies a permit because of nonconformance with these regulations, he shall inform the applicant of his/her right to appeal to the board of adjustment. 
E.  Building Permit Fees. The code administrator shall charge and collect a fee according to the resolution of fees and schedules established by the city. 
F.  Certificate of Occupancy. The code administrator shall issue a certificate of occupancy upon inspection of the completed building, including placement of mobile homes and manufactured homes and assurance that all provisions and conditions set forth by the authority of these regulations are met. In the event the code administrator finds violations and deviations from the terms and conditions of these regulations, he shall make a report and recommendation for action to the board of city commissioners. 
G.  Conditional Use Permit. The code administrator shall issue a conditional use permit upon approval of the application by the board of city commissioners in which all conditions shall be stipulated subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.84 of these regulations. 
H.  Variances, Special Use Permits. The code administrator shall issue the appropriate permit if the board of adjustment or the board of city commissioners reverse his/her decision in case of an appeal by a citizen. The terms of the variance or special use shall be stipulated subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.84 of these regulations. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.80.030 - The city planning commission authority. 
    The city planning commission, a citizen body, nominated by the mayor and confirmed by the board of city commissioners, is vested with authority and jurisdiction to review planning, annexation, zoning, subdivision and city development matters and make recommendation to the board of city commissioners. 
A.  Membership. The city planning commission shall consist of no more than ten members, with two members who reside outside of the city corporate limits but within the extraterritorial zoning area and to be appointed by the Ramsey County Board of Commissioners. Five citizen members are nominated by the mayor and appointed by the board of city commissioners. The other three voting members shall consist of the mayor, city attorney and the city engineer. The term of office for members representing the city shall be three years and overlapping which may be reviewed by the board of city commissioners. The term of office for members appointed by the county, one shall be for five years and one for three years. 
B.  Duties and Responsibilities. 
1.  To hear and act on all applications for amendments to zoning districts and make recommendations to the board of city commissioners for approval, denial or approval with modification; 
2.  To hear and act on all applications for conditional uses in the manner prescribed in these regulations and make recommendations to the board of city commissioners for approval or denial; 
3.  To hear and act on all other matters referred to by the board of city commissioners; 
4.  To study, examine and make recommendations to the board of city commissioners regarding comprehensive planning for the future development of Devils Lake. 
C.  Officers. The city planning commission shall elect its own officers according to its by-laws and may establish rules and procedures for all cases before it. The code administrator may serve as nonvoting secretary. 
D.  Notice of Hearings. The city planning commission shall fix a reasonable date for hearing of applications for zoning district amendments, conditional use permits and other matters before it, give public notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least one week prior to the hearing. The notices shall state the purpose of the hearing and that the applications and supporting documents for zoning district amendments and conditional use permits are available for public inspection in the office of the code administrator during the normal working hours. 
E.  Meetings. Meetings of the city planning commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the city planning commission may determine. All meetings shall be open to the public and any person may testify for or against a petition. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.80.040 - Board of adjustment authority. 
    The board of adjustment, a citizen body, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the board of city commissioners, is vested with authority and jurisdiction to review and act upon all applications for appeal regarding the interpretation and restrictions of these regulations. 
A.  Membership. The board of adjustment shall consist of no more than five members serving for three-year overlapping terms. 
B.  Duties and Responsibilities. 
1.  To hear and decide all appeals forwarded by the code administrator; 
2.  To hear and decide all matters referred by the board of city commissioners; 
3.  To hear other matters related to the interpretation and administration of these regulations. 
C.  Appeals. Appeals to the board of adjustment concerning interpretation or administration of these regulations may be taken by any person. The appeal shall be taken within sixty days by filing with the code administrator a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The code administrator shall forward to the board of adjustment all papers constituting the record and his comments on this matter. 
D.  Notice of Hearings. The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals, give pub-lic notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, at least one week prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the purpose of the hearing and that the application and supporting documents for appeal are available for public inspection in the office of the code administrator during normal working hours. 
E.  Meetings. All meetings of the board of adjustment are open to the public and any one may testify for or against the application for appeal. 
F.  Authority to Reverse, Affirm Decisions. The board of adjustment may reverse or affirm in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination appeal from the decision of the code administrator. The decision of the board of adjustment on variances and special use permits shall be final, but an appeal may be made to the board of city commissioners for further review and action. 
G.  Action for Reversal of Decisions. The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment is necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the code administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to decide under these regulations or to affect any variation in the application of these regulations. 
H.  Rules and Procedures. The board of adjustment shall elect its officers and may establish rules and pro-cedures for review of all cases before it. Members may be removed from office by the board of city commissioners for cause after a public hearing. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.80.050 - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of these regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements including the conditions for modification of use, building or structure shall upon conviction thereof forfeit not more than five hundred dollars and in addition pay all cost and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
Chapter 17.84 - PROCEDURES FOR AMENDMENTS, CONDITIONAL USES AND VARIANCES 

17.84.010 - Zoning district amendments. 
A.  Public Hearing Notice. The city planning commission shall hold a public hearing, a notice of which shall be published at least one week prior to the hearing in the official newspaper of the city. The notice of hearing shall include: (1) the time and place of hearing; (2) description of the property by street address for platted lands and clearly identifiable location for the unplatted lands; (3) the proposed use and requested zoning district change; (4) time and place for public inspection of the documents in the city offices before the hearing. 
B.  Public Hearing. The city planning commission at the hearing shall listen to all persons who may speak in support of or in opposition to the proposal. Upon the completion of its review, the city planning commission shall make recommendations to the board of city commissioners for approval, denial or modification of the petition. The city planning commission may require additional information before it completes its findings and recommendations. 
C.  Data Submission Requirements. Petitions for zoning district change and conditional uses shall be submitted with the following information: 
1.  Legal description of the area proposed to be rezoned, the name and addresses of all owners of property lying within such area; 
2.  A list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties within one hundred fifty feet of the proposed property, excluding the width of the streets rights-of-way; 
3.  A map showing the existing land uses and zoning district classification of the area; 
4.  A site plan showing buildings and uses in the zoning district proposed to be changed and the requested zoning district classification; 
5.  A fee shall be paid in accordance with the schedule established by the board of city commissioners. 
D.  Deliberation and Decision. Following the hearing, the city planning commission, upon due deliberation, shall make a report of its findings and recommendations on the proposed amendment to the board of city commissioners within thirty days after the hearing. If no recommendations are transmitted by the city planning commission within thirty days after the hearing, the board of city commissioners may take action without awaiting such recommendations. 
    In making its finding, the city planning commission shall ascertain that the proposal for zoning district amendment is consistent with the city comprehensive plan and meets all requirements of these regulations and other regulations of the city. 
E.  Effect of Protest. If a protest against zoning district change is signed by twenty percent of: (1) owners of the property within the proposed site; or (2) twenty percent of the owners of the adjoining properties within one hundred fifty feet of the site excluding street rights-of-way, the city planning commission shall make a notice of statutory protest in transmitting its recommendation to the board of city commissioners, where a vote of three-fourths of all commissioners is necessary to approve the zoning district change. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.84.020 - Conditional use permits. 
A.  Purpose. The development of these regulations is based upon division of the city into districts, within which district the use of land and building bulk and locations of building and structures are mutually compatible and substantially harmonious. However, there are certain uses which, because of their unique characteristics, cannot be properly classified as permitted uses in any particular district, without consideration, in each case, of impact of those uses upon neighboring premises. Such uses, nevertheless, may be necessary or desirable to be allowed in a particular district provided that due to consideration is given to location, development and operation of such uses. 
B.  Public Hearing Notice. Shall be the same as the provisions set forth for public hearing notice for zoning district amendment in Section 17.84.010(A). 
C.  Public Hearing. Shall be the same as the provisions set forth for public hearing for zoning district amendment in Section 17.84.010(B). 
D.  Data Submission Requirements. Shall be the same as the provisions set forth for data submission requirements for zoning district amendment in Section 17.84-010(C). 
E.  Deliberation and Decision. Shall be the same as the provisions set forth for deliberation and decision for zoning district amendment in Section 17.84.0120(D). 
F.  Standards. No application for conditional use shall be recommended for approval unless the city planning commission finds that all of the following conditions are present: 
1.  That the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use will not be detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare; 
2.  That the uses, values and enjoyment of other property in the neighborhood for purposes already permitted shall be in no foreseeable manner substantially impaired or diminished by the establishment, maintenance or operation of the conditional use; 
3.  That the establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district; 
4.  That adequate utilities, access roads, drainage and other necessary site improvements have been or are being provided; 
5.  That adequate measures have been or will be taken to provide ingress and egress so designed as to minimize traffic congestion in the public streets; 
6.  That the conditional use shall substantially conform to all applicable regulations of the district in which it is located. 
G.  Conditions and Guarantees. 
1.  Prior to the decision on any conditional use, the city planning commission may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the conditional use as deemed necessary to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the community, and to secure compliance with the standards and requirements specified in subsection F of this section. In all cases in which conditional uses are granted, the city planning commission shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with. 
2.  No alteration of a conditional use shall be permitted unless approved by the board of city commissioners. Where the board of city commissioners has approved or conditionally approved an application for a conditional use, such approval shall become null and void within twelve months of the date of the board of city commissioners action unless the use is commenced, construction is underway or the current owner possesses a valid building permit. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.84.030 - Variances and special use permits. 
    Variance from the terms of these regulations shall be granted provided that the applicant establishes proof of practical difficulty or undue hardship. 
A.  Public Hearing Notice. The board of adjustment shall hold a public hearing, a notice of which shall be published at least one week prior to the hearing (NDCC 40-47-04) in the official newspaper of the city. The notice of hearing shall include: (1) the time and place of hearing; (2) description of the property by street address for platted lands and clearly identifiable location for the unplatted lands; (3) the proposed use and requested zoning district change; (4) time and place for public inspection of the documents in the City Hall before the hearing. 
B.  Public Hearing. The board of adjustment at the hearing shall listen to all persons who may speak in support of or in opposition to the proposal. Upon the completion of its review, the board of adjustment shall approve, deny or modify the proposal. The board of adjustment may require additional information before it completes its findings and decision. Any denial of a request by the board of adjustment shall stand for a period of one year from the date of the hearing unless a significant change in the nature of the request or the circumstances involved exist, as determined by the board of adjustment. Further, the board of adjustment may waive the one-year time restriction. 
C.  Data Submission Requirements. Petitions for variances or special use permits shall be submitted with the following information: 
1.  Legal description of the area proposed to be rezoned, the name and addresses of all owners of property lying within such area; 
2.  A list of the names and addresses of the owners of all properties within one hundred fifty feet, excluding the street rights-of-way; 
3.  A map showing the existing land uses and zoning district classification of the area; 
4.  A site plan showing the existing buildings and uses and the requested changes; 
5.  A fee shall be paid in accordance with the schedule established by the board of city commissioners. 
D.  Deliberation and Decision. In making its finding, the board of adjustment shall ascertain that the request for variance is consistent with the city comprehensive plan and meets all requirements of the regulations and other regulations of the city. 
E.  Standards. No application for variance or special use permit shall be approved unless the board of adjustments finds that all of the following are present. 
1.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the premises and which are not applicable to other premises in the same zoning district; 
2.  That literal interpretation of these regulations would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district; 
3.  That the special conditions and circumstances have not resulted from actions of the applicant; 
4.  That granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privileges that are denied by these regulations to other premises. 
F.  Justification. 
1.  That the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance; 
2.  The variance is the minimum which would make possible a reasonable use of the premises; 
3.  That the granting of variance will be in harmony with the general purpose of these regulations and will not be injurious to the surrounding premises, neighborhood or the city and will not be contrary to the comprehensive plan and the purposes of these regulations; 
4.  That there is practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship in use of the premises if the strict application of the regulations were to be carried out. 
G.  Authorized Variances. A variance shall not be granted for any yard or setback less than the yard or setback as required by these regulations. 
1.  To reduce not by more than twenty percent the applicable requirements for lot area and lot width; 
2.  To reduce the applicable off-street parking or loading facilities by no more than fifty percent of the requirements; 
3.  To permit the use of lot of record if it is smaller than the minimum size required by these regulations; 
4.  To permit roof alterations to provide additional windows, headroom or area for occupancy of third level; 
5.  To permit conversion of an existing building to a permitted residential use provided that it shall not conflict with the above standards cited in subsections (E) and (F) of this section. 
(Ord. 818 (part), 1997; Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
17.84.040 - Action of the board of city commissioners. 
A.  Initiation of Amendment. Amendments may be proposed by the board of city commissioners, the city planning commission, the board of adjustment or any person, firm, corporation or organization which has a freehold interest or contractual interest in a building, structure, lot or parcel of land. 
B.  Application for Amendment. Application for an amendment shall be filed with the code administrator who shall forward all such applications to the city planning commission, or the board of city commissioners. 
C.  Notice of Public Hearing. Notice of hearing shall include time, place and purpose of such hearing and shall be published at least one week before the hearing in the official newspaper of the city. This hearing is independent of the hearing held by the city planning commission. 
D.  Public Hearing. At the public hearing before the board of city commissioners, the proposed amendment is discussed together with the recommendations of the city planning commission. Any person may express opposition to or support for the amendment at such hearing. 
E.  Action of City Commission. In the event that a written protest against a proposed amendment or conditional use application is filed by owners of twenty percent or more of the area within the proposed amendment or owners of twenty percent or more of the adjoining land within one hundred fifty feet of the proposed site excluding street rights-of-way, such amendment or conditional use application shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of four city commissioners. 
F.  Effect of Denial of Application. An application for an amendment to the zoning district map or conditional use permit which has been denied by the board of city commissioners shall not be made for a period of one year from the date of such denials, unless the new application is substantially different from the denied application. 
(Ord. 788 (part), 1994) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR NORTH DAKOTA MUNICIPALITIES 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to North Dakota municipalities. They are current through the 2017 Session of the 65th Legislative Assembly. 
General Provisions 
Political subdivisions 
North Dakota Const. art. VII 
Incorporation 
NDCC ch. 40-02 
Annexation and exclusion of territory 
NDCC ch. 40-51.2 
Consolidation of cities 
NDCC ch. 40-53.2 
Powers generally 
NDCC ch. 40-05 
Home rule 
NDCC ch. 40-05.1 
Ordinances 
NDCC ch. 40-05-01(1.) and 40-11 
Ordinance violation and penalty 
NDCC 40-05-06 
Elections 
NDCC ch. 40-21 and NDCC Title 16.1 
Initiative and referendum 
NDCC ch. 40-12 
Jails 
NDCC § 40-05-01(41.) 
Administration and Personnel 
Council system of government 
NDCC chs. 40-03.2, 40-04.1, 40-08 
Commission cities 
NDCC chs. 40-04, 40-09 
City manager plan 
NDCC ch. 40-10 
Municipal officers generally 
NDCC ch. 40-13 et seq. 
Municipal agencies and authorities 
NDCC chs. 40-33.1 et seq. and 40-61 
Board of park commissioners 
NDCC ch. 40-49 
Fire department 
NDCC 40-05-01(37.) 
Police 
NDCC 40-05-02(9.) 
Municipal judges 
NDCC ch. 40-18 
Public libraries 
NDCC ch. 40-38 
Municipal arts council 
NDCC ch. 40-38.1 
Civil service 
NDCC ch. 40-44 
Employee pension system 
NDCC ch. 40-46; 40-05-01(69.) 
Revenue and Finance 
Fiscal year 
NDCC 40-40-03 
General powers 
NDCC 40-05-01 
Municipal budget 
NDCC ch. 40-40 
Claims and judgments 
NDCC chs. 40-42, 40-43 
Special assessment procedures 
NDCC ch. 40-22 et seq. 
Revenue bonds 
NDCC ch. 40-35 
Lodging tax 
NDCC ch. 40-57.3 
Business Taxes, Licenses and Regulations 
License regulations 
NDCC 40-05-01(24.) 
Franchises 
NDCC 40-05-01(57.) 
Alcoholic beverages 
NDCC 40-05-01(29.) 
Adult establishments 
NDCC 40-05-17 
Auctioneers, brokers and public scales 
NDCC 40-05-01(51.) 
Bowling alleys, billiards and theaters 
NDCC 40-05-01(30.) 
Draymen, taxi drivers, porters and others 
NDCC 40-05-01(27.) 
Milk sales 
NDCC 40-05-02(2.) 
Plumbers and plumbing businesses 
NDCC 40-05-01(25.) 
Public dances 
NDCC 40-05-01(65.) 
Second hand and junk stores 
NDCC 40-05-01(53.) 
Tourist camps 
NDCC 40-05-02(16.) 
Transient businesses and amusements 
NDCC 40-05-01(26.) 
Tax exemptions for new and expanding businesses 
NDCC 40-57.1 
Animals 
Animals running at large 
NDCC 40-05-01(47.) 
Cruelty to animals 
NDCC 40-05-01(42.) 
Dogs 
NDCC 40-05-02(22.) 
Health and Safety 
Nuisances generally 
NDCC 40-05-01(44.), (48.), (49.); title 42 
Fire prevention 
NDCC 40-05-01(34.), (35.), (38.), (39.) 
Health regulations 
NDCC 40-05-01(45.) 
Dairy, meat and food products 
NDCC 40-05-01(32.), 40-05-02(2.) 
Combustible materials and fireworks 
NDCC 40-05-01(38.) 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
Regulations generally 
NDCC 40-05-01(33.) 
Criminal code 
NDCC title 12.1 
Assault and battery 
NDCC 40-05-02(24.) 
Marijuana possession 
NDCC 40-05-02(29.) 
Theft 
NDCC 40-05-02(25.) 
Adult establishments 
NDCC 40-05-17 
Vagrants and prostitutes 
NDCC 40-05-01(43.) 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Traffic regulations generally 
NDCC 40-05-02(14.), (28.), 40-05-06(2.) 
Driving while intoxicated 
NDCC 40-05-02(15.) 
Speed regulations 
NDCC 39-09 
Through highways 
NDCC 39-07-03 
Vehicle size and weight control 
NDCC ch. 39-12 
Local snowmobile licensing prohibited 
NDCC 39-24-07 
Municipal parking authorities 
NDCC ch. 40-61 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Streets and sidewalks generally 
NDCC ch. 40-29; 40-05-01(8.)-(18.) 
Public recreation system 
NDCC ch. 40-55 
Street lighting 
NDCC ch. 40-05-01(10.); 40-30 
Curbs and gutters 
NDCC ch. 40-31 
Parks and park districts 
NDCC ch. 40-05-01(9.); 40-49 
Advertising and obstructions in public places 
NDCC 40-05-01(16.) 
Public Services 
Municipal utilities 
NDCC ch. 40-05-01(12.); 40-33 
Service connections 
NDCC ch. 40-28 
Waterworks system 
NDCC 40-05-01(36.) 
Sewage and garbage disposal 
NDCC ch. 40-34 
Cemeteries 
NDCC 40-05-01(46.) 
Buildings and Construction 
;adv=12;State building code 
NDCC ch. 54-21.3 
Adoption of standard codes 
NDCC 40-05-01(1.) 
Building regulations 
NDCC 40-05-02(6.), (23.) 
Building permits 
NDCC 40-05-02(6.) 
Fire limits and regulations 
NDCC 40-05-01(34.), (35.), 40-05-02(7.) 
Plumbing regulations 
NDCC 40-05-01(25.) 
Substandard buildings 
NDCC 40-05-02(23.) 
Urban renewal 
NDCC ch. 40-58 
Subdivisions 
Platting of townsites 
NDCC ch. 40-50.1 
Zoning 
Regulations generally 
NDCC ch. 40-47; 40-05-02(13.) 
Zoning commission 
NDCC 40-47-06 
Board of adjustment 
NDCC 40-47-07 et seq. 
Planning commission 
NDCC ch. 40-48 
Renaissance zones 
NDCC ch. 40-63 
CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table provides users with the current disposition of the sections of the prior municipal code. 
    Thus, prior code Section 6 currently appears in this code as Section 2.08.010. 
    The prior code section information was derived from the Devils Lake Municipal Code, published in 1983 by Book Publishing Company. 
Prior 
Code § Herein 1 Not codified 2 Repealed by 399 3 Repealed by 399 4 Repealed by 399 5 Repealed by 399 6 2.08.010 7 3.04.010 8 2.12.010 9 2.12.020 10 2.12.030 11 Repealed by 666 12 Repealed by 662 13 2.12.040 14 Repealed by 666 15 Repealed by 666 16 Repealed by 666 17 Repealed by 666 18 Repealed by 666 19 Repealed by 666 20 9.72.010-9.72.040 21 Repealed by 666 22 Repealed by 666 23 Repealed by 666 24 Repealed by 666 25 Repealed by 666 26 Repealed by 666 27 Repealed by 666 28 Repealed by 666 29 Repealed by 666 30 Repealed by 666 31 Not codified 32 Not codified 33 Not codified 34 Not codified 35 Not codified 36 Not codified 37 Not codified 38 Not codified 39 Not codified 40 Not codified 41 Not codified 42 Not codified 43 Not codified 44 Not codified 45 Not codified 46 Not codified 47 Not codified 47a Not codified 47b Not codified 48 Repealed by 666 16 49 Repealed by 666 50 Repealed by 666 51 Repealed by 666 52 Repealed by 666 53 Not codified 54 Not codified 55 Not codified 56 Not codified 57 Not codified 58 Not codified 59 Not codified 60 Not codified 61 Not codified 62 Not codified 63 Not codified 64 8.04.010 65 8.04.020 66 9.24.010 67 Not codified 68 Not codified 69 Repealed by 478 70 Repealed by 478 71 Repealed by 478 72 Repealed by 478 73 Repealed by 478 74 Repealed by 478 75 Repealed by 478 76 Repealed by 478 77 Repealed by 478 78 Repealed by 478 79 Repealed by 478 80 Repealed by 478 81 Repealed by 478 82 Repealed by 478 83 Repealed by 478 84 Repealed by 478 85 Repealed by 478 86 Repealed by 478 87 Repealed by 478 88 Repealed by 478 89 Repealed by 478 90 Repealed by 478 91 Repealed by 478 92 Repealed by 478 93 Repealed by 478 94 Repealed by 478 95 Repealed by 478 96 Repealed by 478 97 Repealed by 478 98 Repealed by 478 99 Repealed by 478 100 Repealed by 478 101 Repealed by 478 102 Repealed by 478 103 Repealed by 478 104 Repealed by 478 105 Repealed by 478 106 Repealed by 478 107 Repealed by 478 108 Repealed by 478 109 Repealed by 478 110 Repealed by 478 111 Repealed by 478 112 Repealed by 478 113 Repealed by 478 114 Repealed by 478 115 Repealed by 478 116 Repealed by 478 117 Repealed by 478 118 Repealed by 478 119 Repealed by 478 120 Repealed by 478 121 Repealed by 478 122 Repealed by 478 123 Repealed by 478 124 Repealed by 478 125 Repealed by 478 126 Repealed by 478 127 Repealed by 478 128 Repealed by 478 129 Repealed by 478 130 Repealed by 478 131 Repealed by 478 132 Repealed by 478 133 Repealed by 329 134 Repealed by 329 135 Repealed by 329 136 Repealed by 329 137 Repealed by 329 138 Repealed by 329 139 Repealed by 329 140 Repealed by 329 141 Repealed by 329 142 Repealed by 329 143 Repealed by 329 144 Repealed by 329 145 Repealed by 329 146 Repealed by 329 147 Repealed by 329 148 Repealed by 329 149 Repealed by 329 150 Repealed by 329 151 Repealed by 329 152 Repealed by 329 153 Repealed by 329 154 Repealed by 329 155 Repealed by 329 156 Repealed by 329 157 Repealed by 329 158 Repealed by 329 159 Repealed by 666 160 Repealed by 666 161 Repealed by 666 162 Repealed by 666 163 Repealed by 666 164 Repealed by 666 165 Repealed by 666 166 Repealed by 477 167 Repealed by 477 168 Repealed by 477 169 Repealed by 477 170 Repealed by 477 171 Repealed by 477 172 Repealed by 477 173 Repealed by 477 174 Repealed by 477 175 Repealed by 477 176 Repealed by 477 177 Repealed by 477 178 Repealed by 477 179 Repealed by 477 180 Repealed by 666 181 Repealed by 666 182 Repealed by 666 183 Repealed by 666 184 Repealed by 666 185 Repealed by 666 186 Repealed by 666 187 Repealed by 666 188 Repealed by 666 189 Repealed by 666 190 Repealed by 666 191 Repealed by 666 192 Repealed by 666 193 Repealed by 666 194 Repealed by 666 195 Repealed by 666 196 Repealed by 666 197 Repealed by 666 198 Repealed by 666 199 Repealed by 666 200 Repealed by 666 201 Repealed by 666 202 Repealed by 666 203 Repealed by 666 204 Repealed by 666 205 Repealed by 666 206 Repealed by 666 207 Repealed by 666 208 Repealed by 666 209 Repealed by 666 210 Repealed by 666 211 Repealed by 666 212 Repealed by 666 213 Repealed by 666 214 Repealed by 666 215 Repealed by 666 216 Repealed by 666 217 Repealed by 666 218 Repealed by 666 219 Repealed by 666 220 Repealed by 666 221 Repealed by 666 222 Repealed by 666 223 Repealed by 666 224 Repealed by 666 225 Repealed by 666 226 Repealed by 666 227 Repealed by 666 228 Repealed by 412 229 Repealed by 412 230 Repealed by 412 231 Repealed by 412 232 Repealed by 412 233 Repealed by 412 234 Repealed by 412 235 Repealed by 412 236 Repealed by 412 237 Repealed by 412 238 Repealed by 412 239 Repealed by 412 240 Repealed by 412 241 Repealed by 412 242 Repealed by 412 243 Repealed by 412 244 Repealed by 412 245 Repealed by 412 246 Repealed by 666 247 Repealed by 666 248 Repealed by 666 249 Repealed by 666 250 Repealed by 666 251 Repealed by 666 252 Repealed by 666 253 Repealed by 666 254 Repealed by 666 255 Repealed by 666 256 Repealed by 666 257 Repealed by 666 258 Repealed by 666 259 Repealed by 666 260 Repealed by 666 261 Repealed by 666 262 Repealed by 666 263 Repealed by 666 264 Repealed by 666 265 Repealed by 666 266 Repealed by 666 267 Repealed by 666 268 Repealed by 666 269 Repealed by 666 270 Repealed by 666 271 Repealed by 666 272 Repealed by 666 273 Repealed by 666 274 Repealed by 666 275 Repealed by 666 276 9.50.020 277 Repealed by 666 278 Repealed by 666 279 Repealed by 666 280 9.34.050 281 Repealed by 666 282 9.56.010 283 Repealed by 666 284 8.20.010 285 8.20.020 286 9.34.020 287 Repealed by 666 288 9.14.010 289 Repealed by 666 290 Repealed by 666 291 Repealed by 666 292 9.24.030 293 9.54.010 294 9.54.020 295 9.52.010 296 9.14.020 297 Repealed by 666 298 9.34.030 299 Repealed by 666 300 9.34.010 301 9.34.040 302 Repealed by 666 303 9.24.020, 9.52.020 304 Repealed by 676 305 2.16.010 306 2.16.020 307 2.16.040 308 2.16.030 309 2.16.050 310 2.16.060 311 2.16.070 312 2.16.080 313 Repealed by 666 314 1.12.010 315 1.12.020 316 1.12.030 317 Repealed by 666 318 1.12.040 319 1.12.050 320 Repealed by 666 321 Repealed by 666 322 Repealed by 666 323 Repealed by 666 324 Repealed by 666 325 Repealed by 666 326 Repealed by 666 327 Repealed by 666 328 Repealed by 666 329 Repealed by 666 330 Repealed by 666 331 Repealed by 666 332 Repealed by 666 333 Repealed by 666 334 Repealed by 666 335 Repealed by 666 336 Repealed by 666 337 Repealed by 666 338 Repealed by 666 339 Repealed by 666 340 Repealed by 666 341 Repealed by 666 342 Repealed by 666 343 Repealed by 666 344 Repealed by 666 345 Repealed by 666 346 Repealed by 666 347 Repealed by 666 348 Repealed by 666 349 Repealed by 666 350 Repealed by 666 351 Repealed by 666 352 Repealed by 666 353 Repealed by 666 354 Repealed by 666 355 Repealed by 666 356 Repealed by 666 357 Repealed by 666 358 Repealed by 666 359 Repealed by 666 360 Repealed by 666 361 Repealed by 666 362 Repealed by 666 363 Repealed by 666 364 Repealed by 666 365 Repealed by 666 366 Repealed by 666 367 Repealed by 666 368 Repealed by 666 369 Repealed by 666 370 Repealed by 666 371 Repealed by 666 372 Repealed by 666 373 Repealed by 666 374 Repealed by 666 375 Repealed by 666 376 Repealed by 666 377 Repealed by 666 378 Repealed by 666 379 Repealed by 666 380 Repealed by 666 381 Repealed by 666 382 Repealed by 666 383 Repealed by 666 384 Repealed by 666 385 Repealed by 666 386 Repealed by 366 387 Repealed by 366 388 Repealed by 366 389 Repealed by 366 390 Repealed by 366 391 Repealed by 366 392 Repealed by 366 393 Repealed by 366 394 Repealed by 680 395 Repealed by 680 396 Repealed by 680 397 5.04.010 398 5.04.020 399 5.04.030 400 5.04.040 401 Repealed by 666 402 Repealed by 666 403 Repealed by 666 404 Repealed by 666 405 Repealed by 666 406 Repealed by 666 407 Repealed by 666 408 Repealed by 666 409 Repealed by 666 410 Repealed by 666 411 Repealed by 666 412 Repealed by 666 413 Repealed by 666 414 Repealed by 666 415 Repealed by 666 416 Repealed by 666 417 Repealed by 666 418 Repealed by 666 419 Repealed by 666 420 Repealed by 666 421 Repealed by 666 422 Repealed by 666 423 Repealed by 666 424 Repealed by 666 425 Repealed by 666 426 Repealed by 666 427 Repealed by 666 428 Repealed by 666 429 Repealed by 666 430 Repealed by 666 431 Repealed by 666 432 Repealed by 666 433 Repealed by 666 434 Repealed by 666 435 Repealed by 666 436 Repealed by 666 437 Repealed by 666 438 Repealed by 666 439 Repealed by 666 440 Repealed by 666 441 Repealed by 666 442 Repealed by 666 443 Repealed by 666 444 Repealed by 666 445 Repealed by 666 446 Repealed by 666 447 Repealed by 666 448 Repealed by 666 449 Repealed by 666 450 Repealed by 666 451 Repealed by 666 452 Repealed by 666 453 Repealed by 666 454 Repealed by 666 455 Repealed by 666 456 Repealed by 666 457 Repealed by 666 458 Repealed by 666 459 Repealed by 666 460 Repealed by 666 461 Repealed by 666 462 Repealed by 666 463 Repealed by 666 464 Repealed by 666 465 Repealed by 666 466 Repealed by 666 467 Repealed by 666 468 Repealed by 666 469 Repealed by 666 470 Repealed by 666 471 Repealed by 666 472 Repealed by 666 473 Repealed by 666 474 Repealed by 666 475 Repealed by 666 476 12.20.010 477 2.48.010 478 2.48.020 479 2.48.030 480 2.48.040 481 2.48.050 482 Repealed by 666 483 Repealed by 666 484 Repealed by 666 485 Repealed by 666 486 Repealed by 666 487 Repealed by 666 488 Repealed by 666 489 Repealed by 666 490 Repealed by 666  
    As of Supplement No. 10,this table will no longer be updated. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Ordinance 
Number 218 Amends prior code §§ 284 and 285, firearms and firecrackers (Repealed by 661) 219 Radio interference (Repealed by 235) 220 Planning commission (Repealed by 666) 221 Amends prior code §§ 262, 264 and 265, sale of milk and cream (Repealed by 666) 222 Dry-cleaning and dry-dyeing plants (Repealed by 666) 223 Flammable liquids (Repealed by 666) 224 (Not used) 225 Amends prior code §§ 424 and 426, licensing peddlers (Repealed by 666) 226 Tax levy (Special) 227 Amends prior code § 387, dog license (Repealed by 366) 228 Excludes certain property from city limits (Special) 229 Zoning (Repealed by 666) 230 Tax levy (Special) 231 Retail sale of beer (Repealed by 397 and 398) 232 Amends § 23 of Ord. 229, zoning districts (Repealed by 666) 233 Paving District No. 2 (Special) 234 Amends prior code §§ 43 through 476, traffic signs and zones (Repealed by 666) 235 Radio interference; repeals Ord. 219 (Repealed by 666) 236 Amends prior code § 200, projecting signs (Repealed by 666) 237 Amends prior code §§ 420, 421 and 422, solicitors (Repealed by 666) 238 Amends prior code §§ 401 and 402, street shows (5.08) 239 Amends prior code §§ 435, 436 and 437, transient merchants (Repealed by 666) 240 Tax levy (Special) 241 Tax levy (Special) 242 Amends § 11 of Ord. 231, beer (Repealed by 397 and 398) 243 Paving District No. 3 (Special) 244 Amends prior code § 41, parking (Repealed by 666) 245 Amends prior code § 63, traffic (Repealed by 666) 246 Disorderly conduct (Repealed by 575) 247 Tax levy (Special) 248 Use of boxcars or passenger cars for residence or business (Repealed by 666) 249 Refuse and waste disposal; repeals prior code§§ 240 through 245 (Repealed by 666) 250 Peddlers, solicitors, hawkers and transient vendors (Repealed by 666) 251 Electric system construction (Special) 252 Street moving and building numbering (Repealed by 666) 253 Adds subsection 2(G) to prior code § 164, privies (Repealed by 666) 254 Amends prior code § 54, bicycles (Repealed by 666) 255 Tax levy (Special) 256 Franchise to Ottertail Power Company (Special) 257 Licensing sale of intoxicating liquor (Repealed by 666) 258 Amends § 1 of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor(Repealed by 666) 259 Amends § 3(A) of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor(Repealed by 666) 260 Limiting number of intoxicating liquor licenses (Repealed by 328) 261 Sewer Improvement District No. 6 (Special) 262 Amends § 23 of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor(Repealed by 666) 263 Tax levy (Special) 264 Amends prior code § 70, building construction(Repealed by 666) 265 Amends prior code § 441, license tax (Repealed by 666) 266 Amends prior code § 458, taxicab license (Repealed by 666) 267 Amends prior code § 12, officers' bonds (Repealed by 662) 268 Playing music in public places (Repealed by 666) 269 Tax levy (Special) 270 Amends § 3 of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor(Repealed by 293) 271 Amends § 2 of Ord. 248, use of cars for residence or business(Repealed by 666) 272 Regulating milk (Repealed by 666) 273 (Repealed by 399) 274 Amends prior code §§ 406 and 408, water carriers (Repealed by 666) 275 Use of advertising vehicles and loudspeakers(9.40) 276 Amends prior code § 344, obstructing police officers or firemen (9.06) 277 Amends prior code § 387, dog licenses (Repealed by 366, 448 and 569) 278 Expiration of annual licenses (5.04) 279 (Missing) 280 Tax levy (Special) 281 Amends §§ 2 and 4 of Ord. 260, intoxicating liquor licenses (Repealed by 328) 282 Amends prior code § 320, police magistrate and city justice (Repealed by 666) 283 Tax levy (Special) 284 Amends prior code § 453, poolhalls and shooting galleries (Repealed by 666) 285 Regulating milk (Repealed by 666) 286 Amends § 5 of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor (Repealed by 666) 287 Adds § 23 to Ord. 231, beer (Repealed by 397 and 398) 288 Tax levy (Special) 289 Civil defense and blackouts (Repealed by 666) 290 Amends prior code § 47b, traffic (Repealed by 353) 291 Tax levy (Special) 292 Amends § 21 of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor (Repealed by 666) 293 Amends § 3(A) of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor; repeals Ord. 270 (Repealed by 666) 294 Amends prior code § 20, curfew (9.72) 295 Annual appropriation (Special) 296 Substandard buildings (Repealed by 666) 297 Amends prior code §§ 247 through 251, slaughterhouses (Repealed by 666) 298 Parking meter zones (Not codified) 299 Sewer Improvement District No. 6 (Special) 300 Parking meters (Repealed by 666) 301 Street Improvement District No. 1 (Special) 302 Causing negligent fire damage to hotels or restaurants (Repealed by 666) 303 Street Improvement District No. 7 (Special) 304 Amends prior code §§ 435, 436 and 437, transient merchants (5.40) 305 Amends § 3 of Ord. 300, parking meter zones (Repealed by 666) 306 Amends §§ 3 and 3(A) of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor (Repealed by 666) 307 Franchise to Ottertail Power Company (Special) 308 Annual appropriation (Special) 309 Tax levy (Special) 310 Interference with snow removal by parked vehicles (Repealed by 666) 311 Appropriations for 1948-1949 (Special) 312 Amends prior code §§ 180 through 183, and 188 through 193, sidewalk construction (Repealed by 666) 313 Franchise to Central Telephone Company (Special) 314 City cemetery (2.44) 315 Licensing bicycles (Repealed by 666) 316 Parking (Repealed by 666) 317 Annual appropriation (Special) 318 Sewer Improvement District No. 8 (Special) 319 Tax levy (Special) 320 Amends prior code § 229, garbage (Repealed by 666) 321 Water purveyors (Not used) 322 Amends prior code § 302, minors in poolhalls and bowling alleys (Repealed by 666) 323 Parental responsibility (9.82) 324 Street Improvement District No. 2 (Special) 325 One-way alleys (Not codified) 326 Amends § 4 of Ord. 297, slaughterhouses (Repealed by 666) 327 Amends § 3 of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor(Repealed by 666) 328 Repeals Ords. 260 and 281 (Repealer) 329 Plumbing; repeals prior code §§ 133 through 158 (Repealed by 666) 330 Sewer Improvement District No. 9 (Special) 331 Annual appropriation (Special) 332 Amends prior code § 459, taxicab licenses (Repealed by 666) 333 Amends Ord. 229, zoning districts (Repealed by 666) 334 Amends prior code § 191, curbs and gutters (Repealed by 666) 335 Leaks in water mains (13.28) 336 Street Improvement District No. 3 (Special) 337 Amends § 3A of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor (Repealed by 666) 338 Amends §§ 3, 8, 10 and 16 of Ord. 300, parking meter zones (Repealed by 666) 339 Annual appropriation (Special) 340 Sewer Improvement District No. 10 (Special) 341 Franchise to Montana-Dakota Utilities for gas (Special) 342 Amends prior code § 20, curfew (9.72) 343 Franchise to Ottertail Power Company (Special) 344 Amends prior code § 67(15), nuisances (8.04) 345 Annual appropriation (Special) 346 Amends § 1 of Ord. 325, one-way alleys (Not codified 347 Theaters, carnivals and other exhibitions (9.42) 348 Sewer Improvement District No. 11 (Special) 349 Amends § 27 of Ord. 257, waitresses in liquor establishments (Repealed by 666) 350 Amends Ord. 334, curbs and gutters (Repealed by 666) 351 Amends prior code § 36, reckless driving (Repealed by 666) 352 Annexation (Special) 353 Amends prior code § 63, penalty; repeals prior code 47b and Ord. 290 (Repealed by 666) 354 City limits (Not codified) 355 Television masts and antennas (Repealed by 666) 356 Paving District No. 2 (Special) 357 Street Improvement District No. 12 (Special) 358 Amends prior code § 211, signs and awnings (Repealed by 666) 359 Amends prior code § 20, curfew (9.72) 360 Amends § 7 of Ord. 329, plumbing (Repealed by 666) 361 Annual appropriation (Special) 362 Amends prior code § 282, theft and damaging property (Repealed by 659 and 661) 363 Fire prevention code (Repealed by 666) 364 Sewer Improvement District No. 13 (Special) 365 Repeals prior code § 40(5) (Repealer) 366 Licensing dogs; repeals prior code §§ 386 through 393 (Repealed by448 and 569) 367 Annexation (Special) 368 Driving vehicles under influence of liquor or narcotics (Repealed by 666) 369 Annual appropriation (Special) 370 Annexation (Special) 371 Resisting arrest, obstructing officers and prisoner escape (9.02) 372 Amends § 1 of Ord. 363, fire prevention code(Repealed by 666) 373 Franchise to Ottertail Power Company (Special) 374 Amends § 8 of Ord. 257, intoxicating liquor (Repealed by 666) 375 Tax levy (Special) 376 Annexation (Special) 377 Franchise to Ottertail Power Company (Special) 378 Annual appropriation (Special) 379 Franchise to Ottertail Power Company (Special) 380 Amends § 7(c) of Ord. 360, trenches (Repealed by 666) 381 Amends prior code §§ 401 and 402, carnivals, circuses and other shows (5.08) 382 Amends §§ 1 and 8 of Ord. 231, beer (Repealed by 397 and 398) 383 Trailers used for residential purposes (Repealed by 666) 384 Sewer Improvement District No. 14 (Special) 385 Sale of intoxicating liquor (Not passed) 386 Annual appropriation (Special) 387 (Repealed by 399) 388 Amends § 1(a) of Ord. 316, parking (Not codified) 389 Annexation (Special) 390 Amends § (a) of Ord. 388, parking (Repealed by 666) 391 Daylight savings time (Repealed by 394) 392 Amends Ord. 323, parental responsibility (9.82) 393 Planning commission (Repealed by 666) 394 Repeals Ord. 391 (Repealer) 395 Annual appropriation (Special) 396 Sewer and water utility (Repealed by 666) 397 Amends Ord. 257, alcoholic beverage licenses; repeals Ord. 231 (Repealed by 608) 398 Repeals Ord. 231 (Repealer) 399 Repeals prior code Ch. 1, Art. 2 and Ords. 273 and 387, city limits (Repealer) 400 Amends prior code Ch. 16, Art. l, animals(Repealed by 680) 401 Amends prior code § 183 as amended by Ord. 312, sidewalk construction (Repealed by 666) 402 Repeals § 2 of Ord. 397 (Repealer) 403 Blacklist of habitual drunkards (Repealed by 666) 404 City commissioners' salaries (Special) 405 Annual appropriation (Special) 406 Adopting major street plan (Special) 407 Purchase of liquor by or for minors (Repealed by 732) 408 Disposal of abandoned personal property (2.36) 409 (Not passed) 410 Zoning districts (Special) 411 Traffic control (Repealed by 654) 412 Garbage disposal; repeals prior code Ch. 10, Arts. 2 and 3 (Repealed by 666) 413 Licensing trailer courts (Repealed by 666) 414 Limiting number of alcoholic beverage licenses (Repealed by 666) 415 Licensing and vaccination of dogs (Repealed by 666) 416 Annual appropriation (Special) 417 Amends § 4 of Ord. 397, alcoholic beverage licenses (Repealed by 608) 418 (Missing) 419 Building permits (Repealed by 666) 420 Municipal airport (Repealed by 666) 421 Parking area requirements (Repealed by 666) 422 Annexation (Special) 423 Tax levy (Special) 424 Delivery of intoxicating liquor by nonlicensed persons (Repealed by 608) 425 Amends prior code §§ 284 and 285, fireworks (8.20) 426 Annual appropriation (Special) 427 Amends §§ 1 through 7 and 29 of Ord. 396, sewer and water utility (Repealed by 666) 428 Personnel policies (Repealed by 666) 429 Annual appropriation (Special) 430 Amends §§ 2 and 3 of Ord. 411, traffic (Repealed by 666) 431 Amends § 8 of Ord. 397, intoxicating liquor(Repealed by 608) 432 Adds § 29 to Ord. 396, sewer and water rates(Repealed by 666) 433 Amends § 2 of Ord. 420, municipal airport (Repealed by 666) 434 Annual appropriation (Special) 435 Parking meters on city parking lots (Repealed by 666) 436 Licensing taxicab (5.36) 437 (Repealed by 633) 437A (Repealed by 633) 438 Franchise for cable television (Special) 439 Fluorides in water system (13.32) 440 Sewer and water hookup fees (Repealed by 666) 441 Amends prior code § 421, solicitors; repeals prior code § 422 (Repealed by 666) 442 Annual appropriation (Special) 443 Amends § 11(4) of Ord. 229, zoning (Repealed by 666) 444 Rezone (Special) 445 Amends § 11(4) of Ord. 229, zoning (Repealed by 666) 446 Rezone (Special) 447 Tax levy (Special) 448 Dogs and cats; repeals Ords. 277 and 366(Repealed by 569) 449 Street Improvement District No. 10 (Special) 450 Annexation (Special) 451 Annual appropriation (Special) 452 Annexation (Special) 453 Amends prior code § 421, solicitors (Repealed by 666) 454 Franchise to Midwest Natural Gas Company (Special) 455 Amends §§ 7 and 8 of Ord. 314, city cemetery (2.44) 456 Amends prior code § 20, curfew (9.72) 457 Recreation centers (Repealed by 764) 458 Limiting number of alcoholic beverage licenses (Repealed by 608) 459 Annexation (Special) 460 Amends § 21 of Ord. 411, speed limits (Repealed by 666) 461 Residency of city employees (Repealed by 666) 462 Annexation (Special) 463 Annual appropriation (Special) 464 Rezone (Special) 465 Amends § 1 of Ord. 372, fire prevention code (Repealed by 666) 466 Annexation (Special) 467 Annual appropriation (Special) 468 Accumulation of junk (8.08) 469 Use of sanitary landfill (8.16) 470 Amends § 3 of Ord. 444, rezone (Special) 471 Amends § 8 of Ord. 397, intoxicating liquor (Repealed by 608) 472 Adopting electrical code (Repealed by 666) 473 Adopting building code (Repealed by 666) 474 Adopting plumbing code (Repealed by 666) 475 Amends § 10 of Ord. 397, alcoholic beverage license (Repealed by 608) 476 Annual appropriation (Special) 477 Adopting electrical code; repeals prior code Ch. 8 (Repealed by 666) 478 Adopting building code and fire districts; repeals prior code Ch. 6 (Repealed by 666) 479 Adopting housing code (15.16) 480 Amends prior code § 69, fire limits (Repealed by 666) 481 Franchise to North Dakota Telephone Company (Special) 482 Annexation (Special) 483 Annual appropriation (Special) 484 Municipal airport regulations (2.40) 485 Amends §§ 7 and 8 of Ord. 455, city cemetery (2.44) 486 Amends prior code § 318, pardon and parole (1.12) 487 Amends prior code § 290, parolees (Repealed by 666) 488 Stealing and receiving stolen property (9.16) 489 Amends §§ 1, 2 and 3 of Ord. 403, habitual drunkards (Repealed by 666) 490 Amends §§ 1 through 4 of Ord. 407, purchase of liquor by or for minors (Repealed by 732) 491 Amends §§ 2 and 3 of Ord. 424, delivery of alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 608) 492 Amends §§ 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 16, 17, 18 and 22 of Ord. 397, alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 608) 493 Speed of locomotives (Not codified) 494 Franchise to Montana-Dakota Utilities for gas (Special) 495 Amends Ord. 431, sale of intoxicating liquors (Repealed by 608) 496 Annual appropriation (Special) 497 Amends § 1 of Ord. 493, speed of locomotives (Not codified) 498 Adds § 29 to Ord. 396, abandoned water service lines (Repealed by 666) 499 Annexation (Special) 500 Annexation (Special) 501 Building construction using public funds (15.12) 502 Annual appropriation (Special) 503 Retirement of city employees (Repealed by 666) 504 Amends § 1 of Ords. 372 and 465, fire protection (Repealed by 666) 505 Gas appliances and piping (15.20) 506 Adopting electrical code; repeals prior code Ch. 8 (Repealed by 666) 507 Adopting plumbing code (Repealed by 666) 508 Snowmobiles (10.38) 509 Comprehensive plan (Titles 16 and 17) 510 Amends prior code § 421, solicitors (Repealed by 666) 511 Annexation (Special) 512 (Missing) 513 (Missing) 514 (Missing) 515 (Missing) 516 Garbage and rubbish disposal (8.20) 517 Annual appropriation (Special) 518 Housing standards (Special) 519 Street opening permits for sewer repair (Repealed by 666) 520 Amends § 9.0305 of Ord. 516, garbage (8.20) 521 Amends part A of §§ 1 and 2 of Ord. 469, sanitary landfill; repeals part B of § 1 of Ord. 469 (8.16) 522 Garbage, refuse and rubbish collection franchise; repeals Art. 3 of Ord. 516 (Not codified) 523 Street opening for public utility repairs (Repealed by 666) 524 Rezone (Special) 525 (Number not used) 526 Annexation (Special) 527 Annexation (Special) 528 Annual appropriation (Special) 529 Adds § 30 to Ord. 314, city cemetery (2.44) 530 Limiting number of alcoholic beverage licenses (Repealed by 608) 531 Amends § 1(A) of Ord. 497, speed of locomotives (Not codified) 532 Amends § 2 of Ord. 435, illegally parked vehicles (Repealed by 666) 533 Adds § 4 to Ord. 453, solicitors (Repealed by 666) 534 Amends § 5 of Ord. 436, age of taxicab drivers (5.36) 535 Adds § 2 to Ord. 509, comprehensive plan (Repealed by 676) 536 Snow removal and street sweeping (Repealed by 666) 537 (Not passed) 538 Operating motor vehicles (Repealed by 666) 539 Annexation (Special) 540 Care of street trees (Repealed by 666) 541 Annexation (Special) 542 Annual appropriation (Special) 543 (Not passed) 544 Amends §§ 7 and 8 of Ords. 455 and 485, city cemetery (2.44) 545 Steam heat utility and commission (Repealed by 764) 546 Annexation (Special) 547 (Repealed by 608) 547A Amends § 1 of Ord. 497, speed of locomotives (Not codified) 548 Employee retirement system (Repealed by 666) 549 Annexation (Special) 550 Sewer service rates (Not codified) 551 Leaks in water mains (13.28) 552 Street opening for public utility repair (Repealed by 666) 553 Parking large trucks in residential areas (Repealed by 666) 554 Water and sewer main tapping fees (13.20) 555 Water and sewer utility (13.08) 556 Bicycles (Repealed by 666) 557 Exhibition driving (Repealed by 666) 558 Going out of business sales (5.16) 559 Amends Art. 2 § 6 of Ord. 538, open bottle law (Repealed by 666) 560 False information to officers (9.06) 561 Annexation (Special) 562 Personnel policies (Repealed by 666) 563 Annexation (Special) 564 Fleeing to avoid arrest or prosecution (9.02) 565 Transient merchants, hawkers and peddlers, runners, solicitors, canvassers and contractors (5.12, 9.64) 566 Loitering on city sidewalks (9.38) 567 Adds § 17 to Ord. 448, animal licenses (Repealed by 569) 568 Annual appropriation (Special) 569 Licensing dogs; repeals Ords. 277, 366 and 448 (Repealed by 680) 570 Limiting number of alcoholic beverage licenses (Repealed by 666) 571 (Repealed by 633) 572 Licensing and control of cats (Repealed by 680) 573 Amends § 3(1) of Ord. 562, holidays (Not codified) 574 Annexation (Special) 575 Possessing alcoholic beverages in public; repeals Ord. 246 (Repealed by 666) 576 Amends Ord. 478, building code (15.04, 15.08) 577 Annexation (Special) 578 Adds section to; amends §§ 3.3, 4.2, 6.3, 7.1, 8.3 and 11.6 of; adds § 5.6 as paragraph to § 6.3 and renumbers § 5.7 to 5.6 of, and redesignates § 11.8 as 11.4 and repeals prior code § 11.4 of Ord. 505, gas appliances and piping (15.20) 579 Adopting fire code (15.20) 580 Adopting fire districts; repeals prior code Ch. 6 (Repealed by 666) 581 Regulating public sewers (Repealed by 666) 582 Extending application of zoning regulation (Repealed by 591) 583 Adds Art. 19 § 7 to Ord. 509, conditional use permits (Title 17) 584 Zoning change to district boundaries (Special) 585 Annual appropriation (Special) 586 Amends §§ 3 and 5 of Ord. 522, garbage (Repealed by 638) 587 Adds subsections (G) and (H) to § 5 of Ord. 586, garbage (Repealed by 638) 588 Amends § 3(7) of Ord. 562, Veterans' Day (Not codified) 589 City cemetery (Not codified) 590 Building permit fees (Repealed by 653) 591 Amends Ord. 393, planning commission; repeals Ord. 582 (Repealed by 873) 592 Water and sewer main connecting fees (13.20) 593 Annexation (Special) 594 Annexation (Special) 595 Annexation (Special) 596 Amends Art. 19 § 7 of Ords. 509 and 583, conditional use permits (Title 17) 597 Adopting fire code (15.08) 598 Repeals § 4 of Ord. 397 (Repealer) 599 Traffic code (Title 10) 600 Annual appropriation (Special) 601 Use of cigarettes, cigars and tobacco in public lodgings (9.50) 602 Amends prior code § 421, solicitors (Repealed by 666) 603 Amends § 3(2) of Ord. 562, holidays (Repealed by 666) 604 Amends § 8 of Ord. 448, dogs (Not codified) 605 Amends Art. 1 § 1 of Ord. 562, employees' annual leave (Repealed by 666) 606 Amends Ord. 576, building code (Repealed by 653) 607 Use of blue lights by firefighters (8.24) 608 Sale of intoxicating liquors; repeals Ords. 397, 424, 458, 491, 492, 495, 530 and 547 (Repealed by 711) 609 Water and water main connecting fees (13.20) 610 Zoning administrator designated (Repealed by 666) 611 Installation of smoke detectors (Repealed by 795) 612 Disorderly conduct (Repealed by 661) 613 Creates public use zoning district (Title 17) 614 Amends Ord. 479, housing code (15.16) 615 Annexation (Special) 616 Annexation (Special) 617 Snowmobiles (10.38) 618 Opening streets for public utility repair (Repealed by 666) 619 Adopting fire code (15.08) 620 Annexation (Special) 621 Parking large vehicles in residential areas (10.24) 622 Snow removal and street sweeping (12.12) 623 Rezone (Special) 624 Public nuisances (8.04) 625 Industrial cost recovery (13.24) 626 Wastewater system service charges (13.16) 627 Regulating sewer use (13.12) 628 Truck routes (10.40) 629 Rezone (Special) 630 Annexation (Special) 631 Office of municipal administrator (Repealed by 698) 632 Amends §§ 3, 8, 9 and 16 of Ord. 448, dogs (Repealed by 658) 633 Repeals Ords. 437, 437A and 571 (Repealer) 634 Amends prior code §§ 284 and 285, fireworks (Repealed by 666) 635 Adds § 3 to Ord. 278, expiration of annual licenses (5.04) 636 Shade trees (2.32, 12.16) 637 Amends Ord. 606, building code (Repealed by 653) 638 Adds § 12 to, and amends §§ 3 and 5 of Ord. 522, garbage; repeals Ords. 586 and 587 (8.12) 639 Annual appropriation (Special) 640 Amends Ord. 628, truck routes (10.40) 641 Adds § 12 to, and amends §§ 3 and 5 of Ord. 522, garbage; repeals Ords. 586 and 587 (8.12) 642 Street opening for public utility repair (12.04) 643 Street opening for public utility repair (12.08) 644 Repeals and replaces § 4 of Ord. 436, taxicab licenses (5.36) 645 Amends §§ 7 and 8 of Ord. 455, city cemetery (2.44) 646 Annexation (Special) 647 Animal control officer (Repealed by 680) 648 Snow removal and parking restrictions on city streets (10.42) 649 Marijuana (9.26) 650 Amends § 8 of Ord. 448, dog impoundment (Repealed by 680) 651 Amends § 402 of Ord. 381, carnivals and circuses (5.08) 652 Annexation (Special) 653 Adopts 1982 Uniform Building Code; repeals Ords. 590, 606 and 637 (Repealed by 687) 654 Traffic control; repeals Ord. 411 (10.08) 655 General provisions (1.04) 656 Inspection of premises authorized (1.08) 657 General penalty provisions (1.16) 658 Amends Ord. 569, dogs; repeals Ord. 632 (Repealed by 680) 659 Amends and reenacts revised city ordinance § 282, damaging public property; repeals Ord. 362 (9.50) 660 Amends § 14 of Ord. 636, shade trees (12.16) 661 Disorderly conduct (9.36) 662 Bond requirements; repeals Ord. 267 (2.12) 663 Amends Ord. 565, business license (Repealed by 761) 664 Amends Ord. 509, zoning (16.04, Title 17) 665 Amends Ord. 439, water system (13.32) 666 Repeals revised city ordinances §§ 11, 14-19, 21-30, 48-52, 159-165, 180-227, 246-275, 277-279, 281, 283, 287, 289-291, 297, 299, 302, 313, 317, 320-385, 401-475, 482-490 and Ords. 88-90, 98, 124, 125, 130, 134, 138, 141, 144, 147-154, 158-162, 169, 172, 174- 176, 181, 186, 187B, 193, 194, 200-203, 206- 208, 211, 217, 220-223, 225, 229, 232, 234- 237, 239, 244, 245, 248-250, 252-254, 257- 259, 262, 264-266, 268, 271, 272, 274, § 4 of 275, 284-286, 289, 292, 293, 296, 297, 300, 302, 305, 306, 310, 312, 315, 316, 320, 322, 326, 327, 329, 332-334, 337, 338, 349-351, 353, 355, 358, 360, 363, 368, 372, 374, 380, 383, 390, 393, 396, 401, 403, 412-415, 419- 421, 427, 428, 430, 432, 433, 435, 440, 441, 443, 445, 453, 460, 461, 465, 472-474, 477, 478, 480, 487, 489, 498, 503, 504, 506, 507, 510, 519, 523, 532, 533, 536, 538, 540, § 10 of 545, 548, 552, 553, 556, 557, 559, 562, 570, 575, 580, 581, 602, 603, 605, 610, 618, and § 1 of 634 (Repealer) 667 Adds § 6(g), amends § 3 and repeals portion of § 3 of Ord. 569, dogs (Repealed by 680) 668 Operation of nonlicensable motorcycles (10.33) 669 Bond issue for sewer utility construction (Special) 670 Adds § 3 to and amends § 2 of Ord. 595, annexation (Special) 671 Adopts Uniform Fire Code, 1982 Edition; repeals Ords. 579 and 619 (15.08) 672 Harassing or injuring police dogs (Repealed by 680) 672A Documents required for going-out-of-business sales (5.16) 673 Repeals and replaces § 9.16.020 and repeals § 9.16.030, stealing and receiving stolen property (9.16) 674 Creates Sewer and Levee Improvement District No. 31-84 (Special) 675 Code adoption (1.01) 676 Repeals §§ 2.40.050, 2.44.300, 5.12.120, 5.16.060, 5.20.110, 5.28.040, 5.32.110, 5.36.100, 5.40.120, 6.12.170, 6.20.030, 8.08.080, 8.12.070, 8.16.040, 8.20.040, 8.24.050, 9.02.050, 9.04.030, 9.06.030, 9.14.030, 9.16.030, 9.24.040, 9.26.020, 9.34.060, 9.36.040, 9.38.040, 9.42.020, 9.52.030, 9.54.030, 9.56.020, 9.64.030, Ch. 9.76, 10.34.120, 10.38.030, 10.40.030, 10.46.030(C), 10.46.100, 13.04.060, 13.08.280, 15.08.080, 15.16.030 and 17.04.020 (Repealer) 677 Amends §§ 1.12.040, 5.04.060, 5.08.020(A), 5.16.020, 5.28.030(A), 5.32.050, 5.36.040, 6.12.040(A), 8.12.040, 8.16.010, 9.40.010, 9.50.030, 12.08.010(B), 13.12.410(C), 13.16.050(B), 13.16.070(A) and (B), 13.20.010(A) and (B), 16.32.020 and 17.88.220(B), licenses, fees and violations (1.12, 5.04, 5.08, 5.16, 5.32, 5.36, 6.12, 8.12, 8.16, 9.40, 9.50, 12.08, 13.12, 13.16, 13.20, 16.32, Title 17) 678 Adds § 10.34.015, bicycle regulations (10.34) 679 Amends §§ 6.08.020, 6.08.030 and 6.08.070, dog licensing (Repealed by 680) 680 Repeals and replaces Title 6, animals (6.04, 6.08, 6.12, 6.16, 6.20, 6.24) 681 Adds § 5.24.190(C), work permits for persons employed by establishments conducting games of chance (Repealed by 711) 682 Amends § 5.24.190(C)(2)(a), work permits for persons employed by establishments conducting games of chance (Repealed by 711) 683 Amends § 5.24.190(C)(2)(g), work permits for persons employed by establishments conducting games of chance (Repealed by 711) 684 Adds § 9.50.040, encroachment on public property (9.50) 685 Amends §§ 12.08.010 and 12.08.030, street opening; deletes § 12.08.040 (12.08) 686 Amends §§ 10.38.010 and 10.38.020, snowmobiles (10.38) 687 Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.04, Uniform Building Code (15.04) 688 Amends §§ 10.02.020, 10.02.030, 10.02.040, 10.02.070, 10.02.220, 10.02.230, 10.02.270, 10.02.310, 10.02.340, 10.02.390, 10.02.450, 10.02.470, 10.02.560, 10.02.570, 10.08.070, 10.14.030, 10.16.160, 10.16.290, 10.16.360, 10.16.390, 10.16.420, 10.16.430, 10.32.010, 10.32.020, 10.36.090, 10.36.180, 10.36.190, 10.36.210, 10.44.060, 10.44.080, 10.46.010, 10.46.030, 10.46.080, 10.46.130, 10.46.140, 10.46.160, 10.46.210, 10.46.220, 10.46.250, 10.46.260, 10.46.280 and 10.46.290, traffic; repeals §§ 10.46.180 and 10.46.190 (10.02, 10.08, 10.14, 10.16, 10.32, 10.36, 10.44, 10.46) 689 Adds §§ 10.02.185, 10.02.275, 10.02.305, 10.02.325, 10.02.345, 10.02.405, 10.02.545, 10.02.555, 10.02.625, 10.02.645, 10.02.725, 10.16.145, 10.20.120(F), 10.36.105 and 10.36.125 (10.02, 10.16, 10.20, 10.36) 690 Repeals Ch. 2.28 (Repealer) 691 Amends § 8.20.010, fireworks sales (8.20) 692 Amends § 9.36.020, disorderly conduct (9.36) 693 Amends § 9.36.020B, disorderly conduct (9.36) 694 Annexation (Special) 695 Annexation (Special) 696 Amends § 2.44.070, purchase of grave sites (2.44) 697 Cable television franchise (Repealed by 844) 698 Repeals Ch. 2.04 (Repealer) 699 Adds Ch. 2.02, auditor-finance officer (2.02) 700 Adds § 10.36.220, child restraint devices (10.36) 701 Amends § 6.16.010, animal control (6.16) 702 Adds Ch. 15.28, floodplains (15.28) 703 Amends § 8.20.010, fireworks (8.20) 704 Amends §§ 13.08.190 and 13.08.200, water utility (13.08) 705 Amends § 8.08.060, junk accumulation (8.08) 706 Adds § 5.24.230, beer and wine sales (Repealed by 711) 707 Adds Ch. 9.28, prostitution (9.28) 708 Adds Ch. 1.07, purchasing and disposition of property (1.07) 709 Adds Ch. 6.32, pit bull dogs (6.32) 710 Adds Ch. 5.44, pawnbrokers (5.44) 711 Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.24, alcoholic beverages (5.24) 712 Adds Ch. 3.08, sales and use tax (Repealed by 874) 713 Adds § 5.40.120 and amends § 5.40.040(I), transient merchants (Repealed by 761) 714 Amends § 10.16.170, miscellaneous driving rules (10.16) 715 Adds § 10.16.190, miscellaneous driving rules (10.16) 716 Deannexation (Special) 717 Telephone system franchise (Special) 718 Amends § 5.24.130, alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 780) 719 (Not adopted) 720 Bid procedure (2.52) 721 Deannexation (Special) 722 Adds § 13.08.195, water and sewer utility (13.08) 723 Amends § 2.24.020(B), planning commission (Repealed by 873) 724 Amends § 10.46.290(B)(6), traffic penalties (10.46) 725 Amends § 6.08.040, dog licenses (6.08) 726 Amends § 1.07.020, property purchase and disposition (1.07) 727 Utility system franchise (Special) 728 Amends § 5.36.050, taxicabs (5.36) 729 Amends § 1.07.020, purchasing and disposition of property (1.07) 730 Amends § 10.36.220, equipment (10.36) 731 Amends § 5.24.120(A), alcoholic beverages (5.24) 732 Amends § 5.24.150(B), alcoholic beverages; repeals Ch. 9.74 (5.24) 733 Adds § 5.04.005, business licenses and regulations (5.04) 734 Amends Ch. 15.20, gasfitting (Repealed by 857) 735 (Defeated) 736 Amends § 9.16.010, stolen property (9.16) 737 Amends Ch. 2.16, police department (2.16) 738 Adds §§ 8.12.045, 13.20.020 and 13.20.030, water, sewer and garbage fees (8.12, 13.20) 739 Amends Ch. 2.08, city commission (2.08) 740 Amends §§ 15.08.010 and 15.08.020, fire code (15.08) 741 Amends §§ 5.44.040 and 5.44.050, pawnbrokers (5.44) 742 Amends Ch. 10.38 (§§ 10.38.010-10.38.030), snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles (10.38) 743 Creates historical preservation commission (2.28) 744 Annexation (Special) 745 Amends § 2.44.070(A), purchase of grave sites (2.44) 746 Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.10, elective officers other than governing body (2.20) 747 Amends Ch. 2.12, appointive officers (2.12) 748 Adds Ch. 2.01, officers-general provisions and § 2.08.180, city commission (2.01, 2.08) 749 Adds § 2.01.060, officers-general provisions; amends § 2.08.060, city commission (2.01, 2.08) 750 Amends Title 17, zoning (17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.36, 17.38, 17.40, 17.44, 17.48, 17.52, 17.56, 17.60, 17.64, 17.72, 17.76, 17.80, 17.84, 17.88, 17.92) 751 Amends Ch. 15.04, Uniform Building Code (Repealed by 857) 752 (Pending) 753 Annexation (Special) 754 Repeals § 5.24.160(C), alcoholic beverages (5.24) 755 Amends § 1.07.020(H)(3), competitive bidding procedures (1.07) 756 Amends Ch. 9.72, curfew (9.72) 757 Amends § 13.16.090, wastewater system service charge (13. 16) 758 Adds Ch. 2.17, special assessment commission (2.17) 759 Adds §§ 2.48.001 and 2.48.060-2.48.140, public library (2.48) 760 Amends § 5.24.130, alcoholic beverages (Repealed by 780) 761 Adds Ch. 5.10, transient merchants; repeals Chs. 5.20, 5.32 and 5.40 (5.10) 762 Adds Ch. 10.47, railroad cars and trains (10.47) 763 Amends Ch. 12.12, snow removal and street sweeping (12.12) 764 Repeals Chs. 5.28, 13.04 and 13.20 (Repealer) 765 Adds Ch. 3.01, utility bill (Repealed by 855) 766 Amends Ch. 8.12, garbage, refuse and rubbish (8.12) 767 Amends Chs. 13.08, 13.12, 13.16 and 13.28, public services (13.08, 13.12, 13.16, 13.28) 768 Amends § 9.36.030, disorderly conduct (9.36) 769 Amends § 10.47.010, railroad car and train speed limits (10.47) 770 Amends § 8.12.020(G)[B], sanitation requirements (8.12) 771 Amends § 2.48.110, public library (2.48) 772 Amends § 10.36.105(B), child restraint devices (10.36) 773 Adds § 2.10.070, distribution of fees for domestic violence cases (2.10) 774 Amends § 6.08.100, dangerous animals (6.08) 775 Amends § 5.24.050, business licenses (5.24) 776 Franchise grant to Otter Tail Power Company (Special) 777 Adds Ch. 9.73, sale of tobacco products (9.73) 778 Amends §§ 15.08.010 and 15.08.020, fire code (15.08) 779 Repeals and replaces § 3.08.120, dedication of tax proceeds (Repealed by 874) 780 Repeals and replaces § 5.24.130, retail liquor establishments (5.24) 781 Amends § 5.24.040, alcoholic beverages (5.24) 782 Amends Ch. 8.12, garbage, refuse and rubbish (8.12) 783 Amends Ch. 15.04, building code (Repealed by 857) 784 Loitering in parking lots (Defeated) 785 Amends Ch. 9.38, prowling or loitering (9.38) 786 Amends § 5.24.080, alcoholic beverages (5.24) 787 Amends § 5.24.050, alcoholic beverages (5.24) 788 Repeals and replaces Titles 16 and 17, subdivisions and zoning (16.04, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.24, 16.28, 16.32, 16.36, 16.40, 17.04, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.36, 17.40, 17.44, 17.48, 17.52, 17.56, 17.60, 17.64, 17.68, 17.72, 17.76, 17.80, 17.84, 17.88) 789 Adds § 9.14.011 and amends § 9.14.010, general offenses against the person (9.14) 790 Adds subsection G to § 8.12.020, garbage, refuse and rubbish (8.12) 791 Adds §§ 10.16.440 through 10.16.444, miscellaneous driving rules (10.16) 792 Amends Ch. 5.10, transient merchants (5.10) 793 Amends § 5.24.160(C)(2), alcoholic beverages (5.24) 794 Adds subsection (C) to § 10.38.020 and adds § 10.38.040; amends § 10.38.030, snowmobiles and all-terrain vehicles (10.38) 795 Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.24, smoke detectors (15.24) 796 Repeals § 10.36.105 (Repealer) 797 Adds Ch. 3.09, restaurant tax (3.09) 798 Annexation (Special) 799 Amends § 9.16.010, stealing and receiving stolen property (9.16) 800 Adds § 9.01.010, public peace, morals and welfare (9.01) 801 Adds Ch. 5.45, site authorization (5.45) 802 Amends § 9.73.050, purchase and possession of tobacco products by minors prohibited (9.73) 803 Adds § 3.08.130, sales tax increase for financing of flood protection district 1-96 (Repealed by 874) 804 Adds Ch. 1.17, initiative of ordinances (1.17) 805 Adds § 9.14.030, criminal trespass (9.14) 806 Adds Ch. 2.60, emergency employees (2.60) 807 Adds §§ 9.73.031 and 9.73.060(C); amends § 9.73.030, tobacco products (9.73) 808 Amends § 2.28.030(A), historic preservation commission (2.28) 809 (Defeated) 810 Amends § 3.09.020, restaurant tax (3.09) 811 Amends § 2.32.030(A), shade tree committee (2.32) 812 Amends Ch. 1.16, general penalty (1.16) 813 (Defeated) 814 Adds Ch. 8.28, public dances (8.28) 815 Adds § 5.24.240, alcoholic beverages (5.24) 816 Adds § 5.24.250, alcoholic beverages (5.24) 817 Amends § 2.48.070, public library (2.48) 818 Adds §§ 17.76.040(C) and 17.76.060-17.76.080; amends §§ 17.08.020, 17.24.040(A) and (B), 17.40.040(A), 17.48.040(A), 17.76.020(C)(2) and 17.84.030(B), zoning (17.08, 17.24, 17.40, 17.48, 17.76, 17.84) 819 Amends § 17.04.040, zoning (17.04) 820 Annexation (Special) 821 Adds § 9.38.050, loitering in parking lots (9.38) 822 Amends § 17.08.020, zoning (17.08) 823 Amends Ch. 15.04, uniform building code (Repealed by 857) 824 (Denied) 825 Amends §§ 1.07.020 and 1.07.030, competitive bidding (1.07) 826 Amends Ch. 5.44, pawnbrokers (5.44) 827 Amends § 17.12.010 and Chs. 17.16-17.72 [and adds Ch. 17.38], zoning (17.12, 17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.32, 17.36, 17.38, 17.40, 17.44, 17.48, 17.52, 17.56, 17.60, 17.64, 17.68, 17.72) 828 Adds § 5.36.025, taxicabs (5.36) 829 Amends Chs. 8.04, 8.08, 8.20 and 8.24, health and safety (8.04, 8.08, 8.20, 8.24) 830 Adds § 9.36.025; amends § 9.36.020, disorderly conduct (9.36) 831 Amends § 9.14.010, assault and battery (9.14) 832 Repeals § 3.09.060 (Repealer) 833 Amends §§ 2.32.020(I), 2.32.030(A), 2.32.040(B), 12.16.060(B), 12.16.120(B) and (D), 12.16.150(A), 12.16.160 and 12.16.180; repeals § 12.16.110, shade trees (2.32, 12.16) 834 Amends Ch. 17.36, zoning (17.36) 835 Annexation (Special) 836 Amends § 16.04.040, jurisdiction (16.04) 837 Amends §§ 17.12.040, 17.16.050, 17.24.020, 17.28.030, 17.28.050, 17.40.030 and 17.76.040, zoning (17.12, 17.16, 17.24, 17.28, 17.40, 17.76) 838 Amends Ch. 15.28, floodplain regulations (15.28) 839 Adds Ch. 12.13, obstructions caused by snow removal (12.13) 840 Adds § 3.08.140, extension of sales tax (Repealed by 874) 841 (Defeated) 842 Amends § 5.36.050, license requirements (5.36) 843 Adds Ch. 15.29 [15.32], permanent land use (15.32) 844 Repeals and replaces Ord. 697, community antenna television service (13.36) 845 Annexation (Special) 846 Adds Ch. 12.30 [12.24] and subsection (I) to § 16.04.020, mailboxes (12.24, 16.04) 847 Adds § 1.07.080, property bids for public buildings (1.07) 848 Amends § 5.24.090(B), license issuance (5.24) 849 Adds Ch. 3.10, Lake Region Heritage Center, Inc. financial assistance (3.10) 850 Adds Ch. 3.11, improvement by special assessment (3.11) 851 (Not approved) 852 Amends § 2.32.030(A)(4), shade tree committee (2.32) 853 Amends § 15.04.010 and renumbers as 17.76.090; amends §§ 17.08.020, 17.20.050, 17.24.050, 17.28.050, 17.28.060, 17.38.070, 17.44.060, 17.64.020, 17.76.020, 17.64.030, 17.76.010, 17.76.020 and 17.76.040, zoning (15.04, 17.08, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.38, 17.44, 17.64, 17.76) 854 Amends § 3.09.010, restaurant tax (3.09) 855 Repeals and replaces §§ 3.01.100 and 13.08.160, curb stops (3.01, 13.08) 856 Amends §§ 17.32.050, 17.36.040, 17.44.020, 17.48.030, 17.64.030, 17.76.040 and 17.76.070, zoning (17.32, 17.36, 17.44, 17.48, 17.64, 17.76) 857 Amends § 15.04.010, building code (15.04) 858 Adds Ch. 13.14, sewer connections in mobile home courts (13.14) 859 Adds Ch. 17.74, coffee kiosks (17.74) 860 Amends § 2.17.010, special assessment commission (2.17) 861 Amends § 2.08.170, city commission (2.08) 862 Adds Ch. 17.78, temporary uses (17.78) 863 Amends Ord. 854, restaurant tax (3.09) 864 Adds Ch. 2.41, airport regulations (2.41) 865 Adds § 13.14.000; amends §§ 13.14.010-13.14.020, 13.14.060 [13.14.030], 13.14.080 [13.14.040] and 13.14.100 [13.14.050], sewer connections in mobile home courts and recreational vehicle parks (13.14) 866 Adds Ch. 9.44, engine brakes and compression brakes (9.44) 867 Adds § 8.04.040, public nuisances (8.04) 868 Adds Ch. 3.12, motor vehicle rental tax (3.12) 869 Amends Ord. 780 [§ 5.24.130], alcoholic beverages (5.24) 870 Adds Ch. 3.13, water source (3.13) 871 Amends Ord. 830, disorderly conduct (9.36) 872 Adds Ch. 13.37, Community Antenna Television Service (North Dakota Telephone Co.) (13.37) 873 Repeals Ord. 591 [Ch. 2.24], planning commission (Repealer) 874 Sales, use, and gross receipts tax; repeals Ords. 712, 779, 803 and 840 (3.08) 875 Amends Ord. 699 [Ch. 2.02], auditor-finance officer (2.02) 876 (Not approved) 877 Amends Ord. 739 [§§ 2.08.020, 2.08.100 and 2.08.110], city commission (2.08) 878 Amends Ord. 747 [§§ 2.12.010 and 2.12.020], appointive officers (2.12) 879 Adds § 17.76.100; amends §§ 17.16.020, 17.16.030, 17.20.020, 17.20.030, 17.20.090, 17.24.020, 17.24.090, 17.28.020, 17.28.090, 17.36.020, 17.36.030, 17.38.020, 17.44.020, 17.48.020, 17.48.030, 17.64.020, 17.72.060, 17.76.030, 17.76.040, 17.76.090, zoning (17.16, 17.20, 17.24, 17.28, 17.36, 17.38, 17.44, 17.48, 17.64, 17.72, 17.76) 880 Amends §§ 1.07.020 and 1.07.030, purchasing and disposition of property (1.07)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 10, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of Devils Lake, North Dakota beginning with Supplement No. 10, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Description Section Section 
this Code 881  1-20-09 Gas distribution system       Added 13.38.020- 13.38.120 882  2- 2-09 Stopping, standing or parking 10.20.020 883  3- 2-09 Gas distribution system       Rpld 13.38.100 884  8- 3-09 Transient merchants       Rpld 5.10.010- 
5.10.110       Added 5.10.010- 
5.10.120 885  1-19-10 Sales tax revnue bonds       Added 3.14.010 886  5-17-10 Child care for young children and volunteer activities for seniors       Added 3.15.010- 
3.15.070 887  7- 6-10 Zoning 17.08.020, 17.12.050, 17.12.060       Added 17.32.020(G), 17.32.090(C), 17.32.110(B), 17.36.090       Added 17.38.020(H) 17.38.040, 17.52.030, 17.56.030 17.64.030       Added 17.64.090(C) 17.72.060, 17.74.030, 17.74.050(F), 17.76.030(B), 17.76.100, 17.78.030, 17.78.040, 17.78.050(E) 888  7- 6-10 Purchasing and disposition of property       Added 1.07.090 889  8- 2-10 Zoning       Added 17.40.030(E) 890  8- 2-10 Non-exclusive franchise for communications system (North Dakota Telephone Co.)       Added 13.39.010- 
13.39.130 891  8-16-10 Zoning       Added 17.76.110 892 12-20-10 Smoking in public places       Added 8.30.010, 8.30.020 893  1-18-11 Resisting police 9.02.010 894  3- 8-11 General animal control       Added 6.16.010(F) 895  6- 6-11 Zoning       Added 17.40.020(N) 
17.40.090(A), 17.44.030, 17.48.030, 17.48.060 896  7- 5-11 Alcoholic beverages 5.24.050(F) 897  6-20-11 Dog licensing and control 6.08.050 898  9-19-11 Purchasing and disposition of property 1.07.020(A) 899  9-19-11 Purchasing and disposition of property 1.07.030(A) 900  4-16-12 Zoning 17.32.070, 17.32.090(E) 901  9-17-12 Substandard building or structures       Added 8.32.010- 
8.32.100 902  9-17-12 Certificate of tenancy       Added 15.34.100- 
15.34.110 903  9-17-12 Uniform Fire Code       Added 15.08.080 904 (Tabled) 905 10-15-12 Alcoholic beverages 5.24.010 906 10-15-12 Alcoholic beverages 5.24.150 907 10-15-12 Alcoholic beverages 5.24.240 908  3- 4-13 Power company       Added 13.40.010- 
13.40.120 909 (Did not pass) 910  5- 6-13 Animal care and treatment       Added 6.36.010 911  5- 6-13 Number of allowable pets       Added 6.34.010 912  5- 6-13 Animals; violation, penalties       Added 6.38.010, 6.38.020 913  5- 6-13 Dog licensing and control       Added 6.08.030(H) 914  5-20-13 Public services; franchises       Added 13.34.010 915  8- 5-13 Zoning 17.16.020(E), 17.16.030(D), 17.20.020(F), 17.20.030(D), 17.24.020(G), 17.24.030(B), 17.28.020, 17.28.030(C), 17.32.020(F), 17.32.030(D), 17.36.020(F), 17.36.030(D), 17.38.020(G), 17.38.030(C), 17.40.020(E)       Added 17.40.030(F) 916 (Did not pass) 917 (Did not pass) 918 (Tabled) 919  3-17-14 General offenses against the person 9.14.011 920  3-17-14 Vehicles and traffic, violation-penalty 10.46.280, 10.46.290 921  3-17-14 Miscellaneous driving rules       Added 10.16.450, 10.16.460 922  7- 7-14 Speed regulations 10.08.020(A) 923 10-20-14 Sale of tobacco products 9.73.020 924  2- 2-15 Annexation Omit 925  3- 2-15 Zoning       Added 17.56.030(C) 926  7-20-15 Sales tax revenue bonds       Added 3.14.020 927  7-20-15 Annexation Omit 928  8-17-15 Drug paraphernalia       Added 9.30.010- 
9.30.030 929  8-17-15 Taxicabs 5.36.025 930  9-21-15 Public library 2.48.001- 
2.48.040, 2.48.070, 2.48.090, 2.48.110, 2.48.130 931  9-21-15 Alcoholic beverages 5.24.130 932  2-16-16 Alcoholic beverages 5.24.050(F) 933  3- 7-16 Zoning 17.08.020 934  3- 7-16 Zoning 17.48.030 17.48.060(D) 935  3- 7-16 Alcoholic beverages       Added 5.24.260 936  3- 7-16 Zoning       Added 17.76.120 937  3- 7-16 Zoning 17.38.020       Added 17.38.030(F), 17.38.060(C) 938  5- 2-16 Taxicabs 5.36.010- 
5.36.180 939  5- 2-16 Annexation Omit 940  5- 2-16 Cable communications system (Midcontinent Communications)       Rpld 13.36.010- 
13.36.140       Added 13.36.010- 
13.36.150 941  8- 1-16 Zoning 17.08.020       Added 17.28.030(K) 944 12- 5-16 Class IX license       Added 5.24.050 F.9. 945 12- 5-16 Accessory dwelling units 17.08.020       Added 17.16.030 G.       Added 17.20.030 G.       Added 17.24.030 K.       Added 17.28.030 L.       Added 17.38.030 G.       Added 17.76.130, 17.76.131 946  9-18-17 Zoning 17.76.010(F) 948 10-16-17 Volunteer activities for seniors 3.15.010-3.15.070 949 10-16-17 Assessment of crime victim and witness fee       Added 1.16.040 950 12-18-17 Animal rescue 17.08.020 17.44.030 17.48.030 17.52.030 17.56.030       Added 6.33.010 951  3-19-18 Server training 5.24.260 952  4-16-18 Sales tax 3.08.010-3.08.120 953  5- 7-18 Temporary uses 17.78.010-17.78.080 954  5-21-18 Medical marijuana manufacturing 17.08.020 17.44.030(M) 17.48.030(H) 17.52.030(C) 17.56.030(E) 17.64.030(L) 956 12-17-18 Annexation Omit 957 12- 3-18 Removal of snow and ice       Added 12.14.010, 
12.14.020 958 12- 3-18 Snow removal 10.42.040 959 12- 3-18 Snow removal and street sweeping 12.12.040 960  2-22-19 Class IX License 5.24.050(F)(9)  
