CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF MANDAN, NORTH DAKOTA 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF MANDAN, NORTH DAKOTA 
(2016) 
____________ 
Tim Helbling 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mike Braun 
Shauna Laber 
Dennis Rohr 
Scott J. Davis 
Board of City Commissioners 
____________ 
Jim Neubauer 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Malcolm H. Brown 
City Attorney 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF MANDAN, NORTH DAKOTA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Arlyn Van Beek 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mike Braun 
Shauna Laber 
Dennis Rohr 
Sandra Tibke 
Board of City Commissioners 
____________ 
Jim Neubauer 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Malcolm H. Brown 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Mandan, North Dakota. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1994 Code, as of February 3, 2015, and ordinances adopted by the Board of City Commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1994 Code, as supplemented, and any ordinance included herein. 
    Subject to certain exceptions, the chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Andrea Gill, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful Mr. Robert Decker, City Planner, for cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mandan, North Dakota. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mandan, North Dakota. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Mandan, North Dakota. 2015. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 1051  5- 5-2009 Include 1 1188 12-16-2014 Include 1 1193 11-18-2014 Include 1 1204 10-20-2015 Include 1 1207  8- 4-2015 Include 1 1210  6-30-2015 Include 1 1212  7-21-2015 Include 1 1218  9-15-2015 Include 1 1219 10- 6-2015 Include 1 1220 10-20-2015 Include 1 1222 11- 3-2015 Include 1 1223 11- 3-2015 Include 1 1225  1-19-2016 Include 1 1226 12- 1-2015 Include 1 1227 12- 1-2015 Include 1 1228  1- 5-2016 Include 1 1229  1- 5-2016 Include 1 1230  1- 5-2016 Include 1 1233  2- 2-2016 Include 1 1234  2- 2-2016 Include 1 1237  5- 3-2016 Include 1 1240  6-21-2016 Include 1 1241 12-13-2016 Include 1 1242 12-20-2016 Include 1 1245  8- 2-2016 Include 1 1247  7-19-2016 Include 1 1248  7-19-2016 Include 1 1252 11- 1-2016 Include 1 1254 12-20-2016 Omit 1 1255 12-20-2016 Include 1 Supp. No. 2 1256  3- 7-2017 Include 2 1257  3- 7-2017 Include 2 1262  6- 6-2017 Include 2 1264  6-20-2017 Include 2 1265  7-11-2017 Include 2 1272  9- 5-2017 Include 2 1273 11- 7-2017 Omit 2 1275 10-17-2017 Omit 2 1276 11- 7-2017 Include 2 1277 12- 5-2017 Omit 2 1278 12- 5-2017 Omit 2 1279 11-21-2017 Include 2 1280  1- 2-2018 Include 2 1281  2- 6-2018 Include 2 1282  2-20-2018 Include 2 1283  3-20-2018 Include 2 1284  4- 3-2018 Include 2 1286  4- 3-2018 Include 2 1287  4- 3-2018 Include 2 1288  5-15-2018 Include 2 Supp. No. 3 1266  7-10-2018 Include 3, Update 1 1285  4- 2-2018 Omit 3, Update 1 1289  6-19-2018 Omit 3, Update 1 1290  7-10-2018 Omit 3, Update 1 1291  3- 5-2019 Include 3, Update 5 1296 11- 6-2018 Include 3, Update 4 1297 10-16-2018 Include 3, Update 2 1298 12-18-2018 Include 3, Update 4 1299  4-16-2019 Include 3, Update 6 1301  3- 5-2019 Include 3, Update 5 1302 11-20-2018 Include 3, Update 3 1306  3- 5-2019 Include 3, Update 5 1307  3-19-2019 Include 3, Update 5 1308  4-16-2019 Include 3, Update 6 1309  5- 7-2019 Include 3, Update 7  
PART 1 - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed in this part is the city's home rule charter. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same style of expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule charters, N.D.C.C. § 40-05.1-01 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION 
    The inhabitants of the City of Mandan, within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under the name of the "City of Mandan." 
ARTICLE 2. - GOVERNING BODY TO EXERCISE POWERS 
    Subject to the limitations imposed by the Constitution of the United States of America, the Constitution of the State of North Dakota, state law, and this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the elected governing body. The elected governing body shall enact ordinances, adopt budgets, determine policies and prescribe the functions of government to be performed by the city under the authority of their Charter. 
ARTICLE 3. - POWERS OF CITY 
    The city shall have all powers granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution and laws of this state and by this Charter, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted. 
    Among its enumerated powers, which may be implemented by ordinance subject to the limitations specified in this Charter, shall be the following: 
(a)  To acquire, hold, operate, and dispose of property within or without the corporate limits, and exercise the right of eminent domain for such purposes. 
(b)  To control its finances and fiscal affairs; to appropriate money for its purposes, and make payment of its debts and expenses; to levy and collect taxes, excises, fees, charges, and special assessments for benefits conferred, for its public and proprietary functions, activities, operations, undertakings, and improvements; to contract debts, borrow money, issue bonds, warrants, and other evidences of indebtedness; to establish charges for any city or other services, and to establish debt and mill levy limitations, provided that all real and personal property in order to be subject to the assessment provisions of this subsection shall be assessed in a uniform manner as prescribed by the state board of equalization and the state supervisor of assessments, in addition, the mill levies ordered imposed by the governing body on property subject to taxation shall not exceed in total the sum of levies authorized by state statutes, constitution or by the city electorate by a previous election. The governing body shall be permitted to promulgate the city budget without regard to specific dedications of mill levies to specific purposes. 
(c)  To fix the fees, number, terms, conditions, duration, and manner of issuing and revoking licenses in the exercise of its governmental police powers. 
(d)  To provide for city officers, agencies, and employees, their selection, terms, powers, duties, qualifications, and compensation. 
(e)  To provide for change, selection, or creation of its form and structure of government, including its governing body, executive officer, and city officers. 
(f)  To provide for city courts, their jurisdiction and powers over ordinance violations, duties, administration, and the selection, qualifications, and compensation of their officers; however, the right of appeal from judgment of such courts shall not be in any way affected. 
(g)  To provide for all matters pertaining to city elections, except as to qualifications of electors. 
(h)  To provide for the adoption, amendment, and repeal of ordinances, resolutions, and regulations to carry out its governmental and proprietary powers and to provide for public health, safety, morals, and welfare, and penalties for a violation thereof. 
(i)  To lay out or vacate streets, alleys, and public grounds, and to provide for the use, operation, and regulation thereof. 
(j)  To define offenses against private persons and property and the public health, safety, morals, and welfare, and provide penalties for violations thereof. 
(k)  To engage in any utility, business, or enterprise permitted by the constitution or not prohibited by statute or to grant and regulate franchises therefor to a private person, firm, or corporation. 
(l)  To provide for zoning, planning, and subdivision of public or private property within the city limits; to provide for such zoning, planning, and subdivision of public or private property outside the city limits as may be permitted by state law. 
(m)  To levy and collect franchise and license taxes for revenue purposes. 
(n)  To exercise in the conduct of its affairs all powers usually exercised by a corporation. 
(o)  To fix the boundary limits of said city and the annexation and deannexation of territory adjacent to said city except that such power shall be subject to, and shall conform with the state law made and provided. 
(p)  To contract with and receive grants from any other governmental entity or agency, with respect to any local, state, or federal program, project, or works. 
(q)  To impose sales and use taxes, provided that any such sales and use taxes shall be subject to approval of the majority of the people voting in a city-wide election. 
(r)  To impose any other fees or taxes allowed by law. 
(s)  To exercise all powers heretofore granted to any city by the general laws of the state. 
The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the city shall have and may exercise all powers which under the Constitution of this state, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. 
ARTICLE 4. - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
    The right to propose ordinances and to enact or reject the same at the polls; and the right to approve or reject at the polls any ordinance enacted by the governing body, is hereby expressly reserved unto the people, except that the annual appropriation ordinance shall not be subject to referendum. 
    Ordinances may be referred or initiated by filing with the city auditor, a petition signed by qualified electors equal thereof in number to 15 percent of the votes cast for all candidates for the executive officer of the city at the preceding regular city election in which said executive officer was subject to election. Filing of a petition for referral shall, upon determination by the city auditor that such petition is sufficient, suspend the operation of any ordinance enacted by the governing body, except emergency ordinances approved by at least two-thirds of the governing body, which shall remain in effect until voted upon by the electors. 
    But the filing of a referendum petition against one or more items, sections, or parts of any ordinance shall not prevent the remainder from going into effect. Referendum petitions shall be filed with the city auditor not later than 30 days after adoption of the ordinance. 
    Each ordinance proposed or referred to the electors by proper petition shall be placed upon the ballot by the city auditor at the next city-wide election occurring at least 30 days after the filing and determination of sufficiency by said city auditor, or at a special election called by the governing body, whichever shall occur first. 
    The repeal of any referred emergency ordinance and the operation of any initiated ordinance shall be effective as of the tenth day after the election thereon. 
    Each petition to initiate or refer ordinances shall have printed thereon a ballot title which shall fairly represent the subject matter of the ordinance and the names of three electors who shall constitute the committee for the petitioners and who shall act for and represent the petitioners. At the bottom of each petition, the circulator of that particular petition shall sign an affidavit affirming that the signers thereto are known to be qualified electors of the city. 
    The city auditor shall pass upon each petition, and if he finds it insufficient, he shall notify the committee for the petitioners and allow ten days for correction or amendment. This article shall be self-executing and all of its provisions treated as mandatory. Ordinances may be enacted to facilitate its operation but no ordinances shall be enacted to hamper, restrict, or impair the exercise of the rights herein reserved to the people. 
ARTICLE 5. - REFERENDUM BY GOVERNING BODY 
    Before adopting ordinances to implement the home rule provisions of this Charter, the governing body may, on its own motion, submit questions to the electorate for an advisory vote of the people at any city-wide election specified by the governing body. If a question is submitted in the form of a proposed ordinance and it is approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon, and the governing body thereafter adopts the ordinance within six months of such a vote, such ordinance shall not be subject to referral by petition within five years of such adoption. 
ARTICLE 6. - REPEAL OF ORDINANCES 
    Any enacted ordinance may be repealed by the governing body; provided, however, that any ordinance, which has been initiated by petition and approved by the electorate or referred to the people in accordance with article 5 and approved by the electorate, may not be repealed except by approval of at least two-thirds of the governing body or by again being referred to the electorate in accordance with article 5. 
ARTICLE 7. - BOUNDARIES 
    The boundaries of the City shall be the boundaries as established at the time this Charter takes effect, or as such boundaries may be changed thereafter in the manner authorized by law. 
ARTICLE 8. - PUBLICITY OF RECORDS 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided by state law, all public records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city shall be open to inspection by the public at all reasonable hours. 
ARTICLE 9. - SEPARABILITY 
    If any section or part of section of this Charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of section to which such holding shall directly apply. 
ARTICLE 10. - PLENARY AND IMPLIED POWERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY 
    The governing body shall have plenary power to enact and make all proper and necessary ordinances, resolutions and orders to carry out and give effect to the express and implied powers granted in this Charter to the end that a complete, harmonious and effective municipal government may be initiated, installed, operated, and maintained in the city, and thereby protect and safeguard the rights, interests, safety, morality, health and welfare of the city and its inhabitants. 
ARTICLE 11. - SUCCESSION IN GOVERNMENT 

Section 1. - Rights of officers and employees preserved. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided, this Charter shall not affect or impair the rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city, or any office, department or agency thereof, existing at the time this Charter shall take effect. Any provision of law in force at the time this Charter shall take effect, which provision of law is not inconsistent herewith, shall remain in full force and effect as respects qualifications of personnel, appointment, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil rights, or any other rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city or any office, department or agency thereof. 
Section 2. - Continuance of present officers. 
    All persons holding elective, executive and administrative office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and shall continue the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been made in accordance therewith for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office. 
Section 3. - Continuance of present offices, departments or agencies. 
    Any office, department, or agency, heretofore existing, shall continue to exercise powers and duties as were heretofore exercised and shall have the power to continue any business proceedings or other matters within the scope of its regular powers and duties until such office, department or agency shall be changed or abolished by the governing body. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office, department or agency of the city by the laws of this state shall, if such office, department or agency be abolished by this Charter or under its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office, department or agency designated by the governing body. 
Section 4. - Continuance of appointive boards, authorities and commissions. 
    All appointive boards, authorities and commissions, heretofore existing, shall continue and shall exercise such powers and duties as were granted them until such boards, authorities, and commissions and the powers thereof shall be changed or abolished by the governing body. 
Section 5. - Continuance of contracts. 
    All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. 
Section 6. - Pending actions and proceedings. 
    The adoption of this Charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending when it takes full effect, brought by or against the city of any office, department, agency or officer thereof. 
Section 7. - Ordinances and statutes to remain in force. 
    All ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city together with state statutes applicable to municipalities which are in force at the time this Charter takes effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions thereof, are hereby continued in force until such ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city are duly amended or repealed and until ordinances are enacted providing procedures replacing those previously required by state statute. 
Section 8. - Inauguration of government under this Charter. 
    If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the question, vote to ratify this Charter, the provisions of this Charter shall go into effect upon the filing of the Charter by the governing body with the secretary of state, the clerk of the district court for Morton County, and the office of the city auditor, within 90 days. 
ARTICLE 12. - CHANGING THE FORM OF GOVERNMENT 
    After the adoption of this Home Rule Charter, the City of Mandan shall continue to operate under the commission form of government. Changes in the form of government may be proposed on motion of the governing body or may be proposed by petitions bearing the signatures of qualified city electors equal thereof in number to 15 percent of the votes cast for all candidates for the executive officer of the city at the preceding regular city election in which said executive officer was subject to election. Proposals for changing the form of government shall be voted upon at the next city-wide election, provided at least 30 days has lapsed after the motion of the governing body or the filing of petitions with the city auditor. 
State Law reference- Commission form of government, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-09. 
ARTICLE 13. - METHOD OF AMENDMENT AND REPEAL 
    The governing body may, on its own motion, submit to the electorate proposals to amend or repeal all or any of this Charter. Such submission shall be at the next city-wide election following said motion and a majority of those voting on the proposed amendment or repeal shall determine the passage or defeat thereof. 
    Proposals to amend or repeal all or any part of this Charter must be submitted to the electorate when a petition for such submission bearing the signatures of qualified city electors thereof equal in number to 15 percent of the votes cast for all candidates for the executive officer of the city at the preceding regular city election in which said executive officer was subject to election, is filed with the city auditor and said auditor has determined the sufficiency thereof. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
    This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designation and citation. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections constitute and are designated the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Mandan, North Dakota," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Mandan Code." The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
(Code 1994, § 1-02-01) 
State Law reference- Revision of ordinances, N.D.C.C. § 40-11-09. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
    Generally. 
(1)  All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(2)  In all interpretations, the person making the interpretation shall look diligently for the intention of the board of city commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. 
(3)  Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
(4)  Clerical and typographical errors shall be disregarded when the meaning of the board of city commissioners is clear. 
(5)  Whenever a general provision is in conflict with a special provision, the two provisions shall be construed, if possible, so that effect may be given to both provisions, but if the conflict between the two provisions is irreconcilable, the special provision shall prevail and be construed as an exception to the general provision, unless the general provision is enacted later and it is the manifest legislative intent that the general provision shall prevail. 
(6)  If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at the same or different time, one amendment without reference to the other, the amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may be given to each. If the amendments are irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment prevails. 
    Board, board of city commissioners, board of commissioners, city commission, governing body. The term "board," "board of city commissioners," "city commission," "board of commissioners," or "governing body" means the board of city commissioners of the City of Mandan, North Dakota. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Mandan, North Dakota" and extends to the city's officers, officials, agents and employees. 
    City auditor. As the city does not provide for the position of city auditor and the position of city auditor is referenced in many state statutes, references to a city auditor shall be interpreted to be the person designated by the city to enforce the particular power or duty referenced. 
    Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mandan, North Dakota as designated in section 1-1. The Code consists of subparts A and B. 
    Computation of time. The time in which any act provided by law is to be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last is a holiday, and then it also is excluded. If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends on the last day of that month. 
    Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, except that in appropriate circumstances the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable. 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either ... or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Morton County, North Dakota. 
    Delegation of authority. Any provision requiring a city officer or a city employee to do some act is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
    Departments, boards, officers, etc. References to a department, board, commission, office, officer or employee are to a city department, city board, city commission, city office, city officer or city employee. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    Heretofore, hereafter. Where the term "heretofore" occurs in any section of this Code or city ordinance, it shall be construed to mean any time previous to the day when such section of this Code or city ordinance shall take effect. Where the term "hereafter" occurs, it shall be construed to mean the time after the section of this Code or city ordinance containing such word shall take effect. 
    Joint authority. Words giving a joint authority to three or more persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
    Land, real estate, real property. The term "land," "real estate" or "real property" means land, tenements, hereditaments, and all rights thereto and interest therein, equitable as well as legal. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    N.D.C.C., state acts. The abbreviation "N.D.C.C." refers to the North Dakota Century Code, as now or hereafter amended. Any reference to the North Dakota Century Code or to a state act by title or short title is a reference to such act as now or hereafter amended. 
    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural. Words in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" means affirmations in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and, in like cases, the term "swear" includes the term "affirm." 
    Official time. Whenever the actual time is a factor, the actual time shall be the time of the dispatch system located at the county law enforcement center. 
    Person. The term "person" includes the state, the county, a political subdivision of the state, other governmental entities, a corporation, firm, partnership, association, limited liability company, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. The term "person" also includes a trustee, receiver, an assignee or similar representative. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" means other than real property. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time. When a requirement that any act be done in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time or notice means such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice. 
    Shall . The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark, when a person cannot write, with the person's name written near it and witnessed by a person who writes the person's own name as witness. Nothing in this provision prevents electronic signatures. 
    State. The term "state" means the State of North Dakota. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or an oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future includes the present. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days, except that in the case of publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of weeks, the term "week" means one insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in each week. 
    Writing, written. The term "writing" or "written" includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, including any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1994, §§ 1-02-02-1-02-05, 1-02-07, 1-02-10, 1-02-11, 1-02-18, 1-02-20, 1-02-21) 
Sec. 1-3. - Headings of sections; effect of history notes; references in Code. 
(a)  The headings of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and are not titles of such sections, nor any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, are they to be so deemed when any of such sections, including the headings, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. State law references, Charter references, cross references and editor's notes that appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to subparts, chapters, articles, or sections are to the subparts, chapters, articles, or sections of this Code, as amended, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1994, § 1-02-17) 
Sec. 1-4. - Code exercise of home rule powers. 
    This Code is an exercise of home rule powers granted by the state constitution and N.D.C.C. § 40-05.1-06. 
Sec. 1-5. - Territorial applicability. 
    The provisions of this Code apply in the city and within such extraterritorial jurisdiction as is granted to the city by state law. 
(Code 1979, § 2-01-01; Code 1994, § 1-03-01) 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance does not revive any ordinance previously repealed. 
(b)  The repeal of any ordinance by the board or by the people through an initiated ordinance shall not have the effect of releasing or extinguishing any penalty, fine, liability or forfeiture incurred under such ordinance, but as to cases tried before, or subsequent to, the repeal of the ordinance, it shall have the effect of extinguishing any jail or prison sentence that may be, or that has been, imposed by reason of said law, unless the repealing act shall provide expressly that the penalties of imprisonment shall remain in force as to crimes committed in violation of such law prior to its repeal. In other respects, such act shall remain in force only for the purpose of the enforcement of such fine, penalty or forfeiture. 
(Code 1994, §§ 1-02-13-1-02-15) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, as appropriate) _____ of the Mandan Code is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The section (chapter or article) should be set out in full. 
(c)  If a new section, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter or article, as appropriate) _____ of the Mandan Code is hereby created to read as follows:...." The section (chapter or article) should be set out in full. 
(d)  All provisions desired for repeal should be repealed specifically by section, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of city commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate organizational units; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other organizational units of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other organizational units to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other organizational unit numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall changes be made in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful, an offense, an infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared to be a misdemeanor, an offense, an infraction or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  All violations of this Code other than non-criminal traffic violations are an offense unless stated otherwise. Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code that is an offense shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,500.00 and imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a Class B misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,500.00 and imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(3)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code that is an infraction shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00; provided that any person convicted of an infraction who has, within one year prior to commission of the infraction for which convicted, been previously convicted of an offense classified as an infraction of state statutes or the ordinances of this or any other state municipality may be sentenced as though convicted of an offense. 
(4)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code regulating the operation or equipment of motor vehicles or regulating traffic shall be punished as provided in state law. 
(5)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(6)  As to other violations, each act is a separate offense. 
(d)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(e)  This section shall not be construed to prohibit the utilization of the sentencing alternatives, other than a fine or imprisonment, provide by N.D.C.C. Title 12.1. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty shall not prevent the city from revoking or suspending any license, franchise or permit. 
(g)  When an organization, as defined in N.D.C.C. § 12.1-03-04, is convicted of an offense, the court may, in addition to any other sentence imposed, require the organization to give notice of its conviction to the persons or class of persons ostensibly harmed by the offense by mail or by advertising in designated areas or by designated media or otherwise. 
(h)  The board of city commissioners, at its discretion, may set, by resolution, a fixed amount for various penalties listed within this code that the police department shall use in issuing citations. The amount listed on the citation is the recommended penalty and the municipal judge has full discretion to modify the recommended penalty when imposing sentence. 
(i)  Unless otherwise specified, the primary enforcement agents for the city are the police chief and code enforcement officer or their designees. 
(Code 1994, §§ 1-04-01-1-04-03; Ord. No. 1185, § 2, 6-17-2014; Ord. No. 1207, §§ 1(App. A), 2, 8-4-2015) 
State Law reference- City fines and penalties limited, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-06. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The board declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases have been declared invalid or unconstitutional. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the application of any provision of this Code to a particular property, building or other structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure not specifically included in such judgment. 
(Code 1994, § 1-01-11) 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the city relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1994, §§ 1-02-09, 1-02-12) 
Sec. 1-12. - Code does not affect prior actions, proceedings offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any action or proceeding commenced, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code, but the proceedings therein must conform to the requirements of this Code as far as applicable. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance on the effective date of this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 1-02-16) 
Sec. 1-13. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of the following ordinances or portion of ordinances that are not codified in this Code. Such ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code: 
(1)  Annexing property into the city. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the city. 
(3)  Describing the boundaries of the city. 
(4)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance, sale or security of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(5)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(6)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(7)  Providing for salaries, benefits, or terms or conditions of employment of city officers or employees any employment classification or position, whether elected or appointed. 
(8)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(9)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive or master plan. 
(10)  Providing for local improvements or levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(11)  Creating any special improvement district. 
(12)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street. 
(13)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(14)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(15)  Levying or imposing taxes. 
(16)  Rezoning specific property. 
(17)  Amending a zoning ordinance affecting only a portion of the inhabitants of the city rather than all of them, or relating to particular parcels of property, rather than ordinances of a general nature. 
(18)  That which is temporary, although general in effect. 
(19)  That which is special, although permanent in effect. 
(20)  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(Code 1994, § 1-01-10) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Commission form of government, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-09. 

ARTICLE 1. - ELECTED OFFICIALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Board of city commissioners, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-06; governing bodies generally, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-06. 

Sec. 2-1-1. - Board of city commissioners. 
(a)  Regular meetings . The board of city commissioners shall meet in regular meeting each first and third Tuesday of each month at 5:30 p.m. at the basement meeting room of the Memorial Building, 205 Second Avenue, Northwest, unless some other time or place shall be specifically fixed by the board. 
(b)  Special meetings . To call a special meeting of the board of city commissioners, there shall be filed with the city administrator a notice of the call of such meeting, subscribed by the members filing the same, and setting the date, hour and purpose of such meeting. Thereupon, the city administrator shall, at least three hours before the time fixed for such a meeting, cause a copy of the notice of the call of such meeting to be served upon each member of the board not subscribing the same. The attendance of all members of the board and their participation in its proceedings, without objection, shall be deemed a waiver of any irregularity in the notice of the call of such meeting or in the manner of the service thereof. 
(c)  Rules and order of business . The rules and order of business for the parliamentary government of the governing body shall be governed by such rules as the board of commissioners may determine effective. 
(d)  Passage of ordinances . All ordinances shall be considered twice, and the second consideration shall not be had in less than one week after the first consideration. After such consideration, before their final passage, such ordinances may be amended and shall then be put upon their second consideration and final passage. Upon adoption, an ordinance shall be signed by the president of the governing body and attested by the city administrator. 
(e)  Required functions . The Board of City Commissioners may, from time to time, appoint such administrators, managers, department heads, attorneys, engineers or other persons as appropriate to perform the functions and duties of administrating the government of the City of Mandan and shall budget amounts required to fund the required functions. 
(f)  Salaries of appointive officers . The salary of all appointive officers shall be fixed by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, §§ 2-02-01-2-02-03, 2-04-03, 3-01-02; Code 1994, §§ 2-01-01-2-01-04, 2-02-03; Ord. No. 973, 12-30-2003; Ord. No. 1094, 4-5-2011) 
State Law reference- Regular meetings, N.D.C.C. § 49-09-11; ordinances, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-11. 
Sec. 2-1-2. - Municipal judge. 
    N.D.C.C. provides for the election of a municipal judge. The procedures set forth in N.D.C.C. shall be followed. Procedures for operation of the municipal court are contained in chapter 14. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEPARTMENTS, FUNCTIONS, OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal officers generally, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-13; officers in commission cities generally, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-15. 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Right of entry. 
    Whenever any officer or employee of the city is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce any ordinance, subject to constitutional limitations: 
(1)  The authorized officer or employee may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same, provided that they shall effect entry in the manner provided in subsection (2) of this section, except in emergency situations, or when consent of the person having charge or control of the building or premises has been otherwise obtained. 
(2)  If the building or premises to be inspected is occupied, the authorized officer or employee shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If the building or premises is unoccupied, they shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If consent to such entry is not given, the authorized officer or employee shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(3)  The municipal judge shall have the authority to consider requests by city officers or employees for an order to enter buildings or premises and shall issue such order when satisfied that the purpose of the request is necessary to enforce city ordinances or to protect the public health, safety or welfare of its citizens. The order shall contain an explanation of the purpose and scope of the right to enter by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 2-04-03; Code 1994, § 1-03-02) 
Sec. 2-2-2. - City administrator. 
    There is created the office of city administrator. The city administrator shall be hired by and serve at the pleasure of the board based on the terms of an employment contract. The city administrator shall be responsible for the day to day operation of city government and shall perform various functions itemized in N.D.C.C. as being the responsibility of the auditor. These functions shall be enumerated by resolution of the board or detailed in the employment contract. The city administrator shall report to and be supervised by the president of the board of city commissioners as directed by the board. The board may authorize the hiring of individuals or contract with individuals or firms to assist the city administrator as needed. 
(1)  Business development. There is created within the office of city administrator the division of business development. The city administrator shall recommend and the board of city commissioners may approve the hiring of an individual, individuals or a company, either as an employee or under contract to the city, for the purpose of promoting business development within the city. Individuals or companies hired for business development shall report to and be supervised by the city administrator. Support staff may also be hired by the city administrator with the approval of the board. A member of the board of city commissioners shall be assigned the business development portfolio and shall consult with the city administrator on a regular basis regarding the functioning of the business development division. 
(2)  Human resources. There is created within the office of city administrator the division of human resources. The city administrator may recommend and the board of city commissioners may approve the hiring of an individual, individuals or a company, either as an employee or under contract to the city, for the purpose of managing the human resources and personnel functions of the city. Individuals or companies hired shall report to and be supervised by the city administrator. Support staff may also be hired by the city administrator with the approval of the board. A member of the board of city commissioners shall be assigned the human resources portfolio and shall consult with the city administrator on a regular basis regarding the functioning of the human resources division. 
Sec. 2-2-3. - Finance. 
    The board of city commissioners, after considering the recommendation of the city administrator, shall appoint a finance director to manage the finance department and perform various functions itemized in N.D.C.C. as being the responsibility of the auditor. These functions shall be enumerated by resolution of the board. The finance director shall report to and be supervised by the city administrator. Support staff may also be hired on recommendation of the finance director and city administrator with approval of the board. A member of the board of city commissioners shall be assigned the finance portfolio and shall consult with the finance director and city administrator on a regular basis regarding the functioning of the finance department. 
Sec. 2-2-4. - Police. 
    As required by N.D.C.C. and after considering the recommendation of the city administrator, the board of city commissioners shall appoint a police chief to manage the police department. The police chief shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The police chief shall coordinate day to day activities with the city administrator. The board may approve the hiring of police officers and support staff as recommended by the police chief and the city administrator. A member of the board of city commissioners shall be assigned the police portfolio and shall consult with the police chief and city administrator on a regular basis regarding the functioning of the police department. 
(1)  Code enforcement officer. The city administrator, upon the recommendation of the police chief in consultation with the building official and city engineer, may employ a code enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this Code. The code enforcement officer shall be housed in the police department and work under the direction of the police chief or designee. 
(2)  Weed control officer. The city administrator, upon the recommendation of the police chief in consultation with the public works director and fire chief, may employ a weed control officer. The weed control officer shall be housed in the police department and work under the direction of the police chief or designee. 
(3)  Combining positions. The code enforcement and weed control functions may be handled by the same person. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-02-01-4-02-03; Code 1994, §§ 2-07-01-2-07-03) 
Sec. 2-2-5. - Fire. 
    As required by N.D.C.C. and after considering the recommendation of the city administrator, the board of city commissioners shall appoint a fire chief to manage the fire department. The fire chief shall serve at the pleasure of the board. The fire chief shall coordinate day to day activities with the city administrator. The board may approve the hiring of fireman and support staff as recommended by the fire chief and the city administrator. A member of the board of city commissioners shall be assigned the fire portfolio and shall consult with the fire chief and city administrator on a regular basis regarding the functioning of the fire department. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-01-01-4-01-03, 4-01-09; Code 1994, §§ 2-05-01-2-05-03, 2-05-09) 
Sec. 2-2-6. - Engineering and planning. 
    As required by N.D.C.C. and after considering the recommendation of the city administrator, the board of city commissioners shall appoint a city engineer to manage the engineering and planning department as well as the operation of the city water treatment plant and the city wastewater treatment plant. The city engineer may be a regular city employee, a contract employee or a firm with registered professional engineers on staff. The city engineer will report to and be supervised by the city administrator. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the city engineer and city administrator. A member of the board of city commissioners shall be assigned the engineering and planning portfolio and shall consult with the city engineer and city administrator on a regular basis regarding the functioning of the engineering and planning department. 
(1)  City planner. After considering the recommendation of the city engineer, the city administrator may appoint a city planner to assist the city engineer. The city planner shall provide staff services to the planning and zoning commission and shall perform various functions itemized in N.D.C.C. as being the responsibility of the auditor. These functions shall be enumerated by resolution of the board. The city planner may be a regular city employee, a contract employee or a firm with qualified planning staff. The city planner will report to and be supervised by the city engineer. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the city engineer and city administrator. 
(2)  Water treatment plant superintendent. After considering the recommendation of the city engineer, the city administrator may appoint a water treatment plant superintendent to manage the day to day operation of the city water treatment plant. The water treatment plant superintendent shall possess the required certifications as mandated by state and federal laws, rules or permits and may be a regular city employee, a contract employee or a firm with qualified staff. The water treatment plant superintendent will report to and be supervised by the city engineer. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the city engineer and city administrator. 
(3)  Wastewater treatment plant superintendent. After considering the recommendation of the city engineer, the city administrator may appoint a wastewater treatment plant superintendent to manage the day to day operation of the city wastewater treatment plant. The wastewater treatment plant superintendent shall possess the required certifications as mandated by state and federal laws, rules or permits and may be a regular city employee, a contract employee or a firm with qualified staff. The wastewater treatment plant superintendent will report to and be supervised by the city engineer. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the city engineer and city administrator. 
(Code 1979, § 4-07-01; Code 1994, §§ 2-04-01, 2-04-02) 
Sec. 2-2-7. - Building inspection. 
    On the recommendation of the city administrator, the board of city commissioners may appoint a chief building official to manage the building inspection department. The chief building official shall be a regular city employee or a contract employee. The chief building official will report to and be supervised by the city administrator. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the chief building official and the city administrator. A member of the board of city commissioners shall be assigned the building inspection portfolio and shall consult with the chief building official and city administrator on a regular basis regarding the functioning of the building inspection department. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-08-01-4-08-06; Code 1994, §§ 2-03-01-2-03-06) 
Sec. 2-2-8. - Public works. 
    The board of city commissioners may appoint a public works director to manage the public works department. The public works director may be a regular city employee or a contract employee. The public works director will report to and be supervised by the city administrator. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the public works director and the city administrator. A member of the board of city commissioners shall be assigned the public works portfolio and shall consult with the public works director and city administrator on a regular basis regarding the functioning of the public works department. 
(1)  Streets and utilities superintendent. Upon the recommendation of the public works director, the city administrator may appoint a streets and utilities superintendent to assist the public works director in the day to day operation and maintenance of streets, water distribution, sanitary sewer collection and conveyance and storm sewer collection and conveyance. The streets and utilities superintendent shall be a regular city employee. The streets and utilities superintendent will report to and be supervised by the public works director. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the public works director and the city administrator. 
(2)  Grounds maintenance superintendent. Upon the recommendation of the public works director, the city administrator may appoint a grounds maintenance superintendent to assist the public works director in the day to day operation and maintenance of public green spaces and the cemetery as well as a program to eradicate Dutch Elm disease within the city. The grounds maintenance superintendent shall be a regular city employee. The grounds maintenance superintendent will report to and be supervised by the public works director. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the public works director and the city administrator. 
(3)  City forester. Upon the recommendation of the public works director, the city administrator may appoint a city forester to assist the grounds maintenance superintendent in the day to day operation and maintenance of public green spaces as well as a program to eradicate Dutch Elm disease within the city. The city forester must have appropriate training and certifications and shall be knowledgeable and skilled in the practice of municipal arboriculture, horticultural, forestry, landscaping or other closely related fields. The city forester shall perform such duties and exercise such authority over all trees, shrubs and grassy areas planted, to be planted, or growing in public places as the board, by resolution or ordinance, may determine to be necessary and desirable to ensure the safety and preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public places. In addition, the board may grant to the forester such powers and duties relating to trees, shrubs and other related matters located on private property as are necessary when it is determined that such matters constitute a public nuisance. The city forester shall be a regular city employee. The city forester will report to and be supervised by the grounds maintenance superintendent. The board may approve the hiring of support staff as recommended by the public works director and the city administrator. 
(Code 1994, §§ 2-06-01, 2-06-02) 
ARTICLE 3. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 

Sec. 2-3-1. - Terms of office. 
    Unless stated otherwise for a specific board, commission or authority, terms of office commence January 1. Unless a member officially resigns in writing, the member serves past the end of their appointed term until a replacement is officially approved by the city commission. 
Sec. 2-3-2. - Groups authorized or required by state statute. 
    The state authorizes or requires the city to have certain authorities, boards or committees. 
(1)  Airport authority. On November 3, 1979, the governing body of the city duly established the Mandan Municipal Airport Authority pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 2-06-02. The city provides selected administrative and personnel services at the request of the Airport Authority. 
(2)  Renaissance zone committee. The renaissance zone committee was created as authorized and structured by N.D.C.C. title 40, ch. 63. 
(3)  Civil service commission. 
(4)  Board of equalization. 
(5)  Parking authority. 
a.  The Mandan Municipal Parking Authority shall consist of five members and a city commissioner, all of whom shall be appointed by the board of commissioners in accordance with provisions of statute. In addition, the chief of police shall be a member, and the authority shall have a records clerk. 
b.  The Mandan Municipal Parking Authority is authorized to exercise all the powers and to assume all the duties and responsibilities as provided by state statute, and shall have jurisdiction over the acquisition, financing and operation of all municipal parking facilities and projects within any commercial or industrial zoning district of the city, and such other areas within any residential zoning district as may hereafter be specifically designated by resolution of the city commissioners. 
(6)  Planning and zoning commission. 
a.  See chapter 101. 
(7)  Park board. 
(8)  Renaissance zone. 
(9)  Sales tax. 
(10)  Southwest water authority. 
(11)  Public library board. 
a.  Pursuant to the authority of N.D.C.C. ch. 40-38, the governing body of the city duly established a public library, and assumed all the powers and duties authorized by said chapter. 
b.  The city provides selected administrative and personnel services at the request of the library board. 
(12)  Special assessment commission. 
(Code 1979, §§ 5-03-01, 5-03-02, 5-08-01, 5-09-01, 5-10-01; Code 1994, §§ 2-12-01, 2-12-08, 2-12-09, 2-12-11) 
Sec. 2-3-3. - Groups created by ordinance. 
    The city has created several permanent groups by ordinance: 
(1)  Architectural review commission. The Mandan Architectural Review Commission was established by ordinance to provide review of building permit applications. The architectural review commission consists of nine members, including the city building official, fire chief and engineer. The remaining six members are appointed by the board of city commissioners and, whenever possible, shall be residents of the city, business owners/operators in the city, or owners of property within the city. The board, when making appointments, shall strive to include members of the design and construction industries or other related professions. 
(Code 1979, § 5-07-03; Code 1994, § 2-12-02; Ord. No. 1003, § 1, 4-4-2006; Ord. No. 1070, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 2-3-4. - Special purpose committees. 
    The board, from time to time, may create by resolution and appoint a special purpose committee to assist it in making decisions. The structure and duties of the group are determined at the discretion of the board. The group may serve for a limited time until the assigned task has been completed. 
(1)  Community beautification committee. The community beautification committee, reactivated in May 2013 with citizen appointees, is responsible for addressing property maintenance issues and determining potential solutions or actions in accordance with existing ordinances. It may also identify the need for and recommend potential new ordinances if remedies to problems are not outlined in existing municipal code. 
a.  Private sector representatives. The six private sector representatives on the committee serve in an advisory capacity to city staff and the board of city commissioners on community beautification matters that together will result in development and formulation of programs and projects to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the community, recommendations for practices and policies that will enhance and upgrade existing properties, and coordination of periodic community clean-up campaigns and encouragement of public participation in such efforts. 
b.  Staff representatives. Staff representatives include the city administrator, a police department staff member, a fire department staff member, the chief building official, an engineering and planning department staff member, the public works director, the business development and communications director and a Custer Health representative. 
(2)  Community center advisory board. 
(3)  Event center committee. 
(4)  Fireworks committee. 
(5)  Growth fund. 
(6)  Noise committee. 
(7)  Progress organization. 
(8)  Safety and wellness committee. 
(9)  Tomorrow. 
(10)  Visitors committee. 
(11)  Weed board. 
(12)  Youth commission. 
(13)  Bismarck-Mandan Mayors' Committee for People with Disabilities. 
(14)  Morton Burleigh Bismarck Mandan (MBBM) Opportunity Development Subcommittee. 
(15)  Mayors' economic advisory group. 
(16)  Combined E-9-1-1 communications and dispatch center. 
(17)  Law enforcement center advisory board. 
(18)  Pension committee. 
ARTICLE 4. - PROCUREMENT 

Sec. 2-4-1. - Statement of policy. 
(a)  It is the intent of this article to provide for a uniform method for procuring supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services necessary to carry on activities of the city and to sell or otherwise transfer needed supplies, equipment and other property. 
(b)  It is the policy of the city to procure supplies, materials, equipment and contractual services in an efficient manner and to ensure that the highest quality is obtained at the best price available. When practicable and in the best interests of the city, competitive bids shall be solicited in order to reduce prices. 
(c)  It is the policy of the city to comply with all laws, rules, regulations and orders with respect to local preference, nondiscrimination, wages and hours and all other applicable laws, rules, regulations and orders. 
(Code 1994, § 3-01-01) 
Sec. 2-4-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contractual services means services provided by entities other than the city, other governmental bodies or public utilities. 
    Emergency means a situation in which unforeseen circumstances require immediate action or action which cannot or should not be delayed for use of a competitive bid process. 
    Noncompetitive type or kind means supplies or services which are, by their nature, unique and not subject to competition, including professional services, management services, contracts with the manufacturer or seller or service agent for repair of equipment; services or supplies of a specialized nature that are available only from one supplier or a limited number of suppliers who are not in competition with each other; supplies or services for which the local market is not competitive; or supplies or services for which purchase in the open market is called for, in order to obtain the best quality at the lowest price. 
    Supplies means all supplies, materials and equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 3-01-02) 
Sec. 2-4-3. - Competitive bidding required. 
(a)  All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property that have become obsolete or unusable must, except as otherwise provided in this article, be based on competitive bids. 
(b)  All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided in this article, when the estimated cost exceeds $25,000.00, must be purchased at public sale from the lowest and best bid meeting or exceeding specifications pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 44-08-01.1 and subject to N.D.C.C. § 44-08-01. 
(c)  All sales or dispositions of obsolete or unusable personal property, when the estimated value exceeds $5,000.00, may be sold only at public sale pursuant to section 2-4-5. 
(d)  Purchases of supplies and contractual services, when the estimated cost is $5,000.00 or less, may be made in the open market without competitive bidding, unless otherwise required by law. Purchases of supplies and contractual services, when the estimated cost is more than $5,000.00 but less than $25,000.00, may be made in the open market without competitive bids, provided that documentation is submitted showing that prices or informal quotes were solicited from a minimum of three suppliers or, if fewer than three suppliers are available, from all available suppliers, unless otherwise required by law. 
(e)  Sales of personal property of an estimated value of $2,500.00 or less may be made in the open market without competitive bids unless otherwise required by law. 
(f)  Any supplies, materials, equipment or contractual services previously competitively bid by the state or one of its agencies, for which the state or agency has made provision for participation by political subdivisions, may be purchased through the state or agency's bid letting upon approval by the board. 
(Code 1994, § 3-01-03; Ord. No. 1015, 11-7-2006) 
Sec. 2-4-4. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 2-4-5, purchases of supplies or services of a noncompetitive type or kind, or purchases from other governmental bodies, or purchases made when, in the opinion of the board or its executive officer, an emergency requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, may be made in the open market without competitive bidding. 
(b)  Whenever a purchase or contract for services, with an estimated cost in excess of $10,000.00, is made without competitive bids, a written report must be filed with the bill or contract stating the reason why competitive bids were not called for and listing all suppliers contacted and quotes or estimates obtained. 
(Code 1994, § 3-01-04) 
Sec. 2-4-5. - Conveyance, sale or disposal of real or personal property. 
(a)  Personal property valued at less than $1,000.00 that has been determined obsolete and is no longer used by the city may be sold at private sale, provided that the department's portfolio commissioner has given prior approval to the sale. The department head of the department selling the obsolete property shall make a record of the sale containing a description of the obsolete property, the reason it is no longer used, the date of sale, the purchase price, and the party to whom the property was sold. Purchases of obsolete property owned by the city may not be made by city employees except at public sale. Such sales must be reported to the board. 
(b)  Real or personal property valued at more than $1,000.00 belonging to the city may be conveyed, sold or disposed of only as approved by a majority vote of all members of the board. Instruments effecting such conveyance, sale, lease or disposal are valid only when duly executed by the president of the board and attested by the city administrator. The board, by duly adopted resolution, shall determine whether real or personal property with an estimated value of less than $5,000.00 shall be sold at public or at private sale. Real or personal property estimated by the board to be of a value of $5,000.00 or more may be sold only at public sale or as provided under section 2-4-8. When a public sale is required or authorized, a notice containing a description of the property to be sold and designating the place, date and time of the sale must be published in the official newspaper once each week for two consecutive weeks, with the last publication being at least ten days in advance of the date set for the sale. The notice shall specify whether the bids are to be received at auction or as sealed bids as determined by the board. The property advertised must be sold to the highest bidder but not for a sum less than the minimum sales price if fixed prior to the sale, if the bid is deemed sufficient by a majority of the members of the board, unless all bids are rejected. 
(c)  The sale of any property, whether at public or private sale, shall be for cash or, if the board authorizes installment payments, then one-fourth of the purchase price shall be cash and the balance in equal annual installments for a period not to exceed ten years. The purchaser shall have the right to pay any or all installments with interest at any time prior to the maturity date. 
(1)  If the sale is for cash, the purchaser must immediately pay the amount of the bid to the city finance director. 
(2)  If the sale is for part cash and the balance in equal installments, the purchaser must immediately pay the amount of the first installment to the city finance director. The purchaser must be given a contract for deed setting forth the terms of the sale which must be executed by the purchaser, the president of the board and the city administrator. The contract shall be in a form prescribed by the board and shall require the purchaser, at his own expense, to at all times maintain insurance against damage on the buildings on the property in an amount set by the city, and shall give the city the right, upon default of the purchaser, to cancel and terminate the contract. 
(3)  The original contract shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of the county and then filed with the city finance director, who shall endorse thereon all payments made by the purchaser. The unpaid balance shall draw interest at the rate of five percent per annum. 
(4)  Upon the payment of the purchase price in cash, or the payment in full of all installments, with interest to the date of payment, the city will execute and deliver to the purchaser a deed conveying to him all right, title and interest of the city in and to such property. 
(5)  Upon the execution and delivery of such contract for deed or such deed, as the case may be, the real property described therein shall be subject to taxation in the same manner as other private property. 
(Code 1979, § 2-02-04; Code 1994, § 3-01-05; Ord. No. 735, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 2-4-6. - Lease or use of public buildings; terms. 
(a)  The board may permit the use of or may lease any public building or any part of a public building under its charge for any legal purpose, giving equal opportunity to all persons, and without religious or political distinctions, provided that the use and occupation of the building or property does not interfere with use of such building or property for public purposes. The board may, by resolution, establish reasonable rules and restrictions on the use of the building as may seem necessary, and shall fix proper rentals and fees for such use. 
(b)  The board, in its discretion, may require a bond from the lessee or user of such building, conditioned upon the payment of charges made for the lease or use and indemnifying the city against damage or destruction of or to the building or any part. 
(c)  No lease of any public building or part of any public building shall be for a term longer than two years, except as may be provided in this section. If the board intends the lease to be for a term longer than two years but not exceeding 20 years, it shall, by resolution, make a finding that, due to the nature of the property or activity and its appurtenant fixtures or equipment and necessary improvements, a longer-term lease is required to ensure the success of the enterprise or activity. Upon making such finding, the board shall cause a notice of its intention to lease such building or property for a term longer than two years to be published once in the official newspaper of the city once a week for two consecutive weeks with the last publication being at least ten days in advance of the date set for receipt of sealed proposals. 
(d)  The notice must contain: 
(1)  Instructions for bidders; 
(2)  Minimum requirements and conditions of the lease, if any; 
(3)  The minimum requirements for rentals and fees; and 
(4)  The date, time and place that sealed written proposals shall be received and opened. 
(e)  If it is in the best interest of the city, the board may, at the time of adoption of the resolution, cause to be filed with the city finance director, open for public inspection: 
(1)  A drawing or plot of the area to be leased; 
(2)  The proposed lease agreement setting forth the minimum requirements, conditions, terms and rentals, if any, which the city will accept for the lease of the building or property; and 
(3)  Such other information as the board deems necessary or desirable in relation to such proposals. 
(f)  The written sealed proposals shall be received up to the date specified in the published notice, at which time and place all such proposals shall be publicly opened and read aloud. The board shall reserve the right to reject any and all bids and to waive irregularities. However, late bids or bids which do not comply with mandatory requirements imposed by law must be rejected. 
(Code 1979, §§ 2-05-05, 2-05-06; Code 1994, § 3-01-06) 
Sec. 2-4-7. - Bidding procedure. 
(a)  Whenever bids are called for, bids and the bidding procedure must be in accordance with applicable requirements of state and federal law. 
(b)  Bid notices shall comply in all respects with applicable state statutes and shall include, at a minimum, a general description of the property or services to be purchased or sold, where bid documents may be obtained, the time and place for opening bids, the deadline for receipt of bids, if different from the time for opening bids, and whether a bid bond is required. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, or otherwise provided by law, all bids must be advertised in the local newspaper once each week for two consecutive weeks with the bid opening at least ten days after the last advertisement. 
(c)  The city shall reserve the right to reject any and all bids and to waive irregularities. However, bids which do not comply with mandatory requirements imposed by law or late bids must be rejected. 
(Code 1994, § 3-01-07; Ord. No. 1081, 5-18-2010) 
Sec. 2-4-8. - Transfer of real property by nonexclusive listing agreements. 
    As an alternative to the procedure established under section 2-4-5, the board may, by resolution, describe the real property of the city which is to be sold, provide a maximum rate of fee, compensation or commission, and provide that the city reserves the right to reject any and all offers determined to be insufficient. After adoption of the resolution, the board may engage licensed real estate brokers to attempt to sell the described property by way of nonexclusive listing agreements. 
(Code 1979, § 2-02-04.1; Code 1994, § 3-01-08; Ord. No. 735, § 2, 1988) 
ARTICLE 5. - FEES FOR SERVICE 

Sec. 2-5-1. - Implied contract for services. 
    The owner or occupant of any property causing, permitting or using the connection to the city's potable water and sanitary sewer systems by way of such act shall be presumed to have entered into a contract with the city for utility service. Under the terms of the presumed contract, the owner or occupant promises to: 
(1)  Pay for the utility service; 
(2)  Properly maintain the service connections; and 
(3)  Permit entry by authorized city employees for the purposes of water meter inspection, maintenance, repair, replacement or removal and the reading of meters for billing. 
(Code 1979, §§ 6-02-06, 6-02-16, 6-03-17; Code 1994, § 9-04-01) 
Sec. 2-5-2. - Joint and several liabilities of owners and occupants. 
    The owner and occupant of each premises shall be jointly and severally liable for all charges and fees for water, sewage, street lighting, storm drainage, garbage collection and solid waste disposal during the period of their respective ownership or occupancy. In addition to any other remedy, all such charges and fees having been properly billed to the owner or occupant of any premises, served and not paid, may be recovered by the city in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction against the owner, the occupant or both. 
(Code 1979, § 6-02-09; Code 1994, § 9-04-02) 
Sec. 2-5-3. - Fees and charges constitute liens upon the premises. 
    All water, sewage, street lighting, storm drainage, garbage collection and solid waste disposal charges or fees for any services supplied, provided or furnished by the city shall constitute liens upon the respective lots, tracts, parcels of land and premises receiving such service. All such charges or fees which have been properly billed to the owner or occupant of the premises served and which are more than 30 days past due on September 30 of each year shall be certified by the city finance director or designee to the county auditor between October 1 and October 10 of each year. The city finance director or designee, in so certifying such charges and fees, shall specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises served and the name of the owner thereof. The amount so certified shall be entered by the county auditor upon the tax rolls against such premises and collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city finance director in the same manner and time as other county and municipal taxes are assessed, certified, collected and returned. 
(Code 1994, § 9-04-03) 
Sec. 2-5-4. - Utility service connection or termination; right to hearing. 
(a)  The city has the right to refuse to connect or reconnect any water or sanitary sewer service or disconnect water service for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of the law. 
(2)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service. 
(3)  Nonpayment of bills. 
(4)  Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise. 
(5)  Damaging or tampering with any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service. 
(6)  Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment. 
(7)  Vacancy of premises. 
(8)  Failure of the consumer or the owner of the property to permit entry of the premises for reading of the city meter, or failure to pay an estimated billing when the city has been unable to obtain entry to the premises to read the city meter. 
(b)  The city shall provide written notice of water service termination to the owner or customer at least fourteen days in advance of disconnecting the service and provide a specific reason for the planned termination of service. The notice shall be sent by regular mail to the address shown on the city's billing receipts and shall include a statement that the recipient of the notice may submit a written demand to the finance director for an informal hearing before the board or its designate. Upon receipt of a written demand for hearing, the planned service termination shall be cancelled and the finance director shall schedule an informal hearing as soon as is practicable. Following the hearing, the board or its designate may order that the utility service be terminated without further delay, make such order that the utility service be terminated if the owner or customer fails to take certain specified actions or make such other reasonable order as may be necessary or appropriate. 
(c)  Whenever water service is disconnected pursuant to this section, a reasonable reconnect fee shall be paid by the owner, customer or successor in interest before reconnection. 
(Code 1979, §§ 6-02-15, 6-03-08; Code 1994, § 9-04-04) 
Sec. 2-5-5. - Tampering prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  Prohibited. No person shall: 
(1)  Tamper with, damage, injure, deface, remove or break the seal on any water meter or other water system component. 
(2)  Break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  Break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the public street lighting system. 
(4)  Break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the public storm drainage system. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  A person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of an offense. 
(2)  Upon discovery of any water meter which has been broken, injured or tampered with, whether through intentional or accidental cause, the public works department director shall be empowered to shut off the water to such premises until such time as the same is repaired or replaced. The expense of repairing or replacing any meter shall be a charge against the consumer, shall be billed with the next month's water bill and shall become due and payable as with any other service charge assessed by the city. 
(Code 1979, §§ 6-02-13, 6-03-06; Code 1994, § 9-04-05) 
Sec. 2-5-6. - Sale of service by customer prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to resell any utility service obtained from the city to others except only by special arrangement approved by the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 6-02-19; Code 1994, § 9-02-16) 
ARTICLE 6. - PUBLIC RECORDS MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Public records, N.D.C.C. § 44-04-17.1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-6-1. - Purpose. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided by law or court order, all records of public and governmental bodies, boards, bureaus, commissions or agencies of any political subdivision supported in whole or in part by public funds shall be public records, open and accessible for inspection during reasonable office hours. This article establishes procedures and fees for the inspection of records and the furnishing of copies of records of the city. Search, prior review and copy services are provided in order to make access to records meaningful. The city has the duty to properly safeguard and protect its records and to ensure that the confidentiality of records which are privileged under the law is maintained. The purpose of charging for record searches, prior review and copies is not to obstruct the furnishing of information but to impose the cost of these services upon the person who seeks the information, rather than upon the general public. 
(Code 1994, § 2-13-01; Ord. No. 811, § 1(0-00-01), 1993) 
Sec. 2-6-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Copy request means a request for a specified number of copies of specified records where the records are sufficiently identified so that no search is required. 
    Prior review means an administrative review of the requested records to protect their confidentiality as required or allowed by law. 
    Record as provided in N.D.C.C. § 44-04-17.1. 
    Search request means any request for inspection or copies of records which are not sufficiently described to permit immediate identification of individual pages or records. 
(Code 1994, § 2-13-02; Ord. No. 811, § 1(0-00-02), 1993) 
Sec. 2-6-3. - Certain records confidential; when prior review required. 
    When a request to review, inspect or copy records of the city may include or compromise information which is privileged under state law, the department head responsible for maintaining and protecting such records shall direct that a prior review of the record be conducted by an appropriate city employee, and the costs of the prior review shall be charged to the person requesting the records. 
(Code 1994, § 2-13-03; Ord. No. 811, § 1(0-00-03), 1993) 
Sec. 2-6-4. - Written request required; services to be prepaid. 
    Any request for inspection of public records or for search or copy services must be in writing on a form provided by the city. If the request is made by telephone or by some other written document, whenever possible, the form should be completed on behalf of the requestor. If the cost of the request exceeds $5.00, no inspection, search or copy services shall be commenced until the cost is paid in advance. If the actual cost of furnishing the services, including the costs of search and prior review, exceeds the advance payment, no copies shall be furnished or inspection allowed until the person requesting services makes payment in full. 
(Code 1994, § 2-13-04; Ord. No. 811, § 1(0-00-04), 1993) 
Sec. 2-6-5. - Response time; inspections supervised. 
    The regular and ordinary duties of city employees responsible for response to search and copy requests are of primary importance and take precedence over such requests. Search and copy requests are to be attended to as promptly as is reasonably possible without delaying accomplishment of primary duties. Requests to inspect records which may require search or prior review to protect confidential matters shall be subject to reasonable rules and regulations as to when, where and how inspection may be made. To safeguard public records and prevent the alteration or loss of records, all inspections must be supervised. 
(Code 1994, § 2-13-05; Ord. No. 811, § 1(0-00-05), 1993) 
Sec. 2-6-6. - Components and waiver of fees. 
    The full cost to the city of any copy, search or prior review services shall be calculated and charged to the person requesting those services. The city finance director may waive charges for these services in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Copy requests totaling less than ten sides or impressions and requiring no search or prior review. 
(2)  Requests made by governmental officials or their agents who require the information in order to carry out their official responsibilities and duties. 
(3)  Requests made by attorneys on behalf of clients involved in current civil or criminal actions in which the city is a party and is required by court rule or order to disclose public records. 
(4)  Requests for which the city determines that a waiver of charges would be in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 2-13-07; Ord. No. 811, § 1(0-00-07), 1993) 
Sec. 2-6-7. - Search and prior review fees. 
    Search and prior review fees shall be charged based upon the fee schedule set forth in N.D.C.C. § 44-04-18(2). 
(Code 1994, § 2-13-08; Ord. No. 811, § 1(0-00-08), 1993; Ord. No. 1034, 1-29-2008) 
Sec. 2-6-8. - Copy fees. 
    The fee for copying documents shall be $0.25 per page. There is no additional charge for time spent by the operator of copying equipment if the time required to provide the copying service is less than one hour. If the time required to provide the copying service is more than one hour, a service fee equal to that provided for search and prior review services shall be charged. If the copy request concerns a record which cannot be readily photocopied, copies may be made in any reasonable manner and a copy charge shall be equal to the total cost of the production of the copies. 
(Code 1994, § 2-13-09; Ord. No. 811, § 1(0-00-09), 1993; Ord. No. 1286, 4-3-2018; Ord. No. 1288, 5-15-2018) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, N.D.C.C. title 5; local regulation of retail sales of alcohol, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-09. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Growler means a glass bottle not to exceed 64 ounces that is filled with beer by a licensee or an employee of a licensee with beer from a keg. The sale of growlers, in compliance with this chapter, is authorized only for licensees approved to sell alcoholic beverages both on-sale and off-sale. The filling of growlers by means of tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler or produced by the licensee pursuant to applicable laws. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. The sale of a filled growler shall be considered off-sale. A growler with a broken seal shall be considered an open container. 
    Licensed premises means: 
(1)  The rooms within a building, including the bar area, dining room, banquet or meeting rooms and all other areas, spaces or rooms where alcoholic beverages are regularly or occasionally sold, served, dispensed or consumed by patrons; 
(2)  An enclosed patio structure permanently affixed to the building of the licensed premises which has been approved under the provisions of section 4-1-11; 
(3)  A temporary site off and away from the licensed premises which has been approved by the board under the provisions of sections 4-2-6 or 4-2-9; or 
(4)  A publicly owned or operated facility which has been granted a special permit under the provisions of section 4-2-9. 
    Licensee means any person to whom a license has been issued to sell alcoholic beverages by the city. 
    Lodge or club means any corporation or association organized for civil, fraternal, social or business purposes, or for the promotion of sports, which has at least 200 members at the time a license is applied for pursuant to this chapter, and was in existence on November 3, 1936. 
    Off-sale means the sale of all alcoholic beverages in the original package for consumption off or away from the licensed premises where sold, and upon which premises the consumption of alcoholic beverages is unlawful; provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit the licensee from dispensing and the customer from consuming a free sample of wine as defined by the laws of this state. 
    On-sale means the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the licensed premises where sold. 
    Package and original package means any container or receptacle holding alcoholic beverages which is corked or sealed by the manufacturer and which cork or seal has not been removed or broken prior to the sale of such package to the customer. 
    Sale means any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means whatsoever for a consideration. The term "sale" includes all sales made by any person, whether principal proprietor, agent, servant or employee. 
    Sale at retail means a sale to a customer for use or consumption and not for the purpose of resale in any form. 
    Wholesaler means any person engaged in the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages at wholesale to persons holding a retail license for the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages within the state or in interstate commerce. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-01; Code 1994, § 12-01-01; Ord. No. 645, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 709, § 1, 1986; Ord. No. 752, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1161, 8-20-2013) 
Sec. 4-1-2. - Application. 
(a)  This chapter is declared to be an exercise of the police power directly affecting and designed to promote peace, safety, good order, health and well-being of the people of the city. This chapter shall apply to all territory within the city and to such outlying contiguous territory without the corporate limits within which the city may exercise police jurisdiction as defined by law. 
(b)  All licenses or permits issued by the city pursuant to this chapter confer a privilege on the license holder to engage in the activity or occupation so licensed, and do not constitute property or property rights or create any such rights in any license holder or applicant. No license or permit issued under this chapter may be mortgaged, encumbered, pledged, seized, levied upon, attached, executed upon, assessed or in any manner taken for the purpose of securing, or in satisfaction of, any debt, judgment, lien, mortgage, encumbrance or obligation. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-02; Code 1994, § 12-01-02; Ord. No. 1116, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 4-1-3. - Hours and time of sale. 
    A person may not sell or dispense, or permit the sale, dispensation or consumption, of alcoholic beverages on licensed premises at any time when prohibited by state law or city ordinances, unless otherwise permitted by the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction. A person may not dispense or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on a licensed premises between 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Sundays, and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. of all other days of the week. All drinks, glasses and beverage containers must be collected and emptied or disposed of as soon as practicable at the legally required time of closing or immediately thereafter. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-03; Code 1994, § 12-01-03; Ord. No. 645, § 2, 1981; Ord. No. 724, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 809, § 1, 1993; Ord. No. 1234, 2-2-2016) 
State Law reference- Days and hours of sale, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-05 et seq. 
Sec. 4-1-4. - Location. 
(a)  General. No class A, class D or class D-1 license shall be issued to cover any location within 300 feet of the property line of property whereon is located any school, church, public or parochial school, public library, hospital, college or university building used for academic purposes, unless the entities affected by the above limitation consents to the issuance of the license. No license shall entitle the holder, except lodges and clubs, to carry on such business at retail except on the first floor above or on ground level; however, hotels and motels may deliver to their guests for consumption in their rooms. 
(b)  Retail alcoholic beverage license. No retail liquor license, whether general or off-sale, shall be issued for any building, room or place not directly adjoining a public street. 
(c)  Gas stations, grocery stores and convenience stores. No retail off-sale alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to a person whose business to be licensed is located in a building that is primarily a gas station, grocery store or convenience store, unless the area to be licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages is clearly set out in a blueprint or diagram and is separated from the nonlicensed portion of the business by a wall designed to allow sales personnel to serve customers and make sales in both the licensed and unlicensed portions of the premises and that may allow customers in either portion of the premises access to the other. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-04; Code 1994, § 12-01-04; Ord. No. 1114, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 4-1-5. - Possess or use by underage persons; presence in licensed premises. 
(a)  Except as permitted in this section and section 4-1-7, an individual under 21 years of age may not manufacture or attempt to manufacture, purchase or attempt to purchase, consume or have recently consumed other than during a religious service, be under the influence of, be in possession of, or furnish money to any individual for the purchase of an alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  An individual under 21 years of age may not enter any licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are being sold or displayed, except: 
(1)  A restaurant, if accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; 
(2)  In accordance with section 4-1-7; 
(3)  If the individual is an independent contractor or the independent contractor's employee engaged in contract work and is not engaged in selling, dispensing, delivering, or consuming alcoholic beverages; 
(4)  If the individual is a law enforcement officer or other public official who enters the premises in the performance of official duty; or 
(5)  If the individual enters the premises for training, education, or research purposes under the supervision of an individual 21 or more years of age with prior notification of the local licensing authority. 
(c)  An individual under 21 years of age is immune from criminal prosecution under this section if that individual contacted law enforcement or emergency medical services and reported that another individual under 21 years of age was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption, provided assistance to the individual in need of medical assistance until assistance arrived and remained on the scene, or was the individual in need of medical assistance and cooperated with medical assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene. The maximum number of individuals that may be immune for any one occurrence is five individuals. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, N.D.C.C. § 5-01-08. 
Sec. 4-1-6. - Sale to certain persons prohibited. 
(a)  Any person who shall knowingly deliver alcoholic beverages to an individual under 21 years of age, except as allowed under section 4-1-7, or to a habitual drunkard, an incompetent, or an obviously intoxicated individual is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, subject to section 4-1-5. 
(b)  An individual under 21 years of age is immune from prosecution under this section if that individual contacted law enforcement or emergency medical services and reported that another individual under 21 years of age was in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption, provided assistance to the individual in need of medical assistance until assistance arrived and remained on the scene and cooperated with medical assistance and law enforcement personnel on the scene, or was the individual in need of medical assistance. The maximum number of individuals that may be immune for any one occurrence is five individuals. 
(c)  If an individual is convicted of this section for delivering alcoholic beverages to an individual under 21 years of age, the court shall consider the following in mitigation: 
(1)  After consuming the alcohol, the underage individual was in need of medical assistance as a result of consuming alcohol; and 
(2)  Within 12 hours after the underage individual consumed the alcohol, the defendant contacted law enforcement or emergency medical personnel to report that the underage individual was in need of medical assistance as a result of consuming alcohol. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-05; Code 1994, § 12-01-05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, N.D.C.C. § 5-01-09. 
Sec. 4-1-7. - Dispensing to underage persons; presence in licensed establishments. 
(a)  Except as permitted in this section, a licensee who dispenses alcoholic beverages to an individual under 21 years of age, or who permits an individual under 21 years of age to remain on the licensed premises while alcoholic beverages are being sold or displayed, is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, subject to section 4-1-5. 
(b)  No person under 21 years of age shall be employed in or about any premises licensed under N.D.C.C. chs. 5-01, 5-02, 5-03 or 5-04, except as provided in this section. 
(c)  An individual under 21 years of age may not remain in a restaurant where alcoholic beverages are being sold except if the restaurant is separated from the room in which alcoholic beverages are opened or mixed and gross sales of food are at least equal to gross sales of alcoholic beverages which are consumed in the dining area, or if the individual is employed by the restaurant as a food waiter, food waitress, busboy, or busgirl, under the direct supervision of an individual 21 or more years of age and is not engaged in the sale, dispensing, delivery, or consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  An individual under 21 years of age may enter and remain on the licensed premises if the individual is an independent contractor or the independent contractor's employee engaged in contract work and is not engaged in selling, dispensing, delivering, or consuming alcoholic beverages; if the individual is a law enforcement officer or other public official who enters the premises in the performance of official duty; or if the individual enters the licensed premises for training, education, or research purposes under the supervision of an individual 21 or more years of age with prior notification of the local licensing authority. 
(e)  An individual under 21 years of age may remain in an area of a site where beer, wine, or sparkling wine is sold in accordance with the conditions of an event permit issued pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 5-02-01.1. 
(f)  An individual who is 18 years of age or older but under 21 years of age may be employed by a restaurant as provided in subsection (b) of this section to serve and collect money for alcoholic beverages, if the individual is under the direct supervision of an individual 21 or more years of age, but may not be engaged in mixing, dispensing, or consuming alcoholic beverages. Any establishment where alcoholic beverages are sold may employ individuals from 18 to 21 years of age to work in the capacity of musicians under the direct supervision of an individual 21 or more years of age. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, an individual is not 21 years of age until 8:00 a.m. on that individual's 21st birthday. 
(h)  If an individual is convicted of this section, the court shall consider the following in mitigation: 
(1)  After consuming the alcohol, the underage individual was in need of medical assistance as a result of consuming alcohol; and 
(2)  Within 12 hours after the underage individual consumed the alcohol, the defendant contacted law enforcement or emergency medical personnel to report that the underage individual was in need of medical assistance as a result of consuming alcohol. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-02-06, 10-02-07; Code 1994, §§ 12-01-06, 12-01-07; Ord. No. 752, § 2, 1989) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-06. 
Sec. 4-1-8. - Misrepresentation of age; licensee may keep book. 
    Any person who misrepresents or misstates that person's age or the age of any other person or who misrepresents that person's age through presentation of any document purporting to show that person to be of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Any licensee may keep a book and may require anyone who has shown documentary proof of that person's age, which substantiates that person's age to allow the purchase of alcoholic beverages, to sign the book if the age of that person is in question. The book must show the date of the purchase, the identification used in making the purchase and the appropriate numbers of such identification, the address of the purchaser, and the purchaser's signature. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-02-08, 10-02-09; Code 1994, §§ 12-01-08, 12-01-09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, N.D.C.C. § 5-01-08.1. 
Sec. 4-1-9. - Presumption of licensee's innocence when certain facts established relative to underage persons. 
    The establishment of the following facts by a person making a sale of alcoholic beverages to a person not of legal age constitutes prima facie evidence of innocence and a defense to any prosecution therefor: 
(1)  That the purchaser falsely represented and supported with other documentary proof that the purchaser was of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  That the appearance of the purchaser was such that an ordinary and prudent person would believe the purchaser to be of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  That the sale was made in good faith and in reliance upon the representation and appearance of the purchaser in the belief that the purchaser was of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, N.D.C.C. § 5-01-08.2. 
Sec. 4-1-10. - Sale or use on streets prohibited. 
(a)  This section does not apply to persons in motor vehicles. 
(b)  Except as may be permitted under article 3 of this chapter, the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages or the possession of any open receptacle containing any alcoholic beverages upon any street, alley or public way is prohibited. 
(c)  Except as may be permitted under article 3 of this chapter, the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon any street, alley, or public way located within any commercial zoning district or upon any lot adjacent to any licensed alcoholic beverage premises is prohibited. 
(d)  A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-10; Code 1994, § 12-01-10; Ord. No. 627, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 922, 6-19-2001) 
State Law reference- Possession of alcohol in motor vehicles, N.D.C.C. § 39-08-18. 
Sec. 4-1-11. - Sale or use outside licensed premises prohibited; exception. 
    The sale, service, dispensing or consumption of alcoholic beverages off of the licensed premises is prohibited, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Where made in accordance with a special permit granted by the board under the provisions of sections 4-2-17 or 4-2-20; or 
(2)  Where made within a patio structure which is permanently affixed to the licensed premises and which meets the following criteria: 
a.  Access to the patio structure may be made only through the licensed premises; 
b.  The patio structure must be permanently enclosed or fenced at a minimum height of 36 inches to prevent entrance other than through the licensed premises; provided, however, that said fence must have a gate as required by the International Fire Code currently in effect; 
c.  The licensee shall file with the building inspector a site plan showing the location, plans and specifications of the proposed enclosure in relation to the licensed structure and the lot lines of the premises. The proposed plan must be approved by the building inspector and fire chief; and 
d.  The enclosed patio area does not exceed the total square footage of the licensed premises to which it is attached. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-10.1; Code 1994, § 12-01-10.1; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 752, § 4, 1989; Ord. No. 1058, § 2(b), (c), 6-30-2009) 
Sec. 4-1-12. - Licensee responsible for conduct of place of business. 
    Every licensee is made responsible for the conduct of his place of business and is required to maintain order and sobriety in such place of business. No intoxicated person shall be permitted to remain upon the premises or to be sold beer, liquor or alcoholic beverages by any person holding any license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-11; Code 1994, § 12-01-11) 
Sec. 4-1-13. - Screens, booths, enclosures or partitions prohibited on on-sale premises. 
    No on-sale licensee shall construct, maintain or suffer or cause to be constructed, placed or maintained any side room, any closed booth, or other enclosures or partition in any part of the premises for which a license has been or is to be issued. All of the premises, except necessary storerooms and spaces not used for the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall be open and freely accessible from any and all parts of the interior of such premises without obstruction, by any door, partition screen, curtain, blind or any other type of enclosure or wall. All booths and areas within said premises, except storerooms and spaces not used for the sale of beer, shall be freely accessible from all parts of the interior of said premises. No booths shall be more than 50 inches high, nor have thereon any screen, curtain, partition or blind or obstruction of any kind preventing a clear view into said booth from the main room and aisle of said premises. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-12; Code 1994, § 12-01-12) 
Sec. 4-1-14. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    No license shall be issued under this chapter to cover any locations where any slot machine or other gambling device is operated or kept upon the premises, or in any part of the building for which a license is issued. The keeping or operation of said gambling devices or slot machines shall be cause for the cancellation or revoking of any license that may have been issued for said premises. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the keeping or operating of any device or games of chance which have been duly licensed under the provisions of the laws of this state. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-14; Code 1994, § 12-01-13; Ord. No. 645, § 3, 1981) 
Sec. 4-1-15. - Health regulations for on-sale establishments. 
    No on-sale license shall be granted for any premises unless adequate and sufficient lavatories and toilets, separately maintained for men and women, and kept in a clean and sanitary condition, are at all times readily available to patrons and handicapped accessible; and no license shall be issued unless adequate sanitary provisions are made for the conduct of business. An on-sale license may be revoked where the foregoing requirements or any other health ordinances or regulations are not at all times strictly observed. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-15; Code 1994, § 12-01-14) 
Sec. 4-1-16. - Purchases to be from licensed wholesaler. 
    No licensee under this chapter shall purchase, have or possess any beer, liquor or alcoholic beverages unless he has purchased the same from a wholesaler duly licensed under the laws of this state. Each licensee under this chapter shall keep on file all invoices covering purchases by him of beer, liquor or alcoholic beverages showing the name and license number of the wholesaler and the name of the municipality issuing such wholesale license. Such records shall be retained in possession of the licensee and at all times shall be open to inspection by any peace officer of this state. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-16; Code 1994, § 12-01-15) 
Sec. 4-1-17. - Records. 
    Each licensee under this chapter shall keep a book showing the kind and quantities of all beer, liquor or alcoholic beverages purchased by him, together with the name of the person from whom purchased, the license number of the wholesaler selling such beer, liquor or alcoholic beverages to said licensee and the name of the municipality issuing such wholesale license. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-17; Code 1994, § 12-01-16) 
Sec. 4-1-18. - Tax must be paid. 
    Other than as regulated by N.D.C.C. ch. 5-03, no alcohol or alcoholic beverage as defined in N.D.C.C. title 5, shall be permitted to be owned, held or possessed on any premises licensed for retail sale unless taxes on said alcohol or alcoholic beverage have been paid. The possession of any container of any kind in which such alcohol or alcoholic beverage is found which does not bear the evidence of such tax being paid shall be deemed to be illegal and in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-18; Code 1994, § 12-01-17) 
Sec. 4-1-19. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1262, § (1), adopted June 6, 2017, effective August 1, 2017, repealed § 4-1-19, which pertained to special Sunday off-sale alcoholic beverage permit authorized; tax and restrictions imposed and derived from Code 1994, § 12-01-17.1; Ord. No. 834, §§ 1-4, adopted May 2, 1995. 
Sec. 4-1-20. - Entertainment and live performances upon the licensed premises. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Entertainment means all forms and types of performing or entertaining for patrons on licensed premises without regard to whether such entertainment is provided by means of live performances or manually operated, or electronic systems designed for stereophonic playback of prerecorded signals. However, the term "entertainment" does not include the use of any television, radio or coin-operated music machine subject to the restrictions in subsection (c) of this section. 
    Live performances means any person who, for consideration, monetary or otherwise, performs in person on a licensed premises as a singer, musician, dancer, comedian, model or any other type of entertainer. 
(b)  No alcohol beverage licensee under this chapter shall permit entertainment for more than one day a week any given week without first having obtained a cabaret license as provided in this chapter. The licensing procedure for cabarets shall be governed by the provisions of chapter 12, article 1. 
(c)  The annual license fee for a cabaret license shall be as established by resolution. The license shall be for a period of one year from July 1 to June 30 and shall be payable in advance at the time of the issuance of the license and thereafter, on or before June 30 of each subsequent year for renewal of said license. 
(d)  The application for a cabaret license shall be made by the licensee on forms provided by the city administrator's office. The granting of a cabaret license shall be subject to the approval of the board and it may be suspended or revoked in conformance with procedures established under article 2 of this chapter. 
(e)  A licensee shall have the duty and responsibility to make available for inspection by a member of the police department an identification card, such as a driver's license, containing a photograph and the age of all entertainers or performers on the licensed premises. The licensee shall not permit a person to make a live performance on the licensed premises if the licensee is not able to obtain the required identification from the performer. 
(f)  If any licensee, or any agent, servant or employee, shall violate any provision of this section, the license of such premises may be revoked for cause in accordance with the procedures established pursuant to section 12-9-5. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-25; Code 1994, § 12-01-18; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 1986; Ord. No. 961, § 1, 6-17-2003) 
Sec. 4-1-21. - Application of prohibited entertainment and live performances to extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Section 4-1-20 and any related licensing and zoning ordinances shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the city and, as permitted by state law, to such outlying contiguous territory without the corporate limits within which the city may exercise police and zoning jurisdiction. 
(Code 1994, § 12-01-19; Ord. No. 961, § 2, 6-17-2003) 
ARTICLE 2. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 4-2-1. - License required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of beer, liquor or alcoholic beverages within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(b)  This section does not apply to public carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
(c)  This section does not apply to a nonprofit organization that sells an alcoholic beverage as part of a fundraising activity. As used in this section, the term "fundraising activity" includes an auction, raffle, or other prize contest for which consideration is given. If the alcoholic beverage is sold as part of a fundraising event, the sale may not be for consumption at that event. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-01; Code 1994, § 12-02-01) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-01. 
Sec. 4-2-2. - Qualifications. 
(a)  Generally. In addition to qualifications or other requirements which may be prescribed by the laws of this state or by the ordinances or resolutions of this city, no license shall be issued to any applicant unless the applicant files a sworn application completed in full, accompanied by the required fee, showing that he possesses the following qualifications: 
(1)  Individual. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant and the applicant's manager, if any, must: 
a.  Be a legal resident of the United States. 
b.  Have a legal and bona fide residence in the state at the time of applying for such license and maintain such residency during the entire term of such license. 
c.  Be over the age of 21 years. 
d.  Be of good moral character. 
e.  Not have had revoked in the previous years any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages issued to him by any city, county or state. 
f.  Be the owner or lessee of the licensed premises during the entire period licensed. 
g.  Provide satisfactory documentation showing that the building in which the business is conducted meets all local and state requirements regarding sanitation and safety. 
h.  Provide documentary proof that the property taxes for the building in which the licensed premises are located are not delinquent. 
(2)  Partnership. If the applicant is a partnership, the manager of the licensed premises must possess all of the qualifications required of an individual applicant. The partners must be legal residents of the United States and persons of good moral character. 
(3)  Corporation. If the applicant is a corporation for profit: 
a.  It must be registered with the Secretary of State of the State of North Dakota and authorized to do business in this state; 
b.  The manager of the licensed premises and any officer, director or stockholder who is engaged or employed at the licensed premises in any capacity in the conduct of the business of the licensed premises must possess all of the qualifications required of an individual applicant. The officers, directors and stockholders must be legal residents of the United States and persons of good moral character. 
(4)  Lodge or club. If the applicant is a lodge or club, the manager or any person who is in charge of day-to-day operations of the licensed premises must possess the qualification required of an individual applicant. 
(b)  Prohibited. 
(1)  A license may not be issued to an applicant if the applicant, manager or any partner, officer, director or stockholder engaged or employed at the licensed premises in any capacity has been convicted of any of the following offenses within the previous five years, and it is determined that that person has not been rehabilitated within the meaning of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-33-02.1, or that the offense has a direct bearing upon the person's ability to serve the public as an alcoholic beverage retailer: 
a.  Any felony. 
b.  Any offense involving the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession for sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
c.  Any offense involving the sale of drugs or felony possession of drugs. 
d.  Prostitution. 
e.  Obscenity. 
f.  Two or more convictions for driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs. 
g.  Any other offense determined by the board to have a direct bearing on the person's ability to serve the public as an alcoholic beverage retailer. 
In the application of this subsection, it shall be presumed that a violation of subsections (b)(1)a, b, c, d, e, or f of this section has a direct bearing on the person's ability to serve the public. 
(2)  No license shall be issued to any person engaged in business as the representative or agent of another, and a license will be issued only to the owner of the business to be conducted at the location for which the license is sought. Except in the case of an applicant for a special class B or class C liquor establishment license, no applicant shall directly or indirectly, own, control or have any interest whatsoever in any other liquor establishment which is licensed to sell beer or liquor within the city. 
(3)  No applicant shall enter into any agreement or understanding with any other person with respect to the use, operation and management of any beer or liquor establishment licensed within the city which shall in any way contravene the qualification requirements contained in this chapter. 
(c)  Revocation of license. Any misstatement or concealment of facts in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued thereon. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-02; Code 1994, § 12-02-02; Ord. No. 645, § 4, 1981; Ord. No. 666, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 770, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 783, § 1, 1991) 
State Law reference- General qualifications for licenses, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-02. 
Sec. 4-2-3. - Application. 
    Any person desiring a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall file a written, sworn application with the city administrator, containing the following information: 
(1)  Name and residence. The name and legal residence of the applicant and the place of residence of the applicant for a period of one year preceding the date of the application. In the event the applicant is a corporation, the names and legal residences of all persons holding one percent or more of capital stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and legal residence of each and every member of the partnership. 
(2)  Evidence of incorporation. If the applicant is a corporation, the following information shall be provided to the city: 
a.  The date of the incorporation and the state where incorporated; 
b.  The amount of the authorized capital stock; 
c.  The amount paid in capital, the purpose for which the corporation was incorporated; 
d.  The names and addresses of the officers, directors and managing agents of the corporation; and 
e.  Whether the corporation is a subsidiary of any corporation and, if so, the name of the parent corporation, and the names and addresses of the officers, directors and managing agents of the parent corporation. 
A copy of the certificate of authority issued by the Secretary of State of the State of North Dakota issued to the applicant and the parent corporation, must be attached to the application. 
(3)  Location and site plan. The location by legal and other appropriate and specific description of the place for which the license is sought and a site plan which specifically delineates the rooms and enclosed patio areas, if any, of the building in which the applicant intends to sell, serve, dispense or consume alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  Sanitation, safety and building standards. The applicant must provide documentation establishing that the building in which the business is to be conducted meets local and state requirements regarding sanitation, safety and building regulations. 
(5)  Name and address of the owner of the premises. The name and address of the owner of the premises for which the license is sought. If the license is sought by a person other than the owner of the premises, the general terms of the lease under which the applicant holds possession of the premises, including the period covered by the lease and the rental to be paid. At the request of the board, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the lease under which he holds possession of the premises. If a license is sought by the owner of the premises, the applicant shall state the date on which the applicant acquired title thereto. 
(6)  Delinquent taxes. Whether there are any delinquent taxes against such property. 
(7)  Previous business; alcoholic beverages. Whether the applicant has ever engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages prior to this application, and, if so, giving the time and type of business and the place where so engaged, whether within or without the state. 
(8)  Record of license termination. Whether the applicant has ever had a license of any kind revoked or cancelled by any municipal, state or federal authority, including a license for the sale or distribution of any alcoholic beverages, and if so, the time and place of such cancellation, the authority cancelling the same, and the reason for such cancellation. 
(9)  Record of conviction for violation. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any municipal, state or federal law relating to the manufacture, sale, distribution or possession of any alcoholic beverages, and if so, the date of the conviction, the name of the violation for which convicted and the court which exercised jurisdiction over the matter. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any other local, state or federal offense, and, if so, the date of the conviction, the name of the crime for which convicted, the amount and terms of the sentence imposed, and the court in which convicted. 
(10)  Associates. The names and addresses of all persons who will have charge, management or control of the establishment for which a license is requested. 
(11)  Other interests. Whether any person other than the applicant has any right, title, estate or interest in the lease hold or in the furniture, fixtures or equipment in the premises for which the license is requested, and if so, the name and address of the person, and a statement of the interest so held. 
(12)  Other agreements. Whether the applicant has any agreement, understanding or intention to have any agreement or understanding with any person to obtain for any other person or transfer to any other person the license for which the application is made or to obtain for any purpose other than for the specified use of the applicant, and if so, the name and address of such person and the conditions of such agreement. 
(13)  Interest in other establishments; alcoholic beverages. Whether the applicant has any interest whatsoever, directly or indirectly, in any other alcoholic beverage establishment either at wholesale or retail, within or without the state, and, if so, the names and addresses of such establishments. This provision includes the holders of stock in any corporation dealing in liquor or alcoholic beverages either at wholesale or retail and within the borders of the United States. 
(14)  Occupational record. A list of the occupations in which the applicant has followed during the last ten years. 
(15)  Business references. The names and addresses of at least three business references. 
(16)  Commercial rating. Whether the applicant is rated by any commercial agency, and if so, the name and address of such agency. 
(17)  Additional businesses. Whether the applicant is engaged in any business other than that for which the license is sought or intends to engage in any business other than for the sale of alcoholic beverages under the license applied for, and, if so, the type of business, and if an employee, the name and address of such employer. 
(18)  Type of license. The specific kind of license applied for. 
(19)  Lodges or clubs. Where the license is sought for a lodge or club, the date of the organization of such club, the number of members therein, the purpose for which organized and the purpose for which profits to be derived from the business engaged in pursuant to such license are to be applied and, whenever required by the board, a list of members belonging to the lodge or club. 
(20)  Inspection. A consent to allow city officials and police officers to enter the premises described at any time for inspection. 
(21)  Authorization. Evidence that the applicant has all permits or licenses required by the state or federal government. 
(22)  Other. Such other information as the board, by resolution, may require. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-03; Code 1994, § 12-02-03; Ord. No. 752, § 5, 1989) 
Sec. 4-2-4. - Classification of alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(a)  The city may issue an unlimited number of alcoholic beverage licenses of any class. There shall be nine classes of alcoholic beverage licenses, namely: 
(1)  Class A. General retail (on- and off-premises) license; requires a minimum seating capacity of 30 persons). 
(2)  Class B. Club (on- and off-premises) license to be issued only to clubs and lodges whose profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages are used only for benevolent purposes. 
(3)  Special B. Publicly owned or operated facilities. 
a.  A license for the retail on-sale of beer only at the manager's building may be issued to the manager of the Municipal Golf Course designated by the Mandan Park District, which shall be nontransferable and shall be held only for the period of the manager's contract and shall terminate with the termination of his contract. The annual license fee shall be as established by resolution for that portion of the year in which such golf course is open. This license shall be limited to the service of beer only to the patrons at the Municipal Golf Course and not open to the public at large. 
b.  A license for the retail on-sale of beer only at the Dacotah Centennial Park may be issued to the concessionaire designated by the Mandan Park District, which shall be nontransferable and shall be held only for the period of the concessionaire's contract and shall terminate with the termination of the contract. The annual license fee shall be as established by resolution for that portion of the year in which such park is open. This license shall be limited to the service of beer only to the patrons of the Dacotah Centennial Park and not open to the public at large. 
c.  Subject to the approval of the board, a temporary license for the distribution or retail on-sale of alcoholic beverages may be issued to the managers of the Municipal Golf Course and the Prairie West Golf Course designated by the Mandan Park District, which shall be nontransferable and shall be held only for the period of a special event, not to exceed three days and shall terminate with the termination of the event. The board may set restrictions, limitations or conditions upon the temporary license. The annual license fee shall be as established by resolution. This license shall be limited to the service or sale of alcoholic beverages to the patrons at the golf courses and not open to the public at large. The licensee may distribute or sell alcoholic beverages during the special event either in the club house or on the golf course, using beverage carts, provided that the sale or distribution is only by a person 21 years of age or older. 
d.  Subject to the approval of the board, a temporary license for the distribution or retail on-sale of alcoholic beverages at the Dacotah Centennial Park may be issued to the concessionaire designated by the Mandan Park District, which shall be nontransferable and shall be held only for the period of a special event, not to exceed three days, and shall terminate with the termination of the event. The board may set restrictions, limitations, or conditions upon the license. The license fee per event shall be as established by resolution. This license shall be limited to the service or sale of alcoholic beverages to the patrons of the Dacotah Centennial Park and not open to the public large and distribution or sale may only be by a person 21 years of age or older. 
e.  Persons or entities holding a special class B beer only licenses are eligible applicants under the provisions of section 4-2-19 relating to special Sunday permits but they are not eligible applicants for a special catering permit under the provisions of section 4-2-16. In making application for a special Sunday permit under the provisions of section 4-2-19, the application must be in the name of the public facility and signed by the president of the park board, or the duly authorized park board representative and the holder of the special class B beer only license. 
(4)  Class C. Motel and hotel (on- and off-premises) license to be issued to the owner or lessee of hotels and motels having 40 or more sleeping rooms, provided that such license may not be transferred to another location and only one licensee may carry on business in the hotel or motel. 
(5)  Class D. Exclusive retail off-sale alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  Class D-1. Exclusive retail off-sale beer and wine. 
(7)  Class E. Food and beverage license, permitting on-premises alcoholic beverage sales, subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
a.  A licensee may sell alcoholic beverages in a restaurant separated from the room in which alcoholic beverages are sold, if the gross sales of food are at least equal to the sales of alcoholic beverages in the dining room. 
b.  On-premises only. The food and beverage license shall be for on-premises alcoholic beverage sales only, and no authority is conferred under said license pursuant to this section to engage in the off-sale alcoholic beverage business. 
c.  Location. Once a food and beverage license has been established at a particular location, no transfer of the license to another location may be permitted. A cessation of business at a licensed location for a period of 30 days or longer shall automatically cancel the license. 
(8)  Class F. Food and beverage license permitting on-premises beer and wine sales subject to the restrictions and conditions applicable to a Class E license set forth in subsection (a)(7) of this section. 
(9)  Class G. Food and beverage license for alcoholic beverage sales for commercial passenger vessels on the Missouri River, subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
a.  The vessel docks and boards passengers at a location within the jurisdictional limits of the city. 
b.  The vessel has a minimum seating capacity for 50 persons. 
c.  Sale and service of on-sale alcoholic beverages may only be made to passengers on the vessel who shall not be permitted to remove alcoholic beverages from the vessel. The sale of off-sale beer is permitted only when made from within an enclosed structure situated on the share adjacent to the vessel's dock, but may not be taken aboard the vessel nor consumed on the vessel. 
d.  The vessel and its operation shall be in compliance with all applicable laws and regulations concerning health, fire and safety. 
e.  Gross sales of food are at least equal to the gross sales of alcoholic beverages. 
f.  Persons under the age of 21 years may be permitted on the vessel in accordance with N.D.C.C. § 5-02-06, provided that the area where persons under the age of 21 years are permitted is separate from the room where alcoholic beverages are opened or mixed. 
g.  Temporary bars may be set up and sale or service of alcoholic beverages permitted to passengers anywhere on the vessel at times when persons under the age of 21 years are not permitted on the vessel. 
h.  The license fee shall be as established by resolution for any seven consecutive monthly periods in the year. 
(10)  Class BWO. The retail on sale of beer and wine only, subject to the following restrictions and conditions. 
a.  May not be in conjunction with any uses other than those in Retail Group A, Service Group A, and Commercial Recreation Group as defined by section 105-1-4. 
[b.]  The license and issuance fee shall be as determined by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to require the city to issue licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages and the board in its discretion, should it deem that a significant number of such licenses have been issued, may refuse to issue any license even though authorized under this section. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-01; Code 1994, § 12-02-04; Ord. No. 645, § 5, 1981; Ord. No. 783, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 969, § 1, 2003; Ord. No. 1120, 4-17-2012; Ord. No. 1168, 10-15-2013; Ord. No. 1297, 10-16-2018) 
State Law reference- Local license fees, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-03. 
Sec. 4-2-5. - Class WB license. 
    A class WB license shall authorize the licensee to operate a domestic winery or brewery and to sell wine or beer produced on the premises by the licensee on-sale and off-sale, and to sell wine-making or brewery supplies and related services, subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  A class WB license may be issued only to a domestic winery or brewery owner or operator who obtains a license from the office of the attorney general allowing the production of wine or beer. 
(2)  A class WB license shall authorize the licensee to sell, on the winery or brewery premises, wine or beer produced by that winery or brewery on the premises at on-sale or off-sale, in retail lots, and not for resale, in total quantities not in excess of that permitted by N.D.C.C. § 5-01-21 and amendments thereto. In the absence of another appropriate license, sales or delivery of on-sale or off-sale wine, or any other alcoholic beverage produced off the premises shall not be permitted. Licenses under this section entitle the licensee to sell beer manufactured on the premises for off-premises consumption, in brewery-sealed containers of quantities permitted by N.D.C.C. § 5-01-21 and amendments thereto. 
(3)  A class WB license will authorize the licensee to utilize special event permits issued by the office of the attorney general. 
(4)  The class WB license holder may: 
a.  Sell and deliver beer produced by the brewery to licensed beer wholesalers. 
b.  Dispense free samples of beer offered for sale. Complimentary samples of beer may not be in an amount exceeding that permitted by N.D.C.C. § 5-01-21 and amendments thereto, per patron. 
c.  Sell and deliver beer produced by the brewery to licensed retailers within the state, but only if: 
1.  The brewer uses the brewer's own equipment, trucks, and employees to deliver the beer; 
2.  Individual deliveries, other than draft beer, are limited to the case equivalent of that permitted by N.D.C.C. § 5-01-21 and amendments thereto, to each licensed retailer; 
3.  The total amount of beer sold or delivered directly to all retailers does not exceed that permitted by N.D.C.C. § 5-01-21 and amendments thereto; and 
4.  A common carrier is not used to ship or deliver the brewery's product to the public or to licensed retailers. All other sales and deliveries of beer to licensed retailers in this state may be made only through a wholesaler licensed in this state. 
(5)  The class WB license shall be governed by all the provisions of this chapter generally applicable to all license qualifications. 
(6)  The fee for a class WB license shall be as determined by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1994, § 12-02-04.1; Ord. No. 1065, 12-15-2009; Ord. No. 1083, §§ 1, 3, 7-30-2010; Ord. No. 1140, § 2, 2-5-2013) 
State Law reference- Local license fees, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-03. 
Sec. 4-2-6. - Class MP license. 
    A class MP license shall authorize the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages produced within the state and to sell said alcoholic beverages at a location within the city, subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  A class MP license may be issued only to a business who obtains a license from the office of the attorney general allowing the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  A class MP license will authorize the licensee to only sell alcoholic beverages produced in the state and no other alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  The class MP license shall be governed by all the provisions of state law and of this article generally applicable to all license qualifications. 
(4)  The fee for a class MP license shall be as determined by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1994, § 12-02-04.2; Ord. No. 1082, 7-16-2010) 
State Law reference- Local license fees, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-03. 
Sec. 4-2-7. - Class DY license. 
    A class DY license shall authorize the licensee to produce distilled spirits, and to sell said distilled spirits at a location with the city, subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  A class DY license may be issued only to a business who obtains a license from the office of the state tax commissioner allowing the production of distilled spirits. 
(2)  A class DY license will authorize the licensee to only sell distilled spirits. 
(3)  The class DY license shall be governed by all the provisions of state law and of this article generally applicable to all license qualification. 
(4)  The fee for a class DY license shall be as determined by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1994, § 12-02-04.3; Ord. No. 1101, 8-2-2011) 
State Law reference- Local license fees, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-03. 
Sec. 4-2-8. - Certification of food sales. 
    Any license holder whose premises includes a restaurant and who allows persons under 21 years of age to enter the premises with a request for renewal of a license shall be required to file with the city a statement by a certified public accountant indicating that he has examined and tested the books and records of the licensee and that the licensee's gross revenue from the sale of food is equal to or exceeds the gross revenue from the sale of alcoholic beverages in the dining room. At the option of the licensee, in lieu of a certified public accountant's statement, the licensee may request from the state tax commissioner's office and furnish to the city finance director's office a certified copy of the licensee's sales tax returns for the most recent 12-month period prior to renewal. 
(Code 1994, § 12-02-01; Ord. No. 1117, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 4-2-9. - License and issuance fees. 
(a)  The license fees shall be payable in advance at the time of the filing of the application. Should a license be granted for an unexpired portion of the term of the license, said fees shall be prorated on the basis of the number of months remaining in such term, determined as of the first day of the month in which such license is issued. No license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be assignable or transferable, and the failure to pay any license fee on or before the date when it is due shall automatically cancel the license. 
(b)  The license and issuance fees shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(c)  When a license is not renewed, or is revoked, a one-time only issuance fee, in an amount determined by the board by resolution, shall be paid by any new licensee. The issuance fee shall be in addition to the annual license fee. In lieu of setting an issuance fee, the board may utilize a competitive sealed bidding process for the award of these licenses, may establish a minimum bid or substitute any other procedure for the issuance of a license as determined by the board. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-06; Code 1994, § 12-02-06; Ord. No. 683, § 3, 1985; Ord. No. 969, § 2, 2003; Ord. No. 1047, 10-7-2008; Ord. No. 1119, 4-17-2012; Ord. No. 1168, 10-15-2013) 
State Law reference- Local license fees, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-03. 
Sec. 4-2-10. - Board approval of license application and site location required. 
(a)  A new license may not be issued to any person to engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverages within the city, nor may any license be transferred to a new or different location without license application and site approval by the board. Prior to the issuance of a new license or approval of transfer of a license to a new or different location, the board shall determine that the proposed site for the licensed business is consistent with the following: 
(1)  Public convenience and necessity. 
(2)  The proposed site meets the site requirements of section 4-1-4. 
(3)  Compliance of the proposed site with applicable building code requirements. 
(4)  Compliance of the proposed site with applicable health and sanitation requirements. 
(5)  Compliance of the proposed site with applicable zoning regulations. 
(b)  The board may also consider: 
(1)  The effect that the proposed siting may have on traffic movements in the area. 
(2)  The number and nature of sites already existing in the area. 
(3)  The general nature, character, age and condition of the development adjacent to the proposed site. 
(4)  The proximity of the proposed site to residential areas, regardless of zoning. 
(c)  Sales of alcoholic beverages in closed containers may be made to persons in motor vehicles at drive-up windows designed for such purpose. However, it shall be unlawful to sell or serve alcoholic beverages in open containers to drivers or occupants of motor vehicles. It shall further be unlawful to serve or sell alcoholic beverages to pedestrians through drive-up windows designed and utilized for sales to persons in motor vehicles. 
(d)  A license application must be approved upon determination of the board that the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 12-02-07; Ord. No. 1115, § 7, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 4-2-11. - Transfers of licenses limited. 
(a)  No license under the provisions of this article or any interest therein may be transferred to another person without the prior approval of the board. The accumulated transfers of ownership of more than 30 percent of the outstanding stock in any corporation holding a license issued under this chapter, occurring at any time subsequent to the date of the application for a license, shall be reported by the licensee to the city administrator at the time the accumulated total of the transfers exceeds 30 percent of the outstanding stock. The accumulated transfers of ownership of 50 percent or more of the outstanding stock of any corporation holding a license under this chapter, occurring at any time subsequent to the date of the application for a license, shall be deemed to be a transfer of the license and a request for the transfer of the license shall be submitted to the board for approval. The board shall determine what information surrounding the transaction shall be disclosed to the city by the applicant. Any concealment of the facts of the transaction shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(b)  Not more than two licenses of each classification shall be issued to any applicant, and each license shall be valid only for the specific premises licensed. 
(c)  No license shall be granted any person who is a member of partnerships possessing two or more retail alcoholic beverage licenses, nor to any person owning more than one percent of the total common or preferred capital stock of any corporations, or combination of corporations, possessing two or more such licenses, nor shall any retail license be issued or granted to any person who is employed in any capacity in connection with any two or more other licensed liquor establishments, nor shall any retail license to sell alcoholic beverages be issued or granted to any member of the immediate family of any person who is the holder of two or more licenses within the city limits. As used in this section, the term "immediate family" means a spouse, child, sibling, parent, grandparent or grandchild, including step-parents, stepchildren, step-siblings, and adoptive relationships. 
(d)  The holder of a class A, D, or D-1 license as of October 15, 2013, shall be permitted to request a transfer of said license on a one-time basis. No further transfers of said license shall be permitted. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-07; Code 1994, § 12-02-08; Ord. No. 645, § 7, 1981; Ord. No. 1118, 4-17-2012; Ord. No. 1174, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. 4-2-12. - Record of applications. 
    Each license shall be given an identification number and a permanent record thereof must be kept by the city finance director showing the name and the address of the licensee and the legal description of the place licensed. Should the application be denied, the amount deposited for license fees shall be returned. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-08; Code 1994, § 12-02-09) 
Sec. 4-2-13. - Location limited. 
    No license to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverages under the provisions of this chapter shall entitle the holder thereof to carry on such business at more than one location under one license. No change of location of any business licensed to sell or distribute any alcoholic beverages, shall be permitted without first making application to and receiving the approval of the board. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-09; Code 1994, § 12-02-10) 
Sec. 4-2-14. - Expiration. 
    Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter shall end on June 30 following the date of their issuance unless revoked or suspended as described in this chapter. Any license issued hereunder shall be used by the operations of a facility within six months of its issuance. Failure to use said license within said period of time shall be cause for revocation. In the event of revocation, there shall be no refund of any issuance fee or license fee. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-10; Code 1994, § 12-02-11; Ord. No. 1173, 11-19-2013) 
Sec. 4-2-15. - Grounds for suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the board following notice and hearing upon the happening of any one or more of the following contingencies: 
(1)  The death of the licensee, unless upon application to the board by the personal representative of the deceased, the board consents to the carrying on of the business by the personal representative. 
(2)  When the licensee ceases business at the location licensed unless a permit for change of location has been granted. 
(3)  When the licensee is adjudged bankrupt. 
(4)  When the licensee has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter, or of N.D.C.C. title 5, or of an offense under any municipal ordinance, state or federal law determined by the board to have a direct bearing upon a licensee's or manager's ability to serve the public as an alcoholic beverage retailer; or, following conviction of any offense, is determined not to be sufficiently rehabilitated under N.D.C.C. § 12.1-33-02.1. 
(5)  When the licensee ceases to possess the qualifications required of an applicant for a license as set out in this chapter. 
(6)  When the federal or state license or permit of the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages at the location licensed has been suspended or revoked. 
(7)  When the business of the licensee at the location licensed is conducted in violation of health or sanitary regulations or other city ordinances. 
(8)  When the licensee, if an individual, or one of the partners or officers if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, is convicted of driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle, or disorderly conduct, provided the conviction is upheld on appeal if an appeal is filed. 
(9)  When the licensee permits persons under 21 years of age, habitual drunkards, obviously intoxicated persons or disorderly persons to frequent his place of business. 
(10)  When the licensee, or any agent, servant or employee shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
a.  Sell or permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of 21 years or to an incompetent person. 
b.  Sell any alcoholic beverages to any person while such person is in an obviously intoxicated condition. 
c.  Sell or permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
d.  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
e.  Sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages, the sale, possession or consumption of which is not authorized under the license. 
f.  Violate any provision of section 4-1-20 regulating entertainment and live performances upon the licensed premises. 
(b)  The causes enumerated in subsection (a) of this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive and the board retains and reserves unto itself the right to cancel the license for any cause which it may deem sufficient. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-11; Code 1994, § 12-02-12; Ord. No. 645, §§ 8, 9, 1981; Ord. No. 708, § 2, 1986) 
Sec. 4-2-16. - Notice and hearing on alleged violations. 
(a)  Any person having information that a licensed retailer of alcoholic beverages has violated any provisions of this chapter may file with the city attorney or city administrator an affidavit specifically setting forth such violation. Upon receipt of such affidavit, the city attorney shall set the matter for hearing not later than the next regular meeting of the board or forward such affidavit to the attorney general. If the matter has been set for hearing before the board, a copy of the affidavit and notice of hearing must be mailed to the licensee by first class mail not less than five days before the hearing. A record of the hearings will be made by stenographic notes or the use of an electronic recording device. At the discretion of the board, or upon request of the city attorney or licensee, the hearing may be adjourned from time to time. 
(b)  If, upon completion of the hearing, it appears to the board that a violation of the provisions of this chapter has been established by a preponderance of the evidence, the board may enter an order suspending the license for a time certain, or shall terminate or revoke the license. If, however, the board determines that sufficient evidence of the alleged violation has not been presented, then the license shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-12; Code 1994, § 12-02-13) 
State Law reference- Hearing required, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-10; appeals, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-11. 
Sec. 4-2-17. - Special catering permit; fee; penalty. 
    Any qualified alcoholic beverage licensee, except the special class B licensees, may obtain a special catering permit to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages permitted to be sold under the restrictions of the regular license at an event or public dance, which is located off and away from the licensed premises and on premises designated by the permit. For the purposes of this section, the term "qualified alcoholic beverage licensee" means a licensee who has paid the city lodging and restaurant tax imposed by the city and who continues to pay such tax thereafter. The fee for the permit shall be as established by resolution. The permit shall not be valid for a period of greater than 14 days, and may include Sundays, provided that the licensee meets the qualifications of section 4-2-20. An application for a special catering permit must be filed by the licensee with the city administrator at least 15 days prior to the first day of the event and shall be placed on the agenda for consideration of the board. The application shall contain the name of the licensee, the type of event for which the permit is desired, the specific location at which the event will take place, including a diagram of the area to be licensed, and the date and times for which the permit is desired. The board may establish rules to regulate and restrict the operation of the special catering permit. The licensee granted a catering permit shall be responsible for compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and with any restrictions and special conditions placed on the catering permit by the board. Any violation of the licensing code provisions, restrictions or special conditions may subject the licensee to immediate revocation of the catering permit and suspension or revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. Any person who dispenses, sells or permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages in violation of this section or the conditions of a special permit is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-13; Code 1994, § 12-02-14; Ord. No. 752, § 6, 1989; Ord. No. 784, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 809, § 2, 1993) 
State Law reference- Local license fees, N.D.C.C. § 5-02-03. 
Sec. 4-2-18. - Special catering permit conditions. 
(a)  Any licensee applying for a special catering permit pursuant to section 4-2-17 shall make written application to the city administrator upon forms furnished by the city. The applicant shall furnish therein such information as may be required by the city administrator, including the name and address of the applicant and the date, place and time of the proposed service. 
(b)  The permit, upon issuance, shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  That any alcoholic beverage dispensed under such permit be consumed on the licensed premises. 
(2)  That such permit shall be effective only from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. on the following day on each day the permit is in effect. 
(3)  That the licensee, as a condition to the issuance of such permit, consents and agrees that any city police officers may enter upon and inspect the licensed premises or any part at any time for the purpose of determining compliance with any city ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-14; Code 1994, § 12-02-15) 
Sec. 4-2-19. - Special catering permit; application of law. 
    Any licensee holding a special catering permit shall comply with all other applicable ordinances and laws relating to the use and sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-15; Code 1994, § 12-02-16) 
Sec. 4-2-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1262, § (1), adopted June 6, 2017, effective August 1, 2017, repealed § 4-2-20, which pertained to Sunday alcoholic beverage permit and derived from Code 1979, § 10-03-16; Code 1994, § 12-02-17; Ord. No. 752, § 7, 1989; Ord. No. 763, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 784, § 4, 1991; Ord. No. 795, § 1, 1992; Ord. No. 797, § 1, 1992; Ord. No. 809, § 3, 1993; Ord. No. 1234, adopted Feb. 2, 2016. 
Sec. 4-2-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1262, § (1), adopted June 6, 2017, effective August 1, 2017, repealed § 4-2-21, which pertained to special Sunday off-sale alcoholic beverage permit authorized; tax and restrictions imposed; penalty and derived from Code 1994, § 12-02-17.1; Ord. No. 834, adopted May 2, 1995. 
ARTICLE 3. - PUBLIC BEER GARDENS 

Sec. 4-3-1. - Public beer garden penalty. 
    Any person who dispenses, sells or permits the consumption of alcoholic beverages in violation of this article or the conditions of the public beer garden permit, who furnishes information required by this article which is false or misleading, or who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Any licensee violating the provisions of this article may also be subject to the suspension or revocation of the alcoholic beverage license, following notice and hearing. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-17; Code 1994, § 12-03-08; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 752, § 9, 1989) 
Sec. 4-3-2. - Public beer garden required; nontransferable; fees. 
(a)  No licensee shall give, hold or conduct a public beer garden unless the owner of the place where the beer garden is given, or the licensee giving the same or in charge thereof, first shall have procured a permit to give, hold and conduct such beer garden. 
(b)  The term "public beer garden" means a temporary event at which alcoholic beverages are sold, dispensed or consumed off and away from a licensed premises in an outdoors setting, including sites which may be protected from the elements by completely enclosed tents. 
(c)  If a permit is issued to any licensee to conduct a public beer garden, the beer garden may be conducted in such place only by the licensee to whom the permit is issued. Such permit shall not be transferable. 
(d)  A permit fee shall be assessed for each day that the beer garden is to be held and the fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board. The permit shall not be valid for a period of greater than three consecutive days nor shall it be valid from 1:00 a.m. on any Sunday through 12:00 noon on the following Monday unless the licensee is the holder of a Sunday alcoholic beverage permit issued pursuant to the provisions of section 4-2-20. 
(e)  The licensee granted a beer garden permit shall be responsible for compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and with any restrictions or special conditions placed on the beer garden permit by the board. Any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Any violation of this Code or restrictions or special conditions of the permit may subject the licensee to immediate revocation of the beer garden permit and suspension or revocation of the alcoholic beverage license following notice and hearing. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-17; Code 1994, § 12-03-01; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 752, § 8, 1989; Ord. No. 836, 6-21-1995) 
Sec. 4-3-3. - Application for beer garden permit; special permits. 
    Any person or on- or off-sale alcoholic beverage licensee desiring to conduct a public beer garden shall make application for a special permit to do so to the board, 30 days in advance of the proposed event. Four copies of the application shall be filed with the city administrator and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Identification of applicant. The application shall include the name, address and social security or driver's license number of the applicant and the name, address and social security or driver's license number of the person who will manage or conduct the public beer garden. The application shall also state whether the applicant or the person who will manage or conduct the event has been convicted of any crime relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances and whether the applicant or the person who will manage or conduct the event has ever had a license of any kind revoked or cancelled by any municipal, state or federal authority. 
(2)  Date, time and place. The place, date and hours of the proposed event shall be clearly identified. 
(3)  Site plan. The person conducting the event shall include in the application a site plan which details the exact placement of the beer garden, lighting and other electrical equipment, public seating, toilet facilities, fencing or other barricades, parking, marked fire lanes, and the proximity of public roadways. The site plan submitted by the applicant shall be reviewed by the city engineer who shall submit his recommendations to the board. 
(4)  Estimate of attendance. The applicant shall provide an estimate of the number of persons that the person conducting the event has determined can be safely accommodated within the chosen site and an estimate of the number of persons expected to attend. 
(5)  Ticket sales. The application shall contain information relating to ticket sales which addresses the control of attendance to meet the site plan limitations, if any. If the person conducting the event intends to open the event to the general public without prior ticket sales, the application shall address the manner in which the person intends to control the size of the crowd to meet the site plan limitations. 
(6)  Traffic control. The application shall specify the proximity of public roadways to the site of the event and to the proposed parking area and shall contain a description of the manner in which traffic control will be handled to ensure the safe ingress and egress of pedestrians and vehicles. Appropriate arrangements shall be made by the person conducting the event to ensure that no interference will occur with the public use of any adjacent public roadways. The traffic control proposal shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(7)  Parking. The application and site plan shall specify the planned accommodations for public parking. The person conducting the event shall provide adequate parking for persons in attendance commensurate with the estimated number of persons that the selected site can accommodate. Under no circumstances will parking be permitted upon public roadways if said parking would be in violation of posted parking restrictions. 
(8)  Sanitation. The application shall include the number and placement of sanitary toilet facilities which will be provided by the person conducting the event. The application shall be accompanied by a letter from the county health officer that indicates that the county has reviewed the site plan and estimate of the number of persons in attendance and has determined that the number and kind of proposed toilet facilities is adequate to meet the needs of persons in attendance at the event. 
(9)  Garbage. The application shall include a description of the and number of available garbage disposal units on the site of the event in addition to the arrangements made to clean up the site after the event has ended. 
(10)  Fencing and barricades. The application shall contain a description of the fencing and barricade system which is intended to control access to the event site, and the location of the fencing and barricade system shall be noted on the site plan. The perimeter of the public beer garden site must be surrounded by a six-foot cyclone-style fence or enclosed within a tent which has four sides. For all events, whether outdoors or indoors, adequate provisions for entrances and exits and access by fire, police and other emergency personnel or vehicles should also be noted in the application and on the site plan. 
(11)  Signing. The application shall contain a description of the signing which is proposed to control pedestrian and vehicular traffic, parking, and provide appropriate notices to the persons in attendance at the event. The size, wording and placement of the signs shall be included in the description and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(12)  Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. If the applicant does not possess an alcohol license, the identity of the alcoholic beverage licensee who will be dispensing said beverages shall be provided. The board may, by resolution or by condition attached to the permit, restrict the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverages to beer or beer and wine only at any event or series of events. Therefore, the person conducting the event shall include within the application a description of the efforts that will be taken to prevent the consumption of other alcoholic beverages at the event, including those alcoholic beverages attempted to be brought in by members of the public. At all such events the dispensing of alcoholic beverages in glass bottles, glass drinking cups or any other glass containers shall be prohibited. 
(13)  Security. The application shall contain, in addition to the estimated number of persons in attendance, an estimate of the number of police officers or private security guards which will be needed to adequately police the event. As used in this subsection, the term "private security guard" means a person licensed pursuant to N.D.C.C. ch. 43-30. The chief of police will be responsible for making the final determination of the number of officers or guards that will be required. 
(14)  Bond required. The person conducting the event shall file with the city finance director a cash bond in an amount to be set by resolution of the board. The bond shall be returned to the person after the event if the site has been adequately cleaned and if no additional costs or property damage has resulted from or as a result of the event. 
(15)  Cost to the city. If the proposed event necessitates any expenditures on the part of the city, excluding the cost of providing the police security, such costs shall be paid to the city by the person conducting the event. The posted cash bond shall be used by the city to cover the costs associated with the event and the balance, if any, will be returned to the person conducting the event. If the cash bond does not cover the costs resulting from the public event, the person conducting the event shall be assessed the additional costs. Costs within this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Costs of cleanup or garbage removal; 
b.  Costs of traffic signing, fencing or barricades; 
c.  Any property damage to public property which occurred during or as a result of the event; and 
d.  Any additional costs associated with crowd control, including injury to city employees or other persons which occurred during or as a result of the event. 
(16)  Temporary vacation of streets. If the site plan proposed by the applicant requires the use of any public street, alley or right-of-way, the application and the site plan shall clearly designate the portion of the public street, alley or right-of-way to be temporarily vacated. In no event shall more of a public street adjoining one-half of a public block be vacated, and in each instance adequate access for emergency vehicles shall be provided. The temporary vacation of any public street or right-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. The board shall determine whether any public street, alley or right-of-way may be temporarily vacated for a public beer garden on a case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-17; Code 1994, § 12-03-02; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1040, § 13, 7-1-2008) 
Sec. 4-3-4. - Inquiry and public hearing. 
    The board shall make such inquiry and investigation as to the propriety of granting or refusing such permit as shall be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-17; Code 1994, § 12-03-03) 
Sec. 4-3-5. - Refusal and revocation of permit for cause. 
(a)  The board may revoke the permit at any time for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. The board shall refuse to issue such permit, and shall revoke a permit already issued, where it appears that: 
(1)  The permitted site is or is likely to become a public nuisance or detrimental to public health, safety or order; 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are being violated; 
(3)  An alcoholic beverage or controlled substance is being sold or given away, except as authorized by the terms of the permit; 
(4)  Any city ordinances or state laws are being violated; 
(5)  The chief of police determines that adequate security cannot be provided to the public event either by city police officers, special police or a combination thereof; or 
(6)  The board has determined that the number of like events needs to be limited in order to ensure the health, safety and security of the public. 
(b)  The chief of police shall report any violations of the permit or violations of city ordinances or state laws immediately to the board. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, if the chief of police determines that the conduct of the public beer garden has become a public nuisance or injurious to the public peace, health or safety, the chief shall immediately cause said event to be closed to the public and thereafter notify the board of the action and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-17; Code 1994, § 12-03-04; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 4-3-6. - Restrictions and conditions attached to permits. 
    If the board determines that the event will not unduly interfere with the peace, health and safety of the public or the neighborhood in which the event will occur and that the applicant is in compliance with the requirements for sanitation and garbage disposal; parking, fencing, traffic and crowd control; security; and regulation of alcoholic beverage consumption, the board may approve the issuance of the permit to be effective for the dates designated and subject to the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages may be distributed and consumed only in those areas specifically designated in the site plan and approved by the board; 
(2)  The distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only during the hours designated by the board and set as a condition of the permit, which in no event shall be before the hour of 12:00 noon on the date specified in the permit and 1:00 a.m. on the following day; 
(3)  No person having a permit to hold a public beer garden shall permit in any such place any person who is obviously intoxicated or who is under 21 years of age; 
(4)  The licensee, as a condition to the issuance of such permit, consents and agrees that any city police officer or special police officer may enter upon and inspect the licensed premises or site or any part at any time for the purpose of determining compliance with the conditions of the permit or city ordinances; and 
(5)  The licensee shall comply with all other applicable ordinances and laws relating to the use and sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-17; Code 1994, § 12-03-05; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 4-3-7. - Limits on number of public beer garden events. 
    The board may, by resolution, set a maximum limit on the number of beer garden permits which will be granted during any period of time. Notwithstanding any restrictions on the number of events, the board may deny any application for a permit if it determines that adequate provisions for traffic control, health, safety or security cannot be provided for the event. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-17; Code 1994, § 12-03-06; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 4-3-8. - Indemnification of city. 
    A person may not give, hold or conduct a public beer garden, nor may the board approve a permit for such public event, without the person having first filed with the city finance director a bond or certificate of insurance in the amount as specified by resolution of the board indemnifying the city and the public against personal injury or property damage occurring at or as a result of the public event. The person giving, holding or conducting the public event agrees to save and hold harmless the city for any personal injury or property damage resulting from actions of any city employees, police officers or special officers in the course of their employment, which actions are directly related to the conduct of the public beer garden. 
(Code 1979, § 10-03-17; Code 1994, § 12-03-07; Ord. No. 744, § 1, 1989) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Chickens, § 105-1-16. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate animals, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(47). 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means any person employed or appointed by the city who is authorized to investigate and enforce violations relating to animal control or cruelty under the provisions of this chapter. 
    At large means a domestic animal that is not on its owner's property and not leashed. 
    Domestic animal means an animal of a tamed species commonly kept as pets and includes livestock. 
    Impoundment means seizing and confining a domestic animal by any animal control officer under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Owner means a person who (a) has a right of property or custody of a domestic animal provided that the right is not merely temporary, (b) keeps or harbors a domestic animal other than temporarily, (c) knowingly permits a domestic animal to remain indefinitely on or about any premises occupied by that person, (d) a domestic animal customarily returns daily for a period of seven days to a place and are given food or shelter, the occupiers of that place shall be deemed to be owners. 
    Provocation means any action or activity, whether intentional or unintentional, which would be reasonably expected to cause a normal dog in similar circumstances to react in a manner similar to that shown by the evidence. 
    Vicious dog means without provocation, bites or attacks human beings or other animals, either on public or private property, or, in a vicious or terrorizing manner, approaches any person in apparent attitude of attack upon a street, sidewalk, or any public ground or place. 
(Code 1979, § 13-01-01; Code 1994, § 16-01-01; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-1-2. - Impoundment authorized. 
    It shall be the duty of any animal control officer to take and impound any animal declared to be a nuisance or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, §§ 13-01-12, 13-02-14; Code 1994, §§ 16-01-12, 16-03-08; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-1-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1307, adopted March 19, 2019, repealed § 6-1-3, which pertained to running at large prohibited and derived from Code 1979, § 13-01-02; Code 1994, § 16-01-02; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983. 
Sec. 6-1-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1307, adopted March 19, 2019, repealed § 6-1-4, which pertained to destruction of property prohibited and derived from Code 1979, § 13-01-03; Code 1994, § 16-01-03; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983. 
Sec. 6-1-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1307, adopted March 19, 2019, repealed § 6-1-5, which pertained to trespassing prohibited and derived from Code 1979, § 13-01-04; Code 1994, § 16-01-04; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983. 
Sec. 6-1-6. - Possession of animals restricted. 
    It is unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person to keep, own, possess or have under his/her control any poultry within the city limits, with the exception of: 
(1)  Commercial hatcheries. 
(2)  As permitted in section 105-1-16. 
(3)  As otherwise allowed by law. 
    It shall also be unlawful to keep within the platted portion of the city any swine, rabbits, cows or horses. 
(Code 1979, § 13-01-05; Code 1994, § 16-01-05; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1306, § 1, 3-5-2019; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-1-7. - Cruelty to animals prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to overwork, torture, cruelly beat, mutilate or needlessly kill, or carry or transport in any vehicle or conveyance in a cruel and inhumane manner, any dog, cat or other animal or cause these acts to be done. 
(Code 1979, § 13-01-06; Code 1994, § 16-01-06; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 6-1-8. - Cruel abandonment prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to abandon any dog, cat or other animal or cause such act to be done. 
(Code 1979, § 13-01-07; Code 1994, § 16-01-07; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, N.D.C.C. § 36-21.2-03. 
Sec. 6-1-9. - Food and shelter. 
    No person shall fail to provide any dog, cat or other animal in his charge or custody with necessary maintenance, drink and protection from the elements or cause any of these acts to be done. 
(Code 1979, § 13-01-08; Code 1994, § 16-01-08; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 6-1-10. - Fight upon exhibition. 
    It is unlawful for any person to maintain any place where fowls, dogs or other animals are suffered to fight upon exhibition or for sport upon any wager. 
(Code 1979, § 13-01-09; Code 1994, § 16-01-09; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 6-1-11. - Poisoning of dogs or cats prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to poison any dog or cat or distribute poison in any manner whatsoever for the intent, or for the purpose, of poisoning any dog or cat. 
(Code 1979, § 13-01-10; Code 1994, § 16-01-10; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 6-1-12. - Killing birds. 
    It is unlawful for any person to willfully frighten, shoot at, wound, kill, capture, ensnare, net, trap or in any manner molest or injure any robin, lark, whippoorwill, finch, sparrow, thrush, wren, martin, swallow, snowbird, bobolink, red-winged blackbird, oriole, kingbird, mockingbird, song sparrow, or other songbird or insectivorous bird, or in any manner to molest or injure the nest eggs or young of any such bird, or to have in possession the nest eggs, young or body of such bird. 
(Code 1979, § 13-01-111; Code 1994, § 16-01-11; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
ARTICLE 2. - DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 6-2-1. - Restricted activities. 
    It is unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person to allow any dog or cat owned by him or under his control for that animal to: 
(1)  Damages or defecates on private property other than private property owned or occupied by the animal's owner, or on public walks and recreation areas unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the person in charge of the dog or cat; 
(2)  Causes a disturbance by loud and frequent yelping, barking, howling, or yowling to annoy any reasonable person. 
(3)  Chases vehicles, or molests, threatens, or interferes with persons or other animals while the latter are on public property, irrespective of whether the dog or cat is on private or public property. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-07; Code 1994, § 16-03-01; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-2. - Restraint, running at large prohibited; dogs to be leashed required. 
    It is unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person to permit or allow any dog of which he is the owner or keeper to run at large within the city, or for the dog to be free of restraint except within the dog park. 
(1)  A dog shall be considered under restraint if it is (a) within the real property limits of its owner and securely confined thereon by a physical fence; or (b) secured by a tether which does not allow the dog to reach within the property of another person, a public walkway or a road (c) secured by a leash or lead no more than six feet in length being held by a person capable of controlling that dog. A dog that frees itself from its owner's real property limits, from a leash, tether or lead, or a dog that is in a vehicle in a manner that would not prevent escape or contact with other persons or animals shall be considered as not being under restraint. 
(2)  A dog shall be deemed running at large when off or away from the premises of the owner, possessor, keeper, or member of his immediate family and not under control, either by leash, cord or chain of not more than six feet in length. 
(3)  Any dog conveyed in an open compartment of any vehicle must be controlled either by being confined in a kennel or by a leash, cord or chain of a length which prevents the animal from reaching the walls or edge of the open compartment. 
(4)  Enforcement of this section may be by citation issued by the city animal control officer carrying a fine of $20.00. 
(5)  Any person cited for a violation of this section shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal offense and may utilize the same procedures for appearance, payment of statutory fee, posting and forfeiture of bond, waiver of hearing, or hearing as is provided for noncriminal traffic offenses pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Mandan Municipal Code. Any person failing to appear at the time designated, after signing a promise to appear, without paying the statutory fee or posting and forfeiting bond is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Failure to appear without just cause at the hearing must also be deemed an admission of commission of the violation charged. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-08; Code 1994, § 16-03-02; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1078, 4-20-2010; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-3. - Destruction of property prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to allow any dog or cat owned by him or under his control to destroy any property that is not the property of the owner or keeper. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-09; Code 1994, § 16-03-03; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 6-2-4. - Trespassing prohibited. 
    It is unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person to allow or permit any cat owned by him or under his control to trespass upon the private property of any other person within the limits of the city. 
(1)  Enforcement of this section may be by citation issued by the city animal control officer carrying a fine of $20.00. 
(2)  Any person cited for a violation of this section shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal offense and may utilize the same procedures for appearance, payment of statutory fee, posting and forfeiture of bond, waiver of hearing, or hearing as is provided for noncriminal traffic offenses pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Mandan Municipal Code. Any person failing to appear at the time designated, after signing a promise to appear, without paying the statutory fee or posting and forfeiting bond is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Failure to appear without just cause at the hearing must also be deemed an admission of commission of the violation charged. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-10; Code 1994, § 16-03-04; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-5. - Vicious dogs. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep, possess or harbor a vicious dog within the city. 
(b)  Whenever a complaint under oath is made to the effect that any person is in violation of this section, the municipal judge shall set a time and place for the hearing of such complaint, notice of which shall be given the owner or possessor of such dog not less than 24 hours before such hearing, in writing, served in the same manner as a summons. Should the municipal judge determine at the time of the filing of such complaint that such dog is dangerous to the public, he may require the animal control officer to immediately impound such dog pending the hearing on the complaint. At the time of the hearing of such complaint, all interested persons shall be entitled to testify. 
(c)  In the event that any person is found to be in violation of this section, the municipal judge shall issue an order requiring said owner or possessor of such vicious dog to either euthanize or remove the dog permanently from the city within 24 hours. In the event such dog is not euthanized or removed within such time, the animal control officer shall be authorized to immediately impound and euthanize such dog. The owner of a vicious dog shall be liable for and shall pay all costs associated with impoundment, removal, euthanasia or other associated costs incurred. 
(d)  Should a dog which has been impounded pending the hearing on said complaint be ordered euthanized or removed from the city subsequent to said hearing, the owner or possessor of such dog wishing to remove it from the city shall, within 24 hours after the issuance of such order, pay, all costs associated with impoundment and shall thereupon immediately remove said dog from the city. Any dog which shall be removed from the city under the provisions of this article and thereafter be brought back into the city, shall immediately be impounded by the animal control officer and euthanized. 
(e)  Should the municipal judge determine that the owner or possessor of an alleged vicious dog is not in violation of this section, said dog shall be returned to the owner or possessor by the animal control officer immediately and the fees for impounding and keeping said dog shall be paid by the city. 
(f)  Any dog taken and impounded under the provisions of this article because of having bitten any person shall be impounded for ten days before the final disposition is made of such dog under the provisions of this article. In the event a vicious dog cannot be taken up and caught by the animal control officer without such animal control officer exposing himself to danger or personal injury from such dog, or without exposing other persons to danger or personal injury from such dog, it shall be lawful for any police officer to forthwith destroy such dog. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-11; Code 1994, § 16-03-05; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-6. - Number of dogs and cats restricted. 
    No person shall keep or maintain more than three dogs and three cats, six months of age or older, on any premises lying within the platted portions of the city or within 200 yards of any platted portion of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-12; Code 1994, § 16-03-06; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 6-2-7. - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person within the city to keep, maintain or have in his custody or under his control any dog or cat over the age of six months which is not identified at all times by a tag that states, at a minimum, the name and phone number of the owner. Dogs and cats must be inoculated against rabies. A license issued under this article is valid for the duration of the rabies vaccination under which it is obtained and shall expire on the date when the last rabies vaccination of the dog or cat expires. The license must be renewed for so long as the cat or dog is kept within the city by payment of the fee established in this article. 
(1)  Enforcement of this section may be by citation issued by the city animal control officer carrying a fine of $20.00. 
(2)  Any person cited for a violation of this section shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal offense and may utilize the same procedures for appearance, payment of statutory fee, posting and forfeiture of bond, waiver of hearing, or hearing as is provided for noncriminal traffic offenses pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Mandan Municipal Code. Any person failing to appear at the time designated, after signing a promise to appear, without paying the statutory fee or posting and forfeiting bond is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Failure to appear without just cause at the hearing must also be deemed an admission of commission of the violation charged. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-01; Code 1994, § 16-02-01; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 903, § 1, 9-21-1999; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-8. - Rabies vaccination prerequisite. 
    No dog or cat license shall be issued under the provisions of this article unless the applicant or owner produces a certificate of vaccination from a duly licensed veterinarian showing that the dog or cat for which the license is desired has been vaccinated against rabies. A license issued under this article may not exceed the duration of the rabies vaccination. An owner or caretaker shall have his dog or cat vaccinated by a duly licensed veterinarian, who shall issue him a metal shield or tag having in figures the year for which the shield or tag is issued, which shall immediately be affixed to and kept upon such animal for which it shall have been issued. 
(1)  Enforcement of this section may be by citation issued by the city animal control officer carrying a fine of $20.00. 
(2)  Any person cited for a violation of this section shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal offense and may utilize the same procedures for appearance, payment of statutory fee, posting and forfeiture of bond, waiver of hearing, or hearing as is provided for noncriminal traffic offenses pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Mandan Municipal Code. Any person failing to appear at the time designated, after signing a promise to appear, without paying the statutory fee or posting and forfeiting bond is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Failure to appear without just cause at the hearing must also be deemed an admission of commission of the violation charged. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-02; Code 1994, § 16-02-02; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 903, § 1, 9-21-1999; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
State Law reference- Rabies control, N.D.C.C. ch. 23-36. 
Sec. 6-2-9. - License fee. 
    Every owner or keeper of a dog or cat shall pay therefore to the city for the use of the city, for each dog and cat, a fee in such amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-03; Code 1994, § 16-02-03; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 6-2-10. - Issuance of tags. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal control officer, at the time of the issuance of a license under this article, to furnish and deliver to the applicant for such license a tag for each dog and cat for which such license is issued, upon which tag shall be stamped or engraved the number of said license. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-04; Code 1994, § 16-02-04; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-11. - Tag attachment. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of the dog or cat licensed under this article to place around the neck of such animal a collar or on a harness, on which shall be securely fastened the tag furnished by the animal control officer. 
(1)  Enforcement of this section may be by citation issued by the city animal control officer carrying a fine of $20.00. 
(2)  Any person cited for a violation of this section shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal offense and may utilize the same procedures for appearance, payment of statutory fee, posting and forfeiture of bond, waiver of hearing, or hearing as is provided for noncriminal traffic offenses pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Mandan Municipal Code. Any person failing to appear at the time designated, after signing a promise to appear, without paying the statutory fee or posting and forfeiting bond is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Failure to appear without just cause at the hearing must also be deemed an admission of commission of the violation charged. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-05; Code 1994, § 16-02-05; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-12. - Transfer. 
    No tag shall be transferable from one dog or cat to another. 
(Code 1979, § 13-02-06; Code 1994, § 16-02-06; Ord. No. 664, § 1, 1983) 
Sec. 6-2-13. - Waste. 
(a)  Pet waste that is on the pet owner's property must not be allowed to accumulate to the extent that odors generated from the waste migrate off the property. Pet waste shall not be allowed to remain in an unenclosed front yard where it can be encountered by delivery workers or neighborhood residents. The code enforcement officer or any other authorized agent of the city may issue a citation to a pet owner who fails to clean up pet waste on the pet owner's property after being notified by the city that a complaint has been received regarding the pet waste. 
(b)  Waste from dogs, cats and other pets that is deposited beyond the boundaries of the pet owner's property must be immediately removed. The code enforcement officer or any other authorized agent of the city may issue a citation to a pet owner who fails to immediately clean up after a pet when the pet deposits solid waste on public property or private property not owned, rented, leased or managed by the pet owner. 
(c)  Violations of this section are infractions. 
(Ord. No. 1228, 1-5-2016; Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-14. - Conflicting ordinances. 
    All other ordinances of the City of Mandan that conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Sec. 6-2-15. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of the chapter shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this chapter, but they shall remain in effect; it being the legislative intent that this chapter shall remain in effect notwithstanding the validity of any part. 
(Ord. No. 1307, 3-19-2019) 
Chapter 8 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- North Dakota Disaster Act of 1985, N.D.C.C. ch. 37-17.1. 

ARTICLE 1. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- North Dakota Disaster Act of 1985, N.D.C.C. ch. 37-17.1. 

Sec. 8-1-1. - Purpose and responsibility. 
    Based upon the size and concentration of the population within the city's incorporated limits, and upon its disaster vulnerability, there shall be provided within the city the capability to respond to natural and defense-related emergencies. The city shall provide the personnel and services, either directly or through cooperative agreements, to protect its citizens and to respond to said emergencies. 
(Code 1979, § 4-09-01; Code 1994, § 6-03-01; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 1985) 
Sec. 8-1-2. - Emergency services coordinator established. 
    The board of city commissioners shall appoint an emergency services coordinator who will perform the duties specified in this chapter and as may be assigned by the state division of emergency management. 
(Code 1979, § 4-09-02; Code 1994, § 6-03-02; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 1985) 
Sec. 8-1-3. - Emergency operations response plan. 
    The board of city commissioners shall, by resolution, adopt an emergency operations response plan which sets out the manner in which the city will provide or secure disaster emergency services and which designates the chain of command during an emergency. 
(Code 1979, § 4-09-03; Code 1994, § 6-03-03; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 1985) 
Sec. 8-1-4. - Duties of emergency services coordinator. 
    The city administrator or designee serves as emergency services coordinator. The duties of the emergency services coordinator are as follows: 
(1)  Prepare a hazard vulnerability assessment to determine the risks of specific hazards, including natural and manmade causes, which are a direct concern for the city. 
(2)  Develop the plan for emergency services which provides a coordinated disaster emergency response. 
(3)  Define the responsibilities of agencies and departments of the city in preparation for, response to and recovery from disaster emergencies. 
(4)  Negotiate mutual aid agreements with local organizations and services to coordinate response capabilities for fire protection, emergency housing, ambulance, health care, traffic control and communications. 
(5)  Negotiate intergovernmental agreements with county, state and federal agencies to coordinate and supplement the city's emergency disaster service capabilities. 
(6)  Coordinate and serve as a direct liaison of the city between emergency service agencies and organizations as detailed in the city's plan and organizational structure. 
(7)  Provide and/or coordinate training for emergency services agencies, organizations and personnel. 
(8)  Ensure operational readiness of all emergency services equipment, including radio towers, emergency generators and support equipment dedicated to emergency service activities. 
(9)  Prepare the budget for emergency services activities. 
(10)  Determine the numbers and use of antennas on all radio towers. Maintenance fees shall be established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(11)  Assist the state division of disaster emergency management in studies of matters related to disaster mitigation. 
(12)  Monitor, test, maintain and upgrade, as necessary, the outdoor warning siren system for the city. 
(13)  Disseminate warning messages as directed by state and federal authorities relating to severe weather or defense emergencies. 
(14)  Report to the state division of emergency management as may be required by state law or the city plan. 
(15)  Assume such other duties as may be designated for local coordinators under N.D.C.C. ch. 37-17.1 or the emergency plan adopted by the board of city commissioners or as may be otherwise assigned by the board. 
(Code 1979, § 4-09-04; Code 1994, § 6-03-04; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 1985) 
Sec. 8-1-5. - Authority to utilize existing services and facilities. 
    The emergency coordinator is directed to utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing departments, offices and agencies of the state, the county and the city to the maximum extent practicable. The officers and personnel of all city departments, offices and agencies are required and directed to cooperate with and extend such reasonable services and facilities to the disaster emergency services organizations of the city and state upon request. 
(Code 1979, § 4-09-05; Code 1994, § 6-03-05; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 1985) 
Sec. 8-1-6. - Appropriations and authority to accept services, gifts, grants and loans. 
    The board of city commissioners shall have the power to make appropriation for the city's ordinary expenses of its local disaster emergency coordinator and services. The city may accept services, equipment, supplies, materials, gifts, grants and loans from any private or governmental source for the purpose of disaster emergency services, subject to the terms, rules and regulations of the agency, organization or persons providing same. 
(Code 1979, § 4-09-06; Code 1994, § 6-03-06; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 1985) 
Sec. 8-1-7. - State of emergency. 
(a)  State of emergency; declaration and duration. The president of the board of city commissioners, or the commissioner acting for the president of the board, is authorized, if he finds that the city or any part is suffering or is in imminent danger of suffering civil disturbance, disorder, riot or other occurrence, including danger of flooding of the city, or any part of the city, which will seriously and substantially endanger the health, safety and property of the citizens, to declare a state of emergency and take the following specified measures throughout the city or any part. The declaration shall be made in a proclamation which shall be delivered to the chief of police, who shall then see that said proclamation is delivered to the news media within the city and who shall use public address systems throughout the city, electronic notification systems or other means deemed appropriate by the chief of police and immediately notify the public of said proclamation. 
(1)  Require evacuation of all or any portion of the city. The chief of police shall have the authority to order the evacuation of residential or commercial buildings or other structures whenever, in the opinion of the chief of police, it is necessary in order to maintain the peace or to protect the health, safety, or property of the city or its citizens from the danger for which the state of emergency was declared. 
(2)  Prohibit or limit the movement of persons or hours of operation of businesses, by curfew or otherwise, within the designated disaster or emergency area, and the occupancy of premises therein. 
(3)  Halt access or exit upon public highways to or from the city or any part. 
(4)  Suspend operations at municipal airport. 
(5)  Halt the movement of trains, or other vehicles into, within, or from the city. 
(6)  Limit or prohibit the sale, dispensing or transportation of alcoholic beverages, explosives, gasoline or other flammable liquids. 
(7)  Limit or prohibit the sale, carrying or possession on the public sidewalks or public streets, or in any public park, of weapons, including, but not limited to, firearms, bows and arrows, air rifles, slingshots, knives, razors, or missiles of any kind. 
(8)  The city engineer shall have the authority to go upon the property of another to establish a temporary flood control dike of earthen or other material whenever, in the opinion of the city engineer, it is necessary in order to maintain or protect the health, safety or property of the city or citizens from flooding or the effects of flooding. In forming such opinion, the city engineer may consider the effect that floodwaters would have upon the city's system of storm or sanitary sewers, or upon other of the city's infrastructure system. 
(9)  The president of the board of city commissioners or the chief of police shall have the authority to close any and all streets, alleys, levees, dikes or other flood protection barriers and other public ways in the city to the public and to prohibit persons from being on, walking on or driving on the same whenever, in the opinion of the chief of police, it is necessary in order to maintain the peace of the community or to safeguard the same. 
(10)  Every person remaining present at the place of any riot or unlawful assembly after the same has been ordered to disperse by the police or any other lawful authority, except the public officers and persons assisting them in the dispersing of same, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(b)  Violation. Unless noted otherwise in this section, any person who willfully violates any provisions of this section or a declaration issued by the president of the board of city commissioners pursuant to this section is guilty of an infraction. 
(c)  Duration. Except as otherwise provided by law, the state of emergency declared by the president of the board of city commissioners shall continue until the president determinates that the threat of an emergency has passed or the disaster has been dealt with to the extent that emergency conditions no longer exist. 
(Code 1994, § 6-03-01; Ord. No. 1096, 7-1-2011) 
State Law reference- Local disasters or emergencies, N.D.C.C. § 37-17.1-10. 
Sec. 8-1-8. - Compensation. 
(a)  Each person within this city shall conduct himself and keep and manage his affairs and property in ways that will reasonably assist and will not unreasonably detract from the ability of the city and the public successfully to meet disaster emergencies. This obligation includes appropriate personal service and use or restriction on the use of property in time of disaster emergency. This article neither increases nor decreases these obligations but recognizes their existence under the Constitution of North Dakota, state statutes and the common law. Compensation for services or for the taking or use of property shall be only to the extent that obligations recognized in this chapter are exceeded in a particular case and then only to the extent that the claimant may not be deemed to have volunteered his services or property without compensation. 
(b)  No personal services may be compensated by the city or agency thereof, except pursuant to state statute or local ordinance. 
(c)  Compensation for property shall be only if the property was commandeered or otherwise used in coping with a disaster emergency declared by the mayor and its use or destruction was ordered by the mayor or the city's disaster emergency services coordinator. 
(d)  Any person claiming compensation for the use, damage, loss or destruction of property under this article shall file a claim therefor with the city administrator's office in the form and manner required by the city administrator. 
(e)  Unless the amount of compensation on account of property damaged, lost or destroyed is agreed between the claimant and the city administrator, the amount of compensation shall be calculated in the same manner as compensation due for a taking of property pursuant to the condemnation laws of this state. 
(Code 1979, § 4-09-08; Code 1994, § 6-03-08; Ord. No. 685, § 1, 1985) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, N.D.C.C. § 37-17.1-12. 
ARTICLE 2. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 8-2-1. - Establishment of alarm site; annual fee. 
(a)  Any person who establishes, installs or connects any fire or security alarm system designed to directly notify the police department of an emergency shall be assessed an annual fee which will be set from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. The annual fee is due and payable upon activation of the alarm site. An alarm site refers to the location of an alarm system. The fee schedule shall include an annual fee for the following categories of alarm systems: 
(1)  Alarm sites which are directly monitored by the system (hard-wire) located at the police department. 
(2)  Alarm sites which are connected by telephone lines through a commercial alarm notification system (auto-dialer) to the police department. 
(3)  Alarm sites which are connected by telephone lines and programmed to directly contact the police department. 
(b)  The city finance director is authorized and directed to deposit the moneys received under this act in a separate account to be kept and administered by him under the directions of the board, in the same manner as other public moneys are kept and administered, and the funds in said account shall be used solely for the purpose of purchasing, maintaining and replacing any equipment or facilities used or useful in providing the monitoring, dispatch and response services of the police and fire department. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1-01; Ord. No. 731, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 8-2-2. - Notification of establishment required; use of 911 system prohibited. 
(a)  Notification of establishment of alarm site required. Any person who establishes any alarm site, as set forth in section 8-2-1, shall notify the police department, in writing and on the forms provided, within 48 hours of the alarm site activation and shall pay the annual fee. 
(b)  Use of 911 system prohibited. No person may connect any alarm system to the city's 911 emergency system. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1-02; Ord. No. 731, § 2, 1988) 
Sec. 8-2-3. - False alarms; fee assessed. 
(a)  As used in this article, the term "false alarm" means an alarm which is caused due to system failure, improper or negligent maintenance, operation or control, but not one due to an act of God. In the event any false alarm occurs and results in the dispatch and response of the police or fire department, the responding department shall notify the city administrator. Any alarm site which has more than three false alarms in a one-year period from January 1 through December 31 shall be assessed a fee for each false alarm in excess of three. The fee shall be established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(b)  The city finance director shall bill, on a quarterly basis, the assessments for false alarms to the owner of the business, organization, establishment or residence of the alarm site, and the assessments shall be due and payable to the city finance director within 30 days after the bill is mailed. The funds received through this assessment shall be deposited in the fund established under this article. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1-03; Ord. No. 731, § 3, 1988) 
Sec. 8-2-4. - Collection of past due fees. 
    In the event the annual or false alarms fees provided for by this article are not paid when due, such fees may be recovered by the city in an action at law against the owner of the alarm site, or such fees may be assessed against the premises served by the alarm site and collected and returned in the same manner as other county and municipal taxes and assessments are assessed, certified, collected and returned. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1-04; Ord. No. 731, § 4, 1988) 
Sec. 8-2-5. - Violations. 
    Any person who fails to notify the police department within 48 hours of an alarm site activation, fails to pay the annual assessment or false alarm fee, or connects any alarm system to the city's 911 emergency system shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1994, § 6-1-04; Ord. No. 731, § 5, 1988) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1-1. - Unlawful hindrance. 
    It is unlawful for any person to prevent, interfere with, or in any manner hinder the fire department, or any members thereof, while engaged in the discharge of duty at a fire, or to disobey any lawful command of the chief or acting chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1979, § 4-01-07; Code 1994, § 2-05-07) 
ARTICLE 2. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General fire prevention and protection powers, N.D.C.C. §§ 40-05-01(34), (35), (37), (38), 40-05-09 et seq. 

Sec. 10-2-1. - Adoption of the International Fire Code. 
    A certain document, at least one copy of which is on file in the office of the city administrator, being marked and designated as the 2015 International Fire Code, including Appendix chapters A, B, C, and D, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the offices of the city administrator and fire chief are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article. The International Fire Code as adopted and amended by the board of city commissioners of the city and the provisions of this article shall be known as the fire prevention code. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-01; Code 1994, § 7-01-01; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 851, 1996; Ord. No. 953, § 1, 1-21-2003; Ord. No. 1092, 4-19-2011; Ord. No. 1172, 11-19-2013; Ord. No. 1255, § 1, 12-20-2016) 
Cross reference- Amendments to International Fire Code, § 10-2-10. 
Sec. 10-2-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1272, adopted Sept. 5, 2017, repealed § 10-2-2, which pertained to establishing limits of districts-Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks prohibited and derived from Code 1979, § 14-04-08; Code 1994, § 7-04-08. 
Sec. 10-2-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1272, adopted Sept. 5, 2017, repealed § 10-2-3, which pertained to establishing limits of districts-New bulk plants for flammable or combustible liquids prohibited and derived from Code 1979, § 14-04-09; Code 1994, § 7-04-09. 
Sec. 10-2-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1272, adopted Sept. 5, 2017, repealed § 10-2-4, which pertained to establishing limits of districts-Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas prohibited and derived from Code 1979, § 14-05-01; Code 1994, § 7-04-10. 
Sec. 10-2-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1272, adopted Sept. 5, 2017, repealed § 10-2-5, which pertained to establishing limits of districts-Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas restricted and derived from Code 1979, § 14-02-01; Code 1994, § 7-04-11. 
Sec. 10-2-6. - Enforcement. 
    The fire prevention code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be enforced by the fire chief. The fire chief may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary to assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the fire chief. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-02; Code 1994, § 7-01-02; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 10-2-7. - Conflicts. 
    In the event of any conflicts between the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted by this chapter or as may be updated by resolution of the board and applicable provisions of state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-04; Code 1994, § 7-01-04; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 953, § 3, 1-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-2-8. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Code official means the fire chief appointed by the board of city commissioners and charged with the duties of administration and enforcement of the code, fire inspector, or other duly authorized representative as designated by the fire chief. 
    Fire prevention code means those portions of the International Fire Code adopted or amended by the city as well as this article. 
    Jurisdiction means the City of Mandan, North Dakota. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-05; Code 1994, § 7-01-05; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 953, § 4, 1-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-2-9. - Offense; penalty; corrective action required. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  To violate or fail to comply with any provisions of the fire prevention code or to permit or maintain such a violation; 
(2)  To violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or to build in violation of any details, statements, specifications or plans submitted or approved thereunder; 
(3)  To operate not in accordance with the provisions of any certificate, permit or approval issued thereunder; or 
(4)  To fail or refuse to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire chief within the time fixed by said order. 
(b)  Violation; penalties. Any person who violates this section or any provision of the fire prevention code shall severally, for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor unless a different penalty is specified. Each day that a violation continues after due notice shall be deemed a separate offense. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner or other person in control of the premises. 
(c)  Corrective actions required. Prosecution, or lack thereof, of the owner, occupant or the person in charge shall not be deemed to excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects. In addition to the imposition of the penalties described in this section, the code official is authorized to institute appropriate action to prevent unlawful construction or to restrain, correct or abate a violation; to prevent illegal occupancy of a structure or premises; or to stop an illegal act, conduct of business or occupancy of a structure on or about any premises. Prosecution under this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-06; Code 1994, § 7-01-06; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 953, § 5, 1-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-2-10. - Amendments to International Fire Code. 
    The 2015 edition of the International Fire Code adopted by the provisions of this article is amended, changed and altered as follows: 
Section 101.1, Title, is amended to read as follows: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Mandan, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 105, requiring operational permits, is amended as follows: 
105.1.1 Permits Required. A property owner or owner's authorized agent who intends to conduct an operation or business, or install or modify systems and equipment which is regulated by this code, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the fire code official and may be required to obtain a permit. 
Section 109.4 is amended in part to read as follows: 
109.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be charged with a class B misdemeanor. 
Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows: 
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be charged with a class B misdemeanor. 
Section 202 Definitions is amended as follows: 
[BG] Group E, day care facilities. This group includes buildings and structures or portions thereof occupied by more than twelve children older than 21/2 years of age who receive educational, supervision or personal care services for less than 24 hours per day. 
[BG] Twelve or fewer children. A facility having twelve or fewer children receiving such care shall be classified as part of the primary occupancy. 
[BG] Twelve or fewer children in a dwelling unit. A facility such as the above within a dwelling unit and having twelve or fewer children receiving such care shall be classified as a Group R-3 occupancy or shall comply with the International Residential Code. 
Section 308.1.4 is amended as follows: 
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated on combustible balconies or within 10 feet (3048 mm) of combustible construction. 
Exceptions: 
1.  One- and two-family dwellings. 
2.  Where buildings, balconies and decks are protected by an automatic sprinkler system. 
3.  LP-gas cooking devices having LP-gas container with a water capacity not greater than 47.8 pounds [nominal 20 pounds (9 kg)] LP-gas capacity. 
Section 308.3 is amended by adding the following subsection 1.4 to exceptions: 
308.3 Group A Occupancies. Open-flame devices shall not be used in a Group A occupancy. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Open-flame devices are allowed to be used in the following situations, provided approved precautions are taken to prevent ignition of a combustible material or injury to occupants: 
1.4  Open-flame devices for food warming. 
Section 403.10.1.3 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
403.10.1.3 Fire Safety and evacuation instructions. Information shall be provided in the fire safety and evacuation plan when required by Section 404 to allow guests to decide whether to evacuate to the outside, evacuate to an area of refuge, remain in place, or any combination of the three. 
Section 503.4 is amended to read as follows: 
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in section 503.2.1 shall be maintained at all times. Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing a designated fire apparatus access road shall be prohibited and enforcement of such prohibition may be accomplished in the same manner as provided in Sec. 24-7-1 of the Mandan Code of Ordinances. A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor. 
Section 510.1 is amended to read as follows: 
510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. When required by the fire code official, new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems of the jurisdiction at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. 
Section 907.2.3 is amended to read as follows: 
Section 907.2.3 Group E. A manual fire alarm system that initiates the occupant notification signal utilizing an emergency voice/alarm communication system meeting the requirements of Section 907.5.2.2 and installed in accordance with Section 907.6 shall be installed in Group E occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems or smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. Where approved by the fire code official, a building's emergency communication system interfaced with the fire alarm system in accordance with NFPA 72 is acceptable. 
Section 907.8.3 is hereby amended as follows: 
907.8.3 Smoke detector sensitivity. Smoke detector sensitivity shall be checked every 5 years after installation . 
Section 5601.1.13 of the 2012 fire code replaces Section 5601.1.3 of the 2015 fire code and reads: 
5601.1.3. Fireworks. The possession, manufacture, storage, sale, handling and use of fireworks are prohibited within the city limits. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Storage and handling of fireworks as allowed in section 5605 shall not qualify as an exception to the prohibition of storage and handling of fireworks within the city limits. 
b.  Manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks as permitted in section 5605 shall not qualify as an exception to the prohibition of manufacture, assembly and testing of fireworks within the city limits. 
c.  The use of fireworks for display as permitted in section 5608 is an exception to the prohibition of use of fireworks in the city, provided that the requirements of sections 5601.2.3 and 5601.2.4 are met. The possession, use, discharge, or explosion of fireworks, as defined by N.D.C.C. § 23-15-01, not including bottle rockets, or a balloon that requires fire underneath to propel the balloon, or an incendiary balloon, or an unmanned free floating device capable of producing an open flame, such as, but not limited to, sky lanterns or celebration lanterns, is permitted between the hours of 12:00 p.m., and 12:00 a.m. on July 2 and 3, from the hours of 12:00 p.m. on July 4 to 2:00 a.m. on July 5 of each year, and from the hours of 5:00 p.m. on December 31 to 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
Penalty: 
1.  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an ordinance violation, punishable by a fine of Seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
2.  Any person cited for a violation of this section shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal offense and may utilize the same procedures for appearance, payment of statutory fee, posting and forfeiture of bond, waiver of hearing, or hearing as is provided for noncriminal traffic offenses pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Mandan Municipal Code. Any person failing to appear at the time designated, after signing a promise to appear, without paying the statutory fee or posting and forfeiting bond is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Failure to appear without just cause at the hearing must also be deemed an admission of commission of the violation charged. 
Section 5704, Storage is amended to read as follows: 
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in all zoning districts within the corporate boundaries of the City of Mandan, with the exception of zoning districts MA, MB, MC and MD. 
Section 5706, Special Operations is amended to read as follows: 
5706.2.4.4 Permanent and temporary tanks. Storage of Class I and II liquids in permanent above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in all zoning districts within the corporate boundaries of the City of Mandan, with the exception of zoning districts MA, MB, MC and MD. 
(Code 1994, § 7-01-07; Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 1092, 4-19-2011; Ord. No. 1172, 11-19-2013; Ord. No. 1220, 10-20-2015; Ord. No. 1255, §§ 2, 3, 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 1272, 9-5-2017) 
Cross reference- Adoption of the International Fire Code, § 10-2-1. 
Sec. 10-2-11. - Modifications permitted in individual cases. 
(a)  The fire chief has the power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or duly authorized agent, if there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the modification is in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code and that such modification does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed must be entered upon the records of the department, and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(b)  The fire chief shall also recommend to the board of city commissioners any amendments to the fire prevention code or ordinances which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-08; Code 1994, § 7-01-08; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 953, § 7, 1-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-2-12. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove of an application or refuse to issue a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire chief to the board of appeals within 30 days from the date of the fire chief's written decision. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-09; Code 1994, § 7-01-09; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 953, § 8, 1-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-2-13. - Permit; license fees; inspections. 
(a)  The fees for any permit, certificates, approvals, licenses and other functions, required or performed under the fire code, shall be established by resolution of the board of city commissioners and shall be payable to the city. Such fees shall accompany each application for such permit, certificate, approval, license or other fee-related code provision. 
(b)  Before permits, certificates, approvals or licenses may be issued as required by this Code, the fire chief or his designee shall inspect and approve the receptacles, processes, vehicles, buildings, sites or storage places to be used for any such purposes. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-12; Code 1994, § 7-01-12; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 953, § 9, 1-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-2-14. - Application of fire code to public and private property. 
    The provisions of the fire code as adopted by this article shall apply equally to both public and private property and shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-13; Code 1994, § 7-01-13; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987) 
Sec. 10-2-15. - False alarms. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to: 
(1)  Give or cause to be given any false alarm of fire; 
(2)  Give or cause to be given, while a fire is in progress, a second or general alarm for the same fire; 
(3)  Tamper with or set off any fire alarm or signal box with like intent; 
(4)  Tamper, meddle or interfere with any such fire alarm box; 
(5)  Intentionally cut, break, deface or remove any such box, or any of the wires or supports thereof, connected with the fire alarm system; 
(6)  Intentionally interfere with or injure any property of any kind belonging to or used by the fire department; or 
(7)  Hinder or delay any apparatus or equipment or vehicle belonging to the fire department. 
(b)  Any person violating this section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-15; Code 1994, § 7-01-15; Ord. No. 669, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1987) 
Sec. 10-2-16. - Application of fire code to existing buildings. 
    Whenever any existing building is renovated, remodeled or enlarged to the degree that costs of same equal or exceed 50 percent of the true and full value of the building, excluding the value of the lot, the plans for renovation, remodeling or enlarging must include plans for bringing the entire building into compliance with the provisions of this article and any related code provisions as required by the fire chief and building official. 
(Code 1979, § 14-01-16; Code 1994, § 7-01-16; Ord. No. 757, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 953, § 10, 1-21-2003) 
Sec. 10-2-17. - Duties of fire code official. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the fire code official to enforce all laws and city ordinances covering the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires; 
(2)  The storage and use of explosives and flammables; 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment; 
(4)  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes; 
(5)  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all other places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate from time to time for any purposes; 
(6)  The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires; and 
(7)  The maintenance of fire cause and loss records. 
(b)  The fire code official shall have other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other sections of this article and as may be conferred and imposed from time to time by law. The fire chief may delegate any of his powers or duties under this article to the fire code official. 
(Code 1979, § 14-02-03; Code 1994, § 7-02-03; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 10-2-18. - Other duties of fire code official. 
    It shall be the duty of the fire code official to investigate and to recommend to the fire chief such additional ordinances, or amendments to existing ordinances, as he may deem necessary for safeguarding life and property against fire. 
(Code 1979, § 14-02-04; Code 1994, § 7-02-04; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 10-2-19. - Instructions. 
    The fire chief shall prepare instructions for the fire code official and his assistants, and forms for their use in the reports required by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 14-02-05; Code 1994, § 7-02-05; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 10-2-20. - Investigation of fires. 
    The fire code official shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire. The fire code official shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of the case. Every fire shall be reported in writing to the fire code official within three days after the occurrence of the same by the fire department officer in whose jurisdiction such a fire has occurred. Such report shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the fire code official and shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin, and circumstances of such fire, the extent of the damage thereof, and the insurance upon such property, and such other information as may be required, including the injury, death or rescue of persons. 
(Code 1979, § 14-02-06; Code 1994, § 7-02-06; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 10-2-21. - Inspections. 
    The fire code official shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises on a periodic basis and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for the safeguarding of life and property from fire. 
(Code 1979, § 14-02-07; Code 1994, § 7-02-07; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 10-2-22. - Orders to remove fire hazards; service of order; penalties. 
(a)  Whenever any inspector, under the provisions of section 10-2-21, shall find in any building, or upon any premises or other places, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to the appeal procedure provided for in section 10-2-12. 
(b)  The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering of same to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of the premises, such order may be served either by delivering to or leaving with the said person a copy of the said order. 
(c)  Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of the order shall be liable to penalties as provided for in section 10-2-29. 
(Code 1979, § 14-02-08; Code 1994, § 7-02-08; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 10-2-23. - Fire code official to keep records. 
    The fire code official shall compile and keep a record of all fires and of all the facts concerning the same, including injuries, death, rescue of persons and statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby, and whether such losses were covered by insurance, and if so, in what amount. Such record shall be made daily from the reports made by the technical inspectors under the provisions of this chapter. All such records shall be public. 
(Code 1979, § 14-02-09; Code 1994, § 7-02-09; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 10-2-24. - Annual report of fire code official. 
    The fire code official shall make an annual report of activities and shall transmit this report to the president of the board of city commissioners through the fire chief. The report shall contain all proceedings under the fire prevention code with such statistics as the fire chief may wish to include therein. 
(Code 1979, § 14-02-10; Code 1994, § 7-02-10; Ord. No. 669, § 2, 1983) 
Chapter 12 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 1. - LICENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to fix the amount, terms and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, N.D.C.C. § 40-20-05(24). 

Sec. 12-1-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Licensee means any person to whom a license has been issued under the provisions of this article or other applicable provisions of this Code or city ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-01; Code 1994, § 13-01-01) 
Sec. 12-1-2. - Compliance required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to conduct any business or nonprofit enterprise, or to use in connection therewith any vehicle, premises, or machine or device, in whole or in part, for which a license is required by any law, provision of this Code, or city ordinance, without a license therefor being first obtained and kept in effect as required by this article or any other provision of this Code or city ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-02; Code 1994, § 13-01-02) 
Sec. 12-1-3. - Application of law. 
    All licenses granted under the provisions of this article shall be subject to the provisions of this Code and city ordinances in force at the time of issuing thereof or which may be subsequently passed by the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-03; Code 1994, § 13-01-03) 
Sec. 12-1-4. - City license officer. 
    The board may appoint an individual to act as the city license officer. Said person shall collect all license fees and shall issue licenses in the name of the city to all persons qualified. Where approval of the board of city commissioners is required, the city license officer shall present such application to the city commission at its next regular meeting and issue the license after approval of the city commission. In all cases, the approval or refusal of the license by the city license officer shall be subject to review by the city commission. In such cases where it is provided for approval and issuance of a license by a designated city official, the approval or refusal of a license application by such issuing officer shall, in all cases, be subject to the review by the city commission. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-04; Code 1994, § 13-01-04) 
Sec. 12-1-5. - Duties of city license officer. 
    The city license officer shall: 
(1)  Make policies and procedures. Promulgate and enforce all reasonable policies and procedures necessary to the operation and enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Adopt forms. Adopt forms and prescribe the information to be given therein as to character and other relative matters for all necessary papers. 
(3)  Require affidavits. Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths necessary to the administration of this article. 
(4)  Obtain endorsements. Submit all applications, in a proper case, to interested city officials for their endorsement thereon as compliance by the applicant with all city regulations for which they have the duty of enforcing. 
(5)  Investigate. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any applicant for a license as prescribed in this chapter. 
(6)  Examine records. Examine the books and records of any applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(7)  Give notice. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of his application and, upon his refusal of any license or permit, at the applicant's request, state in writing the reasons therefor and deliver them to the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-05; Code 1994, § 13-01-05) 
Sec. 12-1-6. - Qualification of applicants. 
    The general standards set out in this article relative to the qualifications of any applicant for a city license shall be considered and applied by the city license officer. The applicant shall: 
(1)  Be of good moral character. In making such determination, the city license officer shall consider: 
a.  Penal history. All felony convictions, reasons therefor, and subsequent conduct. 
b.  License history. A license history of the applicant, whether such person in previously operating in this or another state under a license, has had such license revoked or suspended, and reason therefor. 
c.  General personal history. Such facts as to general personal history as he deems necessary. 
(2)  Not be in default under the provisions of any city ordinance or be indebted or obligated to the city in any manner except for current taxes. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-06; Code 1994, § 13-01-06) 
Sec. 12-1-7. - Fees. 
    License fees shall be in the amounts established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners, a record of which shall be on file in the office of the city license officer. No license fee, unless otherwise specially provided, shall be pro-rated for any fractional part of a year. No rebate or refund shall be made by reason of nonuse of a license. Any license fee collected through error shall be refunded by the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-07; Code 1994, § 13-01-07) 
Sec. 12-1-8. - Formal application required. 
    Every person required to produce a license under the provisions of this Code or any city ordinance or law shall submit an application for such license to the city license officer. Said application shall: 
(1)  Be a written statement upon forms provided by the city license officer. Such forms shall include an affidavit to be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public of this state. 
(2)  Require the disclosure of all information necessary for compliance with the provisions of this article and of any other information which the city license officer shall find to be reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article. 
(3)  Be accompanied by the full amount of the fees chargeable for such license, or any bond. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-08; Code 1994, § 13-01-08) 
Sec. 12-1-9. - Issuance of receipts. 
    Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time the application for the same is made, the city license officer shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance, subject to the following conditions: Such receipts shall not be construed as the approval of the city license officer for the issuance of a license, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-09; Code 1994, § 13-01-09) 
Sec. 12-1-10. - Issuance and expiration of license. 
    No license shall be granted for a period longer than one year, and all yearly licenses shall commence on January 1 of each year and expire on the December 31 of each year, unless otherwise specified. All licenses shall be signed by the city license officer under the corporate seal. No license shall be valid unless so signed and sealed, nor shall any person be deemed licensed until the license shall be duly issued to him. Each license shall be dated the day of the issuance thereof, but, should the applicant have been acting without a license, the license shall commence with the date the business commenced, and the date of the issuance of the license together with the time of commencing and expiration shall be given in the license and license records. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-11; Code 1994, § 13-01-11) 
Sec. 12-1-11. - Compliance pending legal action. 
    When the issuance of a license is denied and any such action is instituted by the applicant to compel its issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the business for which the license was refused unless a license is issued to him pursuant to a judgment ordering the same. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-12; Code 1994, § 13-01-12) 
Sec. 12-1-12. - Contents of license. 
    Each license issued under this article shall state upon its face the following: 
(1)  The name of the licensee and any other name under which such business is to be conducted. 
(2)  The kind and address of each business so licensed. 
(3)  The amount of license fee therefor. 
(4)  The dates of issuance and expiration thereof, which shall be December 31, following issuance, unless otherwise provided. 
(5)  Such other information as the license officer shall determine. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-13; Code 1994, § 13-01-13) 
Sec. 12-1-13. - General standards of conduct. 
    Every licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Permit inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of his business and examinations of his books by public authorities so authorized by law. 
(2)  Comply with the governing law. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations applicable to such licensed business. 
(3)  Operate properly. Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary practices or conditions which do or may affect the public health, morals or welfare. 
(4)  Cease business. Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on premises after the expiration of license and during the period the license is revoked or suspended. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-14; Code 1994, § 13-01-14) 
Sec. 12-1-14. - Display of license. 
    Any licensee shall post and maintain such license upon the licensed premises or vehicle in a place where it may be seen at all times, and where applicable, shall carry such license on his person. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-15; Code 1994, § 13-01-15) 
Sec. 12-1-15. - Misuse of license. 
    Any licensee shall not loan, sell, give or assign to any person, or allow any other person to use or display, damage or remove or have in his possession, any license issued to said licensee. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-16; Code 1994, § 13-01-16) 
Sec. 12-1-16. - Renewal license procedure. 
    The application for the renewal of a license shall be made to the city license officer. The application shall: 
(1)  Be a written statement on forms provided by the city license officer. Such form shall include an affidavit to be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public of this state. 
(2)  Require the disposal of such information concerning the applicant's demeanor and the conduct and operation of the applicant's business during the preceding licensing period as is reasonably necessary to the determination by the license officer of the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license and to a possible adjustment of license fee. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-17; Code 1994, § 13-01-17) 
Sec. 12-1-17. - Duplicate license. 
    A duplicate license or permit shall be issued by the license officer to replace any license previously issued which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed, without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing by the licensee of an affidavit sworn to before a notary public or this state attesting to such fact and the paying to the license officer of a fee as established by resolution. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-18; Code 1994, § 13-01-18) 
Sec. 12-1-18. - License nontransferable. 
    No license shall be assignable or transferable nor shall any person be authorized to do business or act under such license except the person to whom it is granted, or at any place other than the place specified therein; provided, however, that the city commission may grant the removal of the business licensed to any other portion of the city, said permission to be certified upon such license by the city license officer. No license shall authorize any person to act under it at more than one place at the same time, or at any other place than is therein specified. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-19; Code 1994, § 13-01-19) 
Sec. 12-1-19. - Inspections authorized. 
    The following persons are authorized to conduct inspections in the manner prescribed in this section: 
(1)  License officer. The license officer shall make all investigations reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(2)  Officials having duties. The license officer shall have the authority to order the inspection of licensees, their businesses and premises by all city officials having duties to perform with reference to such licenses of businesses. 
(3)  Police officers. All police officers shall inspect and examine businesses located within their respective jurisdictions or beats to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-20; Code 1994, § 13-01-20) 
Sec. 12-1-20. - Authority of inspectors. 
    All persons authorized in this article to inspect licenses and businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without a search warrant, at all reasonable times, the following premises: 
(1)  Those for which a license is required. 
(2)  Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of inspection, are operating under such licenses. 
(3)  Those for which a license has been revoked or suspended. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-21; Code 1994, § 13-01-21) 
Sec. 12-1-21. - Report by inspectors. 
    Persons inspecting licensees, businesses, or premises, as authorized in this article, shall report all violations of this article or other applicable provisions of this Code or city ordinances to the license officer and shall submit such other reports as the license officer shall order. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-22; Code 1994, § 13-01-22) 
Sec. 12-1-22. - License suspension and revocation; notice; hearing; appeal. 
(a)  The city may, upon recommendation of the city administrator, chief of police or his designee and as provided in subsection (b) of this section, suspend or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this article at any time for the following reasons: 
(1)  The license was procured by fraud or false representation of fact; 
(2)  For the violation of, or failure to comply with, the provisions of this article or any of the provisions of state law by the licensee or by any of his servants, agents or employee when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by the servants, agents or employees; 
(3)  For the conviction of the licensee of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances committed on the premises; or 
(4)  For the conviction of any of the licensee's servants, agents or employees of any crime or offense involving prostitution, promoting prostitution, or transactions involving controlled substances committed on the premises in which the cabaret is conducted when the licensee knew or should have known of the violations committed by the licensee's servants, agents or employees. 
(b)  A license procured by fraud or misrepresentation shall be revoked. Where other violations of this article or other applicable ordinances, statutes or regulations are found, the license shall be suspended for a period of 30 days upon the first such violation, 90 days upon the second violation within a 24-month period, and revoked for the third and subsequent violations within a 24-month period, not including periods of suspension. 
(c)  The city administrator shall provide at least ten days' prior written notice to the licensee of the recommendation to suspend or revoke the license and the date of the hearing before the board of city commissioners, which must not be more than 30 days from the date of service of the notice, either by first class mail with a return receipt or by personal service upon the manager or owner of the licensed premises. Such notice shall inform the licensee of the right to a hearing before the board of city commissioners and the date of the scheduled hearing and shall state the grounds for revocation and suspension. The board of city commissioners shall hold the hearing within 30 days of service upon the licensee and shall issue its decision within 15 days following the close of the hearing. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board shall have a right to appeal to the district court. The decision of the board shall be stayed during the pendency of the appeal, except as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Where the city building official, fire chief, their designees or the city health officer find that any condition exists upon the premises of a cabaret or adult cabaret which constitutes a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property, said official may immediately suspend any license issued under this article pending a hearing in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. The official shall issue notice setting forth the basis for the action and the facts that constitute a threat of immediate serious injury or damage to persons or property and informing the licensee of the right to appeal the suspension to the board of city commissioners under the same appeal provisions set forth in subsection (c) of this section; provided, however, that a suspension based on threat of immediate serious injury or damage shall not be stayed during the pendency of the appeal and the licensee may request an expedited hearing at the next scheduled regular meeting of the board. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by the action of the board in refusing to issue or renew any license issued under this article shall have the right to appeal such action to the district court. Pending completion of the appeal process, the city shall issue a temporary license, provided that the aggrieved person files a notice of appeal with the city within 30 days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew. 
(Code 1994, § 13-02.1-07; Ord. No. 964, § 7, 6-24-2003) 
Sec. 12-1-23. - Provisional order. 
(a)  Issuance. When an inspector has reported a violation of this article or other applicable provisions of this Code or city ordinances, the license officer shall issue to the affected person a provisional order to comply. 
(b)  Nature of notice. The provisional order, and all other notices issued in compliance with this article, shall be in writing, shall be personally served and shall apprise the person affected of his specific violations. In the absence of the person affected or his agent or employee, a copy of such notice shall be affixed to some structure on the premises. Depositing such notice in the United States mailbox shall constitute service thereof. 
(c)  Period of compliance. The provisional order shall require compliance within five days after personal service on the affected person. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-23; Code 1994, § 13-01-23) 
Sec. 12-1-24. - Hearing. 
    Upon written application by the person affected before the expiration of the five-day period of compliance, the license officer shall order a hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the affected person in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-24; Code 1994, § 13-01-24) 
Sec. 12-1-25. - Modifying authority of licensing officer. 
    Upon written application, or on his own motion, the license officer shall have the authority, in the proper case, to extend the time for compliance, to grant a new hearing date, and to change, modify or rescind any recommendations or order. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-25; Code 1994, § 13-01-25) 
Sec. 12-1-26. - Final order. 
(a)  Generally . Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply with the provisional order or with any order made after hearing, the license officer shall then declare and make the provisional order final. 
(b)  Authority of license officer. The license officer shall have the authority to suspend or revoke licenses upon making and declaring a provisional order final. 
(c)  Effect of revocations or suspensions . Upon revocation or suspension, no refund of any portion of the license fee shall be made to the licensee. He shall immediately cease all business at all places under such license. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-26; Code 1994, § 13-01-26) 
Sec. 12-1-27. - Summary action. 
    When the conduct of any licensee, agent or employee is so inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare as to constitute a nuisance and thus give rise to an emergency, the license officer shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of business and the close of premises or to suspend or revoke the license. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-27; Code 1994, § 13-01-27) 
Sec. 12-1-28. - Special hearing. 
    Unless waived in writing, a special hearing for such actions, in respect to the summary order, shall be held as soon as possible by the license officer. In no case shall such hearing be held later than five days after summary action. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-28; Code 1994, § 13-01-28) 
Sec. 12-1-29. - Right of appeal; denial of license. 
(a)  Right of appeal. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the license officer after hearing shall have the right to appeal to the board of city commissioners by filing written appeal to such officer within 20 days following the effective date of the action or decision complained of. 
(1)  Contents of appeal. Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed from and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon to avoid such order. 
(2)  Notification of license officer. At the time of filing any such appeal, a copy thereof shall be filed by the appellant with the license officer. 
(3)  Hearing. The board of city commissioners shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and shall personally serve a written notice, as provided in this section, upon the appellant informing him thereof. The board of city commissioners shall also give such notice to the license officer and such officer shall be entitled to appear and defend such order. 
(b)  Denial of license. Any person aggrieved by the action of the board in refusing to issue or renew any license issued under this article shall have the right to appeal such action to the district court. Pending completion of the appeal process, the city shall issue a temporary license, provided that the aggrieved person files a notice of appeal with the city within 30 days of notice of the refusal to issue or renew. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-29; Code 1994, §§ 13-01-29, 13-02.1-05; Ord. No. 964, § 5, 6-24-2003) 
Sec. 12-1-30. - Liability of violator. 
(a)  Unpaid fee. The amount of any unpaid fee, the payment of which is required under this article, shall constitute a debt due to the city. 
(b)  Action by city attorney. The city attorney shall, at the direction of the license officer, institute civil suit in the name of the city to recover any such unpaid fees. 
(c)  Civil judgment; no bar. No civil judgment, or any act by the city attorney, the license officer or the violator, shall bar or prevent a criminal prosecution for each and every violation of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 10-01-30; Code 1994, § 13-01-30) 
ARTICLE 2. - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax and regulate amusements, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(26), (30). 

Sec. 12-2-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means a bookstore having a preponderance of publications, books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult establishment means either: 
(1)  An adult bookstore; 
(2)  An adult motion picture theater; 
(3)  An adult mini-motion picture theater; or 
(4)  A massage business. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons of the theater. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting motion pictures, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons of the theater. 
    Massage means the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading or tapping, by hand or mechanical device. 
    Massage business means any establishment or business wherein massage is practiced, including establishments commonly known as health clubs, physical culture studios, massage studios, or massage parlors. 
    Mechanical amusement device means a machine which, upon insertion of a coin or the payment of consideration, operates or may be operated to depict, display or project, directly or indirectly, pictures, photographs or other visual images, a preponderance of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons. 
    Persons means any person, partnership, association or corporation. 
    Sexually oriented devices means, without limitation, any artificial or simulated specified anatomical area or any other device or paraphernalia that is designed, in whole or in part, for specified sexual activities. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals and pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; or 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals and pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-02; Code 1994, § 13-02-02; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-2-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to recognize and to provide for the fact that the operation of adult establishments and mechanical amusement devices, a preponderance of which businesses and devices are to depict or display specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, results in increased enforcement problems of the city and additional expense to the city that justifies a license fee for these establishments and devices. This follows because it is not immediately possible to distinguish between constitutionally protected nonobscene depictions or portrayals of explicit sexual conduct from nonconstitutionally protected obscene portrayals of sexual conduct. This necessitates greater police vigilance to ensure that the lawful business of displaying nonobscene portrayals or depictions of sexual conduct is not used inadvertently or by design as the means of unlawfully displaying or depicting obscenity. An additional enforcement obligation is directed to the necessity to restrict access to said establishments to adults. In order to recoup some of the costs thus imposed on the city, it is appropriate that there be imposed on the persons who profit from such businesses and devices some of the costs of ensuring that they are operated and used only lawfully. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-01; Code 1994, § 13-02-01; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-2-3. - Adult bookstore license required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of an adult bookstore within the city without first obtaining a license to do so. The license application shall be accompanied by a license fee as established by resolution. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-03; Code 1994, § 13-02-03; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-2-4. - Adult motion picture theater license required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of an adult motion picture theater within the city without first obtaining a license to do so. The license application shall be accompanied by a license fee as established by resolution. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-04; Code 1994, § 13-02-04; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-2-5. - Adult mini-motion picture theater license required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of an adult mini-motion picture theater within the city without first obtaining a license to do so. The license application shall be accompanied by a license fee as established by resolution. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-05; Code 1994, § 13-02-05; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-2-6. - Massage business license required. 
    No person shall engage in the massage business within the city without first obtaining a license to do so. The license application shall be accompanied by a license fee as established by resolution. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-06; Code 1994, § 13-02-06; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-2-7. - Mechanical amusement device license required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of providing mechanical amusement devices which are used on a regular basis to depict or display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in the city without first obtaining a license to do so. The license application shall be accompanied by a license fee as established by resolution. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-07; Code 1994, § 13-02-07; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-2-8. - Limitations on location and use. 
(a)  No license shall be used for an adult establishment if the adult establishment for which a license is sought is to be located or contained within any building, premises, structure or other facility that contains any other licensed adult establishment. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to an adult establishment if the adult establishment for which a license is sought is to be located or contained within any building, premises, structure or other facility in which sexually oriented devices are sold, distributed, exhibited or contained. 
(c)  No license shall be issued for mechanical amusement devices which are regularly used on a regular basis to depict or display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, unless said devices are to be located on the premises of a licensed adult motion picture theater or adult mini-motion picture theater. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to an adult establishment that is located adjacent to another adult establishment's building, premises, structure or facility, unless separated by a solid wall and the entrances and exits in the two structures are located not less than 150 feet apart. 
(e)  No license shall be issued for an adult establishment unless the adult establishment for which a license is sought is located within the proper zoning district as set forth in section 105-1-5. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-08; Code 1994, § 13-02-08; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-2-9. - Provisions and conditions of licensure. 
    Each adult establishment within the city shall meet the following conditions: 
(1)  The adult establishment shall not permit any person less than 18 years of age to enter or remain upon the premises or to purchase any materials or services of the establishment. 
(2)  The adult establishment shall not display signs visible from the exterior of the premises except signs identifying the establishment as an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater or adult massage business. 
(3)  No materials depicting specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas, or displaying sexually oriented devices shall be visible from the exterior of the adult establishment. 
(4)  The manager and the owners of the adult establishment are registered with the chief of police and have provided him with such information as he reasonably may require with respect to their names and current addresses, including fingerprints and prior criminal records relating to obscenity violations or prostitution, if any. 
(5)  The owner of mechanical amusement devices used on a regular basis to depict or display specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities shall furnish a complete list to the police department of all devices owned or operated subject to licensing with an indication thereon of the location of each machine and a list of all films used and date of any film replacement during the licensing period. 
(6)  The business premises of the adult establishment which are generally open to its patrons are open equally at the same time, without charge, to members of the city police department who may wish to enter thereon, provided that the entry is in the course of the discharge of the police officer's duties. 
(7)  The business premises of the adult establishment which are generally open to its patrons shall be closed to its patrons from 1:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. daily and all day on Sunday, from 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m. on Mondays and on such other days as the board of city commissioners may by resolution prescribe. 
(8)  The fees provided for in this article shall be payable at the time the adult establishment commences business and on July 1 of each year thereafter. No fees shall be prorated. 
(9)  The provisions of article 1 of this chapter shall apply to the licensure of adult establishments and mechanical amusement devices. 
(Code 1979, § 10-26-09; Code 1994, § 13-02-09; Ord. No. 637; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 1982) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADULT CABARET/MANAGERS/ENTERTAINERS 

Sec. 12-3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult cabaret means any commercial premises or private club to which any member of the public or club member is invited or admitted, and where an entertainer provides live entertainment or activity as defined in adult entertainment. 
    Adult entertainment means: 
(1)  Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in any premises where such exhibition, performance, or dance involves a person who performs in such clothing or sheds clothing to a point where the area below the top to the bottom of the areola of a female breast or any portion of pubic area, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals are covered by opaque material, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
(2)  Any exhibition, performance or dance which includes any of the following: 
a.  The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
c.  The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals, or the nipples of the female; 
d.  Appearances, entertainment or performances of any type consisting of or containing any nude performer or topless female dancer; or 
(3)  Any exhibition, performance or dance which is intended to sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the premises activity. This includes, but is not limited to, any such exhibition, performance or dance performed for, arranged with or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public on the premises at that time, with separate consideration paid, either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition or dance and which is commonly referred to as table dancing, couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing or straddle dancing. 
    Applicant means the individual or entity seeking a cabaret license in the city. 
    Applicant control persons means all partners, corporate officers and directors and any other individuals in the applicant's business organization who hold a significant interest in the adult cabaret business, based on responsibility for management of the adult cabaret business. 
    Cabaret means any room, place or space whatsoever in the city in which any music, singing, dancing or other similar entertainment is permitted in connection with any hotel, restaurant, cafe, club, tavern and/or eating place, directly selling, serving or providing the public or its members, with or without charge, food or liquor. Music and entertainment, as used in this section, does not apply to radios or mechanical devices. 
    Clerk means such city employees or agents as the city administrator shall designate to administer this article, or any designee thereof. 
    Employee means any and all persons, including managers, entertainers, and independent contractors, who work in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of the cabaret. 
    Entertainer means any person who provides adult entertainment within an adult cabaret, whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment. 
    Liquor means all beverages as defined in N.D.C.C. title 5. 
    Manager means any person who manages, directs, administers or is in charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult cabaret. The term "manager" includes assistant managers working with or under the direction of a manager to carry out such purposes. 
    Member of the public means any customer, patron, club member, or person, other than an employee, who is invited or admitted to a cabaret. 
    Nude performer or nude dancer means any person who performs or appears in attire such that any portion of the pubic area, anus, vulva, or genitals is exposed to view or not covered with an opaque material. 
    Operator means any person operating, conducting, or maintaining an adult cabaret. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group of persons, however organized. 
    Sexual conduct means: 
(1)  The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law. 
(2)  The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals. 
(3)  The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals, or the nipples of a female. 
(4)  Appearances, entertainment or performances of any type consisting of or containing any nude performer, or nude dancer, or topless female dancer. 
    Topless female performer or topless female dancer means any female who performs or appears in attire such that any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola is exposed to view or not covered by opaque material. 
(Code 1994, § 13-02.1-02; Ord. No. 964, § 2, 6-24-2003) 
Sec. 12-3-2. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate adult entertainment establishments in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects and concentrations of adult entertainment establishments within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the board, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. V. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 US. 560 (1991); Thomas v. Chicago Park District, 122 S. Ct. 775 (2002); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972) City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); and other cases; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around adult entertainment establishments, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma County, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Dallas, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Bellevue, Washington; Newport News, Virginia; New York, New York; Phoenix, Arizona; and from summaries of several of the foregoing secondary effects reports; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the board finds: 
(1)  Adult entertainment establishments lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that cause deleterious secondary effects in the establishments and in the areas surrounding them. This article is designed to make the owners and operators of these establishments responsible, within constitutional boundaries, for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of unregulated adult entertainment establishments, defined in this article as adult cabarets, engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, occur at unregulated adult entertainment establishments, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for viewing films or videos or live sexually oriented shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such unregulated space encourages unsanitary activities, which create unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult cabarets, adult arcades, and other adult entertainment establishments for the purpose of engaging in illicit sexual activities within the premises of such adult entertainment establishments or for the purpose of purchasing or selling illicit drugs. 
(6)  Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in adult entertainment establishments. 
(7)  According to research from the Kaiser Family Foundation, an estimated 650,000 to 900,000 Americans are infected with HIV. The number of new HIV infections occurring each year is now about 41,000. Men and women of all races are most likely to be infected by sexual contact. 
(8)  The centers for disease control and prevention estimates that as many as one in three people with HIV do not know they are infected. 
(9)  The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 cases through November of 1990. 
(10)  The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high level, with over 500,000 cases being reported in 1990. 
(11)  The surgeon general of the United States, in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn. 
(12)  According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts. 
(13)  Sanitary conditions in some adult entertainment establishments are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(14)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of adult entertainment establishments where persons view adult-oriented films and live sexual shows. 
(15)  The findings noted in subsections (b)(1) through (b)(14) of this section raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(16)  Adult entertainment establishments have operational characteristics that should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(17)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the adult entertainment establishments. Further, such a licensing procedure will give an incentive to the operators to see that the adult entertainment establishment is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the adult entertainment establishment, in ultimate possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(18)  Removal of doors on adult booths, cubicles, or individual viewing areas and requiring sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult establishments. 
(19)  Requiring licensees of adult establishments to keep information regarding current and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(20)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the adult establishment, where such information is substantially related to significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(21)  In the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases, it is desirable to obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct which this article is designed to prevent, or who are likely to be witnesses to such conduct. 
(22)  The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this article. 
(23)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years serves as a deterrent to, and prevents conduct which leads to, the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(24)  The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of this city will be promoted by the enactment of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 13-02.1-01; Ord. No. 964, § 1, 6-24-2003) 
Sec. 12-3-3. - Standards of conduct and operation. 
(a)  Standards of conduct. The following standards of conduct must be adhered to by employees and entertainers of any adult cabaret while in any area in which members of the public are allowed to be present: 
(1)  No employee or entertainer shall be unclothed or in such less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(2)  No employee or entertainer, while performing or mingling with members of the public, shall be unclothed or in less than opaque and complete attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section, nor shall any male employee or entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or wear or use any device or covering which simulates the same. 
(3)  No employee or entertainer, while performing or mingling with members of the public, shall wear or use any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the breast below the top of the areola, vulva, genitals, anus, any portion of the pubic region, or buttocks. 
(4)  No employee or entertainer shall caress, fondle, or erotically touch any member of the public. No employee or entertainer shall encourage or permit any member of the public to caress, fondle or erotically touch any employee or entertainer. 
(5)  No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts of sexual conduct or any act which constitutes a violation of N.D.C.C. chs. 12.1-27.1 or 12.1-27.2. 
(6)  No employee or entertainer mingling with the members of the public shall conduct any dance, performance or exhibition in or about the non-stage area of the adult cabaret, nor shall any employee or entertainer conduct any dance, performance or exhibition for less than all members of the public in the establishment. 
(b)  Requirements. At any adult cabaret, the following are required: 
(1)  Admission must be restricted to persons of the age of 18 years of more. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager or other person in charge of the adult cabaret to knowingly permit or allow any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such premises. 
(2)  Neither the performance nor any photograph, drawing, sketch or other pictorial or graphic representation thereof displaying any portion of the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic hair, buttocks, genitals, and/or anus may be visible outside of the adult cabaret. 
(3)  No member of the public shall be permitted at any time to enter into any of the non-public portions of the adult cabaret, which shall include, but are not limited to, the dressing rooms of the entertainers or other rooms provided for the benefit of employees, and the kitchen and storage areas; except that persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages, or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or equipment on the premises may be permitted into non-public areas to the extent required to perform their job duties. 
(c)  Responsibilities of manager. The responsibilities of the manager of an adult cabaret shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  A licensed manager shall be on duty at an adult cabaret at all times adult entertainment is being provided or members of the public are present on the premises. The name and license of the manager shall be prominently posted during business hours. The manager shall be responsible for verifying that any person who provides adult entertainment within the premises possesses a current and valid entertainer's license. 
(2)  A licensed manager shall provide to the police department a weekly schedule of dates and names of the licensed entertainers who will be performing, which notice shall be provided no later than 4:00 p.m. on each Monday of each week. Any changes in the schedule shall be provided to the police department within 24 hours of the change. 
(3)  The licensed manager on duty shall not be an entertainer. 
(4)  The manager or an assistant manager licensed under this article shall maintain visual observation of each member of the public at all times any entertainer is present in the public or performance areas of the adult cabaret. Where there is more than one performance area, or the performance area is of such size or configuration that one manager or assistant manager is unable to visually observe, at all times, each adult entertainer, each employee, and each member of the public, a manager or assistant manager licensed under this article shall be provided for each public or performance area or portion of a public or performance area visually separated from other portions of the adult cabaret. 
(5)  The manager shall be responsible for, and shall ensure that, the actions of members of the public, the adult entertainers and all other employees shall comply with all requirements of this article. 
(d)  Premises; specifications. 
(1)  Performance area. The performance area of the adult cabaret where adult entertainment is provided shall be a stage or platform at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating areas and shall be separated by a distance of at least six feet from all areas of the premises to which members of the public have access. A continuous railing at least three feet in height and located at least six feet from all points of the performance area shall separate the performance area and the patron seating areas. The stage and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided must be visible from the common areas of the premises and at least one manager's station. Visibility shall not be blocked or obstructed by doors, curtains, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. 
(2)  Lighting. Sufficient lighting shall be provided and equally distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all objects are plainly visible at all times. A minimum lighting level of 30 lux horizontal, measured at 30 inches from the floor and on ten-foot centers, is hereby established for all areas of the adult cabaret where members of the public are admitted. 
(3)  Signs. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters at least one-inch height shall be conspicuously displayed in the public area of the premises stating the following: 
THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF MANDAN. 
ENTERTAINERS ARE: 1. NOT PERMITTED TO ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT. 2. NOT PERMITTED TO APPEAR SEMI-NUDE OR NUDE. 3. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS OR GRATUITIES IN ADVANCE OF THEIR PERFORMANCE. 4. NOT PERMITTED TO ACCEPT TIPS DIRECTLY FROM PATRONS AT ANY TIME. TIPS SHALL BE DEPOSITED IN THE RECEPTACLE PROVIDED BY THIS ESTABLISHMENT.  
(4)  Recordkeeping requirements. 
a.  All papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this article shall be open to inspection by the city, its employees or agents during the hours when the licensed premises are open for business, upon two days' written notice. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine whether the papers, records, and things meet the requirements of this article. 
b.  Each adult cabaret entertainment business shall maintain and retain, for a period of two years, the name, address, and age of each person employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform on the premises, as an adult entertainer, including independent contractors and their employees. This information shall be open to inspection by the city, its employees or agents during hours of operation of the business upon 24 hours' notice to the licensee. 
(5)  All adult cabarets which are open to members of the public, including those adult cabarets which offer memberships to members of the public, shall be open to inspection by city agents and employees during the hours when the premises are open for business. The purpose of such inspections shall be to determine if the licensed premises are operated in accordance with the requirements of this article. It is hereby expressly declared that unannounced inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this article, and the adult cabaret upon acceptance of a license from the city consents to such unannounced inspections. 
(e)  Hours of operation. It is unlawful for any adult cabaret to be operated or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. 
(f)  Exemptions. This article shall not be construed to prohibit: 
(1)  Plays, operas, musicals, or other dramatic works that are not obscene; 
(2)  Classes, seminars and lectures which are held for serious scientific or educational purposes and which are not obscene; or 
(3)  Exhibitions, performances, expressions or dances that are not obscene. 
These exemptions shall not apply to sexual conduct. 
(Code 1994, § 13-02.1-06; Ord. No. 964, § 6, 6-24-2003) 
Sec. 12-3-4. - Required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so, obtained in the manner provided in this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment directly related to, the operation of an unlicensed adult cabaret. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any entertainer to perform in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any manager to work in an adult cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the city to do so. 
(Code 1994, § 13-02.1-03; Ord. No. 964, § 3, 6-24-2003) 
Sec. 12-3-5. - Application. 
(a)  Adult cabaret license. 
(1)  All applications for an adult cabaret license shall be submitted to the clerk in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct an adult cabaret on the business premises and shall be signed by such person and certified as true under penalty of perjury. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the clerk, which shall require the following information: 
a.  For the applicant and for each applicant control person, provide names, any aliases or previous names, driver's license number, if any, and business, mailing, and residential address, and business telephone number. 
b.  If a partnership, whether general of limited, and if a corporation, date and place of incorporation, evidence that it is in good standing under state laws, and name and address of any registered agent for service of process. 
c.  Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this article or any license for similar adult entertainment or sexually oriented business, including bookstore, motion picture theaters and panoramas, from the city or another city, county or state, and if so, the names and addresses of each other licensed business. 
d.  A summary of the business history of the applicant and applicant control persons in owning or operating the adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses, providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such businesses, and whether any business license or adult entertainment license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor. 
e.  For the applicant and all applicant control persons, any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, other than parking offenses or minor traffic infractions, including the dates of conviction, nature of the crime, name and location of court and disposition. 
f.  For the applicant and all applicant control persons, a description of business, occupation or employment history for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
g.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information to confirm any statements set forth in the application. 
h.  The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult cabaret, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number, together with the name and address of each owner and lessee of the property. 
i.  Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant and applicant control persons, taken within six months of the date of the application, showing only the full face. 
j.  A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant or each applicant control person by city police department employees. 
k.  A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the premises for the proposed adult cabaret, including a statement of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas, seating areas, manager's office and stations, restrooms and service areas shall be clearly marked on the drawing. An application for a license for an adult cabaret shall include building plans which demonstrate conformance with all applicable city building, fire, food service, and health and safety codes. 
(2)  An application shall be deemed complete upon the applicant's provision of all information requested in subsection (a)(1) of this section, and the applicant's verification that the application is complete. The clerk may request other information or clarification in addition to that provided in a complete application where necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(3)  A nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution must be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the costs of processing the application. 
(4)  Each applicant shall verify, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in the application is true. 
(5)  If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an adult cabaret license, a significant interest based on the responsibility for management or operation of the licensed premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition shall be provided in writing to the clerk no later than 21 days following such acquisition. The notice required shall include the information required for the original adult cabaret license application. 
(6)  The adult cabaret license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed adult cabaret. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult cabaret so that it can be easily read at any time the business is open. 
(7)  No person granted an adult cabaret license pursuant to this article shall operate the adult cabaret business under a name not specified on the license, nor shall any person operate an adult cabaret under any designation or at any location not specified on the license. 
(8)  Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the clerk shall provide copies to the health office, police, fire, and building departments for their investigation and review to determine compliance of the proposed adult cabaret with the laws and regulations which each department administers. Each department shall, within 14 days of the date of such application, inspect the application and premises and shall make a written report to the clerk whether such application and premises complies with the laws administered by each department. No license may be issued unless each department reports that the application and premises comply with the relevant laws. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the departments shall base their recommendation as to premises compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the application. Any adult cabaret license approved prior to the premises construction shall contain a condition that the premises may not open for business until the premises have been inspected and determined to be in substantial conformance with the drawings submitted with the application. A department shall recommend denial of a license under this section if it finds that the proposed adult cabaret is not in conformance with the requirements of this article or other law in effect in the city. A recommendation for denial shall cite the specific reason therefor, including applicable laws. 
(9)  An adult cabaret license shall be issued by the clerk within 30 days of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless the board of city commissioners determines that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements of this article or provide any information required under this subsection or that the applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact on the application for a license. The clerk shall grant an extension of time in which to provide all information required for a complete license application upon the request of the applicant. If the clerk finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of an adult cabaret license, the clerk shall recommend denial of the application in writing, shall cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable law, and shall forward the same to the board. If the board fails to approve or deny the license within 30 days of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the applicant shall be permitted, subject to all other applicable law, to operate the business for which the license was sought until notification from the clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the city extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. 
(b)  Adult cabaret manager and entertainer license. 
(1)  No person shall work as a manager, assistant manager or entertainer at an adult cabaret without an entertainer's or manager's license from the city. Each applicant for a manager's or entertainer's license shall complete an application on forms provided by the city containing the information identified below. A nonrefundable application fee established by resolution shall accompany the application. A copy of the application shall be provided to the police department for its review, investigation and recommendation. All applications for a manager's or entertainer's license shall be signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of perjury. The manager's or entertainer's license application shall require the following information: 
a.  The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number, date and place of birth, fingerprints taken by the city police department employees or by a police department approved by the city and any stage names or nicknames used in entertaining. 
b.  The name and address of each business at which the applicant intends to work. 
c.  Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18 years. Any two of the following shall be accepted as documentation of age: 
1.  A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth. 
2.  A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth. 
3.  An official passport issued by the United States of America. 
4.  An immigration card issued by the United States of America. 
5.  Any other identification that the city determines to be acceptable. 
d.  A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any misdemeanor or felony violations in this or any other city, county, or state within five years immediately preceding the date of the application, except parking violations or minor traffic infractions. 
e.  A description of the applicant's principal activities or services to be rendered in the adult cabaret. 
f.  Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant, taken within six months of the date of the application, showing only the full face. 
g.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the application. 
h.  Every adult entertainer shall provide his license to the adult cabaret manager on duty on the premises prior to his performance. The manager shall retain the licenses of the adult entertainers readily available for inspection by the city at any time during business hours of the adult cabaret. 
(2)  The clerk may request additional information or clarification when necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(3)  An adult cabaret manager's or an adult entertainer's license shall be issued by the city within 15 days from the date the complete application and fee are received, unless the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be supplied according to this article, has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has failed to meet any of the requirements for issuance of a license under this article. If the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to qualify for the license applied for, the clerk shall recommend denial in writing, cite the specific reasons therefor, including applicable laws, and shall forward the same to the board. If the board has failed to approve or deny an application for an adult cabaret manager's license within 15 days of filing of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other applicable laws, commence work as an adult cabaret manager in a duly licensed adult cabaret until notified by the clerk that the license has been denied, but in no event may the clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. 
(4)  An applicant for an adult entertainer's license shall be issued a temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application and fee. Said temporary license will automatically expire on the 14th day following the filing of the complete application and fee unless the city has failed to approve or deny the license application in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the board approves or denies the application, or until the final determination of any appeal from a denial of the application. In no event may the clerk extend the application review time for more than an additional 20 days. 
(Code 1994, § 13-02.1-04; Ord. No. 964, § 4, 6-24-2003) 
ARTICLE 4. - AMUSEMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax and regulate amusements, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(26), (30); amusements, N.D.C.C. ch. 53-03 et seq. 

Sec. 12-4-1. - Required to operate public amusements. 
(a)  It is unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to the public and for which an admittance fee is charged without having first secured a license from the city. The license fee for amusements shall be determined by resolution of the board. 
(b)  No license fee is required if a show, exhibition, entertainment, gallery, stand or other device is operated or given under the auspices of and for the benefit of a church or school, or charitable, fraternal or political organization. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-01; Code 1994, § 13-04-01) 
Sec. 12-4-2. - Public amusements for which license is required. 
    A person may not conduct, operate or maintain the following activities without first obtaining a license from the city: 
(1)  Public dance, as that term is defined by N.D.C.C. § 53-02-01. 
(2)  Any circus, carnival or similar event. 
(3)  Any theatrical exhibition, motion picture show, vaudeville performance, opera or variety theater. 
(4)  Any show, entertainment, gallery, stand or device of any description on the streets, alleys or public grounds within the city. 
(5)  Any merry-go-round, rides or similar devices. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-04-02-10-04-05; Code 1994, § 13-04-02) 
Sec. 12-4-3. - Liability insurance or bond required. 
    A person may not conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire, or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the city license officer a bond indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of operation of the ride, or certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least $500,000.00. Such bond or certificate of insurance is subject to the approval of the city attorney. This section applies to all persons, whether or not such persons are exempted from any other provision of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 13-04-03) 
Sec. 12-4-4. - Licensee to maintain order. 
    Any licensee engaged in giving or conducting any public amusement for pay shall preserve good order in and about the place of exhibition or public amusement, and if necessary for that purpose, shall employ, at the licensee's own expense, a sufficient security force. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-06; Code 1994, § 13-04-04) 
Sec. 12-4-5. - Policing of dances, music festivals or public concerts. 
    A public dance or public dancing place or hall may not be conducted, maintained or operated, unless the same is policed as provided by N.D.C.C. § 53-02-08. A music festival or public concert, as defined in N.D.C.C. § 53-02-01, shall be policed as provided in N.D.C.C. § 53-02-08. The cost of the policing, as determined by the chief of police, must be paid by the applicant at the time of the license application or, at the discretion of the chief of police, a cash bond in a reasonable amount may be posted, which shall be refunded upon payment of costs of policing following the event. 
(Code 1994, § 13-04-05) 
Sec. 12-4-6. - Use of streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to play any game, sport or amusement upon any public right-of-way of the city, except as permitted by the board. 
(Code 1994, § 13-04-06) 
ARTICLE 5. - PAWNBROKERS, JUNK DEALERS, AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax and regulate secondhand and junk stores, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(53). 

Sec. 12-5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junk dealer means any person who maintains a store, shop or place of business where purchases are made of used metals, scrap iron, scrap batteries, rags, bottles, bones or scrap of any kind, nature or description for the purpose of resale either at retail or otherwise. 
    Pawnbroker means any person who: 
(1)  Loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or any other valuable thing. 
(2)  Deals in the purchase of personal property or any other valuable thing, on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. 
(3)  Loans money, secured by chattel mortgage on personal property, taking possession of the property or any part so mortgaged. 
    Secondhand dealer means any person, including antique dealers and jewelers, who make purchases of used articles such as, but not limited to, automobile parts and accessories, electronic equipment, electronic appliances, furniture, kitchenware, clothing, jewelry, coins with a market value more than the face value, collectibles, and glass or chinaware for the purpose of resale, either at retail or otherwise and either in its original condition or in a different form. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-14-01, 10-19-01; Code 1994, § 13-14-02) 
Sec. 12-5-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The board finds that pawn shops or businesses that deal in secondhand goods or valuables provide a convenient means by which thieves or those who deal in stolen goods may dispose of such property. In order to discourage transactions in stolen goods and other unauthorized transactions, and to assist in the recovery of stolen goods and identification of those who sell stolen goods or engage in other unauthorized transactions, the board finds that it is necessary to license such businesses, to require that certain records be kept, and that police officers be authorized to inspect such records. 
(Code 1994, § 13-14-01) 
Sec. 12-5-3. - Exceptions. 
    This article does not apply to: 
(1)  Any person who principally engages in the sale of new goods who, incident to the sale of new goods, accepts for trade-in previously owned or secondhand goods or who re-purchases goods from the same person who purchased those goods at the same store, shop or place of business, provided that he does not otherwise engage in a business defined in this article. 
(2)  Any person who sells goods at a rummage sale, garage sale, yard sale or flea market who does not otherwise engage in a business. 
(3)  Any person who purchases aluminum, glass or plastic containers or paper products for the purpose of recycling or for re-sale for recycling who does not otherwise engage in a business. 
(4)  Any federally licensed firearms dealer required by federal laws or regulations to maintain records substantially equivalent to records required pursuant to this article relating to purchases of firearms, provided that such records are open to inspection by any law enforcement officer and he does not otherwise engage in a business. 
(5)  A bona fide investment brokerage firm, as defined by the Internal Revenue Service, which firm does not otherwise engage in a business. 
(Code 1994, § 13-14-03) 
Sec. 12-5-4. - Record of purchases or loans. 
(a)  Any person who operates a business in the city must keep a record of each and every purchase or loan made by the business, containing: 
(1)  The name, address and date of birth of the seller or pledger; 
(2)  Written consent of a parent or legal guardian if the seller or pledger is less than 18 years of age; 
(3)  The date the article was sold or pledged; 
(4)  The description of the article, including the make, model, serial number and color and any prominent or descriptive marks on the property; 
(5)  The amount for which the article was sold or pledged; 
(6)  The date of forfeiture and sale; and 
(7)  A driver's license number or other identifying information of the person by whom sold or left in pledge. 
(b)  The records must be legible and no record may be destroyed or rendered illegible by any alteration or correction. 
(c)  Records must be retained for two years and freely exhibited to any city police officer conducting an inspection authorized by this article upon demand during usual business hours. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-14-10, 10-19-04; Code 1994, § 13-14-06) 
Sec. 12-5-5. - Sale of unredeemed pledges. 
    Sale of unredeemed pledges may be made at any time after forfeiture by public auction to the highest bidder for cash after public notice at least one week prior to sale. The notice must describe each article to be sold. Such sale shall work a complete forfeiture of the right of redemption by the original owner, and the proceeds thereof, after paying expenses, is absolutely the property of the pawnbroker. 
(Code 1979, § 10-19-08; Code 1994, § 13-14-07) 
Sec. 12-5-6. - Reversion of property. 
    At the sale, if no bids are made and offered for any article, it reverts to and becomes the property of the pawnbroker and can be disposed of by private sale. 
(Code 1979, § 10-19-09; Code 1994, § 13-14-08) 
Sec. 12-5-7. - Purchase from minors restricted. 
    A person who engages in a business, or agent or employee, may not loan money to any person under the age of 18 years or purchase any merchandise, goods or property from a minor without the written consent of the parents or guardian of that person. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-14-09, 10-19-07; Code 1994, § 13-14-09) 
Sec. 12-5-8. - Junkyard nuisance prohibited. 
    A junkyard must, at all times, be kept and maintained in a sanitary condition, and the keeping of any goods, wares and merchandise of any kind, or property which tends to annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health or safety of others, or in any way renders other persons insecure in life, or the use of property, is declared a nuisance and is prohibited. 
(Code 1994, § 13-14-10) 
Sec. 12-5-9. - Authorized inspections. 
(a)  The police department is authorized and required to establish a policy setting guidelines regulating the nature and frequency of inspections authorized by this article. The policy must provide that regular and periodic unannounced inspections of the records of all licensed businesses, sufficient to ascertain compliance with this article, must be conducted at least on an annual basis. The policy shall also provide that additional inspections may be authorized by the chief of police, chief of detectives or their designates, but only if there is reason to believe that property of a kind that is commonly purchased at the licensed business has been stolen or unlawfully traded or sold. 
(b)  When requested by any peace officer during the ordinary hours of business, every licensee shall submit and exhibit the records as required by this article to the officer. The licensee shall also exhibit to the peace officer any goods or personal property that may be left, deposited, pledged or purchased. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-14-11, 10-19-06; Code 1994, § 13-14-13) 
Sec. 12-5-10. - Police department to maintain list of stolen goods. 
    The police department will maintain a list of stolen goods and will respond to inquiries of persons licensed under this article. This list will be kept current and updated daily insofar as is practicable. 
(Code 1994, § 13-14-11) 
Sec. 12-5-11. - Information to be used for official purposes only. 
    Information obtained by police officers from records required to be kept pursuant to this article may be used for official purposes only. 
(Code 1994, § 13-14-12) 
Sec. 12-5-12. - License required. 
    A person may not conduct the business of pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk dealer without having first obtained a license to do so. Application for the license shall be made to the city licensing officer and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the board. The annual license fee issued pursuant to this article shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1979, §§ 10-14-02, 10-14-04, 10-19-02; Code 1994, § 13-14-04) 
Sec. 12-5-13. - Bond required. 
    Before a license shall be issued to any person under the provisions of this article, the applicant shall execute a bond to the city in an amount to be determined by resolution of the board, conditioned that the applicant will, in every particular, conform to the requirements of this article, and with the requirements of any law or ordinance which may hereafter be passed concerning pawnbrokers. 
(Code 1979, § 10-19-03; Code 1994, § 13-14-05) 
Sec. 12-5-14. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked by the board after notice and hearing for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a license. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of the licensee for any crime involving theft or dishonesty. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for suspension or revocation must be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice must be sent by first class mail to the licensee at least five days prior to the date set for hearing. 
(Code 1979, § 10-14-13; Code 1994, § 13-14-14) 
ARTICLE 6. - DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES AND SOLICITATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax and regulate transient merchants, itinerant merchants, peddlers and hawkers, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(26). 

Sec. 12-6-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The board of city commissioners finds and declares that, for the safety, privacy and protection of residents of the community, and for the preservation of the rights of people conducting protected speech, it is necessary and proper that certain door-to-door solicitations in residential areas be regulated and that permissible sales or solicitations be restricted to daylight or early evening hours. 
(Code 1994, § 13-15-01; Ord. No. 1004, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 12-6-2. - Door-to-door sales regulated. 
    The practice of going door-to-door at private residences without being requested or invited to do so for the purpose of selling or soliciting orders to sell goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, periodicals or personal services is allowed only as permitted by this article. Any person violating the provisions of this article is guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1994, § 13-15-02; Ord. No. 1004, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 1184, 5-20-2014) 
Sec. 12-6-3. - Sales or solicitations without a permit. 
    Any person or organization desiring to engage in door-to-door solicitation in residential areas for the purpose of soliciting charitable or religious contributions, the sale of religious articles or publications or the sale of other articles if the proceeds are used for charitable or religious purposes, persons soliciting for or in support of any nonprofit organization or public interest, political candidates, or persons campaigning for or against a political candidate or issue may do so without a permit, provided that they comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 13-15-06; Ord. No. 1004, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 12-6-4. - Hours of sales solicitation. 
    Door-to-door sales or solicitation allowed pursuant to this article are permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. and between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily. 
(Code 1994, § 13-15-07; Ord. No. 1004, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 12-6-5. - Locations where solicitation prohibited. 
    Notwithstanding the sales or solicitations allowed under this article, no person may solicit or sell at any private residence, business or establishment if there is placed on the premises, in an observable location, a sign at least ten square inches in size bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No Soliciting," or similar notice. 
(Code 1994, § 13-15-08; Ord. No. 1184, 5-20-2014) 
Sec. 12-6-6. - Required; application. 
(a)  Any person or organization desiring to engage in door-to-door sales in residential areas for the purpose of selling or soliciting orders to sell goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, periodicals or personal services, may do so, provided that they comply with the provisions of this article and obtain a permit to do so by filing an application with the office of city administration. The application must be on a form provided by the city and contain the following: 
(1)  Applicant's name, present residence, present home address, present business address, current telephone number and email address. 
(2)  A general description of the applicant's business, including the goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, periodicals or personal services that will be sold in the city. 
(3)  Applicant's residence and business address for the prior two-year period, if different from the present residence and address. 
(4)  The name and address of the organization the applicant represents or by whom they are employed. 
(5)  If the applicant is a business and the application is for multiple sales persons, a complete listing of the name, date of birth, local address and telephone number of each sales person that will conduct sales in the city. 
(6)  A copy of the applicant's state sales tax permit and if applicable, a copy of the applicant's transient merchant license. 
(7)  Such other information as is required by the city. 
(b)  An applicant for a door-to-door sales permit must be a person of good character, integrity and honesty, whose prior activities, criminal record, including arrest record or pending criminal cases, reputation, habits and associations, do not pose a threat to the public interest of this state or to safety or security of the citizens in their homes. A permit may not be issued to a person whose prior conduct indicates a threat to the safety of other persons. The city police department will conduct a background check on any applicant applying for a door-to-door sales permit. 
(c)  A permit may not be issued to an applicant unless the applicant has obtained a transient merchant license from the attorney general, pursuant to N.D.C.C. ch. 51-04, if required, or the applicant has obtained a statement from the attorney general that a transient merchant license is not required. 
(d)  A person who has pled guilty to or been found guilty of a felony offense as defined by the laws of this state, other states, or the federal government under circumstances which indicate the person poses a threat to the public interest, or has pled guilty to or been found guilty of a felony violation of N.D.C.C. chs. 12.1-06.1, 12.1-11, 12.1-20, 12.1-22, or 12.1-23 or an offense of other states or the federal government equivalent to the offenses defined in these chapters, may not be granted a door-to-door sales permit for five years from the date of conviction, release from incarceration, end of a period of suspension or deferral, or expiration of parole or probation, whichever is the latest. 
(e)  A person who has pled guilty to or been found guilty of a misdemeanor offense in violation of N.D.C.C. chs. 12.1-06.1, 12.1-11, 12.1-20, 12.1-22, or 12.23, or an offense of other states, the federal government, or a municipality equivalent to these offenses may not be issued a door-to-door sales permit for two years from the date of conviction, release from incarceration, end of a period of suspension or deferral, or expiration of parole or probation, whichever is the latest. 
(f)  The chief of police shall issue or deny a door-to-door sales permit within a reasonable time of receipt of the application. Written notice of a denial must be mailed to the applicant at the address listed as current on the application. The notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the denial is based. 
(g)  Denial of a door-to-door sales permit is subject to an appeal to the board of city commissioners upon written notice of appeal filed within ten days of receipt of the notice of denial. If no appeal is filed within the time specified the action shall be final. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the board shall set a date for a hearing within 15 days of receipt of the notice of the appeal. Notice of the time and place for the hearing must be served upon the applicant personally or by first class mail at least five days before the hearing. The board shall hear such testimony and other evidence as it deems necessary and expedient, and thereupon make its findings and decision, which shall be final. 
(Code 1994, § 13-15-03; Ord. No. 1004, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 1184, 5-20-2014) 
Sec. 12-6-7. - Issuance and terms thereof. 
(a)  Upon approval of the application, the chief of police shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  The permit is to be in the form of a photo identification badge and must be worn at all times by the applicant when selling. Permits will be issued to each employee or agent of the applicant that will engage in sales. 
(c)  The permit must have a number on it which shall also be placed on the applicant's application file. The permit must also contain the name of the applicant and/or the name of the sales person. Each sales person shall wear a permit in a visible manner during all sales activities. 
(d)  The permit shall be issued for a period of one year. The permit fee shall be established by resolution. 
(Code 1994, § 13-15-04; Ord. No. 1004, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 1184, 5-20-2014) 
Sec. 12-6-8. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the board of city commissioners, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a permit. 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on business. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conviction of any crime involving theft or dishonesty. 
(5)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(6)  In the event the chief of police acquires information that a permittee is engaging in fraudulent sales practices, he may issue an order immediately suspending said permit pending notice and hearing as provided in this section. 
(b)  Notice of the hearing for revocation must be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice must be mailed, first class mail, to the address of the licensee as contained in the application, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Code 1994, § 13-15-05; Ord. No. 1004, 4-18-2006; Ord. No. 1184, 5-20-2014) 
ARTICLE 7. - TAXICABS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to license, tax and regulate taxicabs, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(27). 

Sec. 12-7-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Passenger means any person engaging a taxicab under the terms of this article. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, with a seating capacity of 13 persons or less, and not operating on a fixed route. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-01; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-2. - Scope of service. 
(a)  All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city, operating under the provisions of this article, must render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Licensees shall maintain a central place of business open 24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They shall answer all calls received for services inside the corporate limits of the city as soon as they can do so, and if services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time they must then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason for delay. Any licensee who refuses to accept a call in the corporate limits of this city at any time when the licensee has available cabs, or who fails or refuses to give overall service, is in violation of this article. 
(b)  Any licensee under this chapter shall have at least one operable accessible vehicle in its fleet and in service at all times and operated by a driver "trained to proficiency" in assisting passengers with a disability. Any licensee under this chapter shall have at least one driver trained to proficiency for each accessible vehicle in its fleet. If a person holds more than one license under this chapter, at least one operable accessible vehicle is required for each license. A license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked if the licensee fails to comply with this requirement. Any taxicab licensee renewing a license in December 2017 shall meet this requirement by July 1, 2018 and shall provide proof of their ownership and use of an accessible taxicab. Any taxicab licensee applying for a new license after January 1, 2018 shall meet this requirement immediately. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, any taxicab licensee whose fleet is limited to one taxicab shall comply with this paragraph at such time as it changes or replaces that taxicab or adds one or more taxicabs to its fleet. For the purposes of this paragraph: 
(1)  "Accessible vehicle" means a taxicab that includes a ramp and other features to allow a wheelchair user to board safely and independently, if able to do so, and to ride safely. Such features shall comply with the relevant laws including the U.S. Department of Transportation regulations implementing the Americans with Disabilities Act contained in 49 C.F.R. § 38.23. 
(2)  "Wheelchair" shall mean a mobility aid belonging to any class of three or more wheeled devices, usable indoors, designed or modified for and used by individuals with mobility impairments, whether operated manually or powered. 
(3)  "Trained to proficiency" means a taxi driver who drives an accessible taxicab and who is trained and able to assist a mobility impaired passenger and safely utilize the accessible features of the accessible taxicab including: 
a.  How to use and maintain accessibility features and equipment in accessible vehicles. 
b.  Proper securement of mobility devices. 
c.  A sensitive and appropriate interaction with passengers with disabilities and a working understanding of the requirements of the ADA. 
(4)  An additional fee or fare cannot be charged for the use of an accessible taxi or for serving persons with disabilities. A licensee may not charge a fee for an attendant acting on behalf of and traveling with a passenger with disabilities. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-02; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009; Ord. No. 1276, 11-7-2017) 
Sec. 12-7-3. - Fees. 
    Fees for taxicab company licenses and taxicab driver licenses shall be established by resolution. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-23; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-4. - Reciprocity with Bismarck. 
    A taxicab business licensed to do business by the City of Bismarck and a taxicab driver licensed to drive taxicabs by the City of Bismarck may provide taxicab services in the City of Mandan so long as the business license and the driver's licenses are issued in conformance with the provisions of this article. A taxicab business must be licensed in the city where it is located. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-24; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-5. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Any license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended by the board of city commissioners for any violation of any provision of this article, city ordinance or state law. 
(b)  Prior to a license being revoked or suspended, a hearing must be held by the board. The licensee must be given at least five days' notice of the time and place for the hearing. The notice must specify the action proposed to be taken, the reason for it, and the licensee's right to appear. The notice must be mailed to the licensee by mail or personally served not less than eight days before the hearing. If, after the hearing, the board concludes that the violation charged has been proved, it may either revoke the license or suspend the license for a period not exceeding 60 days. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-13; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-6. - Passenger capacity limitation. 
    It is unlawful for any licensee to carry passengers in excess of the number specified for that motor vehicle in the license. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-07; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-7. - Taxicab meters. 
(a)  Every taxicab must be equipped with a taximeter of a make, construction and operation satisfactory to the chief of police and have a lighted dial in plain view to passengers which registers the fare for each trip. Taximeters must be factory sealed and certified by the manufacturer to be accurate. Before being used for the charging of fares, taximeters must be certified as to accuracy and sealed before use. The police department may inspect and test a taximeter at any time. 
(b)  Any taximeter which is the subject of a complaint must be placed out of service until it is re-certified by the manufacturer or a qualified service provider. No person may tamper with or break the seal of a taximeter for any purpose. No taxicab may be operated in the city if the seal of the taximeter has been broken until the taximeter is re-inspected by the manufacturer or a qualified service provider and resealed. No person may operate any taxicab without a sealed operating taximeter in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-08; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-8. - Taxicab fares and uniformity. 
(a)  Rates of fare. 
(1)  All applicants or licensees must annually file a statement or scheduled listing all fairs, multiple loading charges, flat rate charges for certain specified routes, and any other information necessary to clarify rates to be charged with the city administrator prior to the operation of taxicabs. 
(2)  Any passenger has the option of electing payment by the taximeter rate or by the hourly rate. If a passenger engages a taxicab at the hourly rate, the taximeter may not be used. 
(3)  When a taxicab is in service, which includes waiting time, other than when hired at the hourly rate, a flag or indicator on the taximeter must be lowered setting the taximeter in operation at the time the passenger enters the taxicab and must be raised, which stops the taximeter when the taxicab is halted to discharge such passenger. Waiting time includes the following: 
a.  Time beginning three minutes after arrival at a place in which the taxicab has been called and while it is not in motion. 
b.  The time consumed by delays in traffic or elsewhere. 
c.  The time consumed while standing at the direction of the passenger. The passenger may not be charged for any inefficiency of the driver of the taxicab or for arrival of the taxicab at the place of call prior to the appointed time. 
(4)  Any licensee may operate a taxicab car pool service. 
(b)  A licensee's rates must be uniform throughout the city. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-09; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-9. - Taxicab stands. 
    The board of city commissioners may designate the places where taxicabs licensed under this article are permitted to stand while awaiting employment. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-10; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-10. - Motor vehicle safety inspections and maintenance. 
    Prior to the use and operation of any motor vehicles as a taxicab under the provisions of this article, the motor vehicle must be thoroughly examined and inspected by a certified mechanic and found to provide safe transportation and to comply with state and city laws. Every motor vehicle used as a taxicab must be inspected at least semi-annually by a certified mechanic to ensure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. Every motor vehicle operating under this article must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. A report of every required inspection must be kept on file and furnished to the chief of police upon request. The police department may inspect any taxicab for compliance with this section. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-11; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-11. - Restrictions on alcoholic beverages in taxicabs. 
    A person other than a passenger may not possess an alcoholic beverage in a taxicab within the city limits. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-12; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-12. - Substitution and retirement of motor vehicles. 
    If a licensee sells or disposes of a motor vehicle licensed as a taxicab, the license issued for such taxicab may be transferred to another motor vehicle without charge upon application and upon the furnishing of satisfactory evidence of required insurance coverage. If the licensee desires to retire a motor vehicle licensed as a taxicab from active service, the licensee may reinstate such motor vehicle at some future time during the year for which originally licensed without the payment of an additional fee, and provided satisfactory evidence that the motor vehicle is covered by insurance. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-14; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-13. - Vehicle identification. 
    Every licensee shall fix the number of the license, in figures at least four inches high and three inches wide and in distinctive contrasting colors to the color of the vehicle, on the two sides and rear of the vehicle prior to its use as a taxicab. The number must be plain and distinct at all times when the taxicab is in use. Upon the expiration or cancellation of the taxicab license, the licensee shall immediately remove the number from the motor vehicle. The motor vehicle may not be used with that number on the vehicle. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-15; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-14. - Required. 
(a)  A person may not operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city without obtaining a license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Licenses granted under this article expire at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance unless renewed in accordance with the provisions of this article or unless sooner revoked. 
(c)  Restrictions as to passenger capacity for each motor vehicle used as a taxicab shall be stated on the license. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-03; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-15. - Application; fee. 
    An applicant for a taxicab shall file a sworn written application signed by the applicant, if an individual, all partners if a partnership, or the president and secretary if a corporation or limited liability company, with an application fee established by resolution. The application must contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers; 
(3)  The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals; 
(4)  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the motor vehicles of the applicant; 
(5)  The make, model and serial number of each motor vehicle for which license is sought and the number of passengers that can be carried; and 
(6)  A rate schedule showing all proposed rates, fees and charges. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-04; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-16. - Public hearing and issuance. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a taxicab license the board of city commissioners shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing must be given to the applicant. 
(b)  If the board of city commissioners finds that the applicant is fit, willing, and able to perform taxicab services and to conform to the provisions of this article, the board shall direct the city administrator to issue a license stating the name and address of the applicant, the number and capacity of motor vehicles authorized under the license and the date of issuance; otherwise the application shall be denied. 
(c)  In making the findings in subsection (b) of this section, the board of city commissioners shall take into consideration the character, experience and responsibility of the applicant as well as the suitability of the applicant's equipment. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-05; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-17. - Indemnity bond or liability insurance. 
    A license may not be issued under the provisions of this article or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect liability insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $500,000.00 for bodily injury or property damage to any one person and in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for injuries or property damage to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident. The liability insurance policy must be issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state. The insurance policy must contain a provision that the company knows of this provision of this Code, and issues it pursuant to the terms of this article, and that no cancellation shall be valid unless 30 days' written notice in advance is given by first class mail to the city administrator. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-06; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-18. - Required. 
    A person may not operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab may permit it to be so driven, unless the driver has a taxicab driver's license issued annually under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-16; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-19. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a taxicab driver's license required by the provisions of this article must make application on forms to be provided by the city. The application must state the name, date of birth, driver's license number, and place of residence of the applicant, and any other information that may be required by the city and shall be signed and verified by the applicant. 
(b)  At the time of the submission of the application, the city may require the applicant to furnish a fingerprint card prepared by the police department showing the fingerprints of the applicant, and the applicant shall provide a photograph taken by or under the supervision of the police department. The fingerprint card, if required, and photograph must be retained by the police department in its regular fingerprint and photograph file. 
(c)  Each applicant must be accompanied by a certificate from a physician that the applicant has no disease or infirmity which may make the applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver or otherwise threaten the health and safety of the passengers. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-17; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-20. - Restrictions. 
    A license may not be issued to any person under the age of 18 years or to any person convicted of any felony within the previous five years whether or not sentencing is deferred, or of driving while under the influence, being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence, reckless driving or leaving the scene of an accident or any other criminal traffic offense within the previous three years, to any person whose driving record shows that he is not a safe and prudent driver if the board of city commissioners determines that the person has not been rehabilitated within the meaning of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-33-02.1, to a person required to register as a sex offender, or to a person who has demonstrated conduct that indicates against the safety of other persons. If the city commission makes a finding that the person has been rehabilitated, the conditions in this section may be waived, but any license so issued shall be temporary until the conditions in this section are met. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-18; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-21. - Examination. 
    Before any application for a license required by this article is finally passed upon by the chief of police, the applicant must show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's permit issued by the state. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-19; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-22. - Investigation; approval of application. 
(a)  The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's license and a report of the investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the chief of police. 
(b)  The chief of police shall issue or deny the license within a reasonable time of receipt of the application. Written notice of issuance or denial must be mailed to the applicant at the address listed as current on the application. In the case of a denial, the notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the denial is based and notification of the right to appeal to the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-20; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-23. - Appeal. 
(a)  Denial of a license is subject to an appeal to the board of city commissioners upon written notice of appeal filed with the city administrator within ten days of receipt of the letter of denial from the chief of police. If no appeal is filed within the time specified, the chief of police's action is final. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the city administrator shall set a date for a hearing before the board within 20 days of receipt of the notice of the appeal. Notice of the time and place for the hearing must be served upon the applicant personally or by first class mail at least five business days before the hearing. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-21; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 12-7-24. - Display. 
    Every taxicab driver licensed under this article shall post the taxicab driver's license in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1994, § 13-19-22; Ord. No. 1053, 6-2-2009) 
ARTICLE 8. - TOBACCO PRODUCTS 

Sec. 12-8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Compliance survey program means a program conducted by a law enforcement agency or conducted by a state agency, city, county, board of health, tobacco retailer, or association of tobacco retailers, after consultation with the appropriate local law enforcement authority, which is intended to determine whether licensed tobacco product retailers are appropriately enforcing the state law or local ordinance relating to sales of tobacco products to minors. 
    Distribute means to give tobacco products to the general public at no cost or at nominal cost for product promotional purposes. 
    Electronic cigarettes means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term "electronic cigarettes" includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, and e-pipe or under any other product, name or descriptor. 
    Restricted self-service means any display or stocks of tobacco products located in a distinct portion of the licensed premises which is restricted by posting conspicuous signs informing minors of the prohibited acts and penalties under this article and has such physical barricades or impediments as may reasonably be necessary for the purpose of barring the entry or presence of minors, except those minors who are employees of the licensee. 
    Retail tobacco dealer means any person selling, offering for sale, exposing for sale or having in possession for sale at retail, tobacco products. 
    Sell , besides its ordinary purposes, means and includes dispensing from a vending machine under the control of the actor. 
    Tobacco products means, but is not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, cigarette papers, smokeless tobacco, tobacco snuff, chewing tobacco, electronic cigarettes, and tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing. 
    Vending machine means any kind of device or mechanical machine which, upon the insertion of coins, tokens, or other objects will release tobacco products in packages or otherwise. 
(Code 1994, § 13-21-02; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 7-18-2000; Ord. No. 1180, § 1, 3-4-2014) 
Sec. 12-8-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person convicted of selling or distributing any tobacco product without having first obtained a valid license from the city or during a period of the license suspension shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1994, § 13-21-06; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 7-18-2000) 
Sec. 12-8-3. - Licensee may keep book to record carding procedure of tobacco sales. 
(a)  Licensees may require persons to present identification to show that person to be of legal age to purchase tobacco products. Any licensee may keep a book and may require anyone who has shown documentary proof of age, which substantiates an age to allow the purchase of tobacco products, to sign a book, if the age of that person is in question. If the licensee elects to keep a book, the book must show the date of the purchase, the identification used in making the purchase and the appropriate numbers of such identification, the address of the purchaser, the purchaser's signature and the signature of the person making the sale. 
(b)  A defense may be established to an offense of sale of tobacco products to minors, if evidence is presented that: 
(1)  The purchaser falsely represented and supported with documentary proof that the purchaser was of legal age. 
(2)  The purchaser signed the book in the presence of the licensee or authorized employee or agent. 
(Code 1994, § 13-21-03; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 7-18-2000) 
Sec. 12-8-4. - Employees under 18 years of age exempted. 
    A person under 18 years of age employed by a licensed tobacco dealer or distributor may enter a restricted self-service area and may handle tobacco products as part of his employment. 
(Code 1994, § 13-21-04; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 7-18-2000) 
Sec. 12-8-5. - Compliance checks authorized; license suspension. 
(a)  The chief of police may organize and conduct or authorize the conduct of compliance checks by other agencies, in order to ensure that tobacco product licensees, or their employees or agents, are appropriately requiring identification of persons seeking to purchase tobacco products and refusing to sell any tobacco products to minors. 
(b)  Licensees who fail to successfully pass the compliance checks may be subject to suspension of their license in addition to prosecution for any violations of the city's ordinances. 
(c)  Any licensee who personally or whose employees or agents sell, furnish or distribute to a minor any tobacco products: 
(1)  Twice within a 12-month period shall have the license suspended for five consecutive days. 
(2)  Three times within a 12-month period shall have the license suspended for ten consecutive days. 
(3)  Four times within a 12-month period shall have the license suspended for 30 consecutive days. 
(Code 1994, § 13-21-05; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 7-18-2000) 
Sec. 12-8-6. - Required; application; fee. 
(a)  It is unlawful to sell or distribute any tobacco products without having first secured a license from the city. The license required by this section shall also apply to sales or distribution of tobacco products through vending machines. 
(b)  An applicant for a tobacco products license must file an application with the city license officer on forms provided by the city and shall attach a diagram indicating the restricted self-service areas on the premises. The term "restricted self-service area" means any display or stocks of tobacco products located in a distinct portion of the licensed premises which is restricted by posting conspicuous signs informing minors of the prohibited acts and penalties under this article and has such physical barricades or impediments as may reasonably be necessary for the purpose of barring the entry or presence of minors except those minors who are employees of the licensee. 
(c)  The license fee for sale of tobacco products shall be determined by resolution of the board. The license fee for any licensee applying for an annual renewal of the tobacco products license who has not been found in violation of this article during the preceding 12 months shall be determined by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1994, § 13-21-01; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 7-18-2000) 
Sec. 12-8-7. - Licensee requirements. 
(a)  A licensee must limit the display, sale and distribution of tobacco products to a restricted self-service area. 
(b)  A licensee, its agents and employees, are prohibited from selling or distributing tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age. A licensee shall cooperate with local law enforcement in the conduct of compliance survey program inspections. 
(Code 1994, § 13-21-03; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 7-18-2000) 
ARTICLE 9. - PUBLIC DANCES OR PUBLIC CONCERTS 

Sec. 12-9-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public concert means a musical performance by one or more groups held either indoors or outdoors where the audience is seated by reserve or general admission, free of charge or otherwise, with the audience being present primarily for the purpose of listening to music and the location of such musical performance having a seating capacity of at least 1,000 people, or, if the concert is outdoors, the site has a capacity of at least 300 persons. 
    Public dance means any dance held either indoors or outdoors where the public may participate, whether an admission fee is charged or not, and is present primarily for the sole purpose of dancing, and where the location of the dance has a capacity of at least 100 persons. 
    Public event or event means a music festival, public dance or public concert. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-09; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 12-9-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person who gives, holds or conducts a public event in violation of this article or in violation of the conditions of the public event permit, who furnishes information required by this article which is false or misleading, or who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-17; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 12-9-3. - Required; nontransferable; fees. 
    No person shall give, hold or conduct a public event unless the owner of the place where the public event is given, or the person giving the same or in charge thereof, first shall have procured a permit to give, hold and conduct such public event. A permit may be issued for one or more public dances or public concerts. If a permit is issued to any person to conduct a public event, the event may be conducted in such place only by the person to whom the permit is issued. Such permit shall not be transferable. A permit fee shall be assessed for each event held within a 24-hour period or an annual permit fee may be assessed if the site location is intended to be a permanent site, and the amount of the fees shall be set from time to time by resolution of the board. A permit, other than an annual permit, shall not be valid for a period of greater than three consecutive days. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-10; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 12-9-4. - Application; special permits. 
    Any person desiring to conduct a public event at a public building or site or any outdoor location shall make application for a permit to do so to the board, 30 days in advance of the proposed event. In the event the applicant proposes to sell or dispense or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages at such public event, an application for a special permit under the provisions of sections 4-2-16 and 4-2-20 shall accompany the application for the public event. Four copies of the application shall be filed with the city license officer and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  Identification of applicant. The application shall include the name, address and driver's license number of the applicant and the name, address and driver's license number of the person who will manage or conduct the public event. The application shall also state whether the applicant or the person who will manage or conduct the event has been convicted of any crime relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances or within the past five years has been convicted of any crime against persons, including assault, disorderly conduct, sexual assault, rape or murder, and whether the applicant or the person who will manage or conduct the event has ever had a license of any kind revoked or cancelled by any municipal, state or federal authority. 
(2)  Date, time and place. The place, date and hours of the proposed event shall be clearly identified. 
(3)  Site plan. The person conducting the event shall include in the application a site plan which details the exact placement of the stage, lighting and other electrical equipment, public seating, toilet facilities, fencing or other barricades, parking, marked fire lanes, and the proximity of public roadways. The site plan submitted by the applicant shall be reviewed by the city engineer, who shall submit his recommendations to the board. 
(4)  Estimate of attendance. The applicant shall provide an estimate of the number of persons that the person conducting the event has determined can be safely accommodated within the chosen site and an estimate of the number of persons expected to attend. 
(5)  Ticket sales. The application shall contain information relating to ticket sales, which addresses the control of attendance to meet the site plan limitations, if any. If the person conducting the event intends to open the event to the general public without prior ticket sales, the application shall address the manner in which the person intends to limit the size of the crowd to meet the site plan limitations. 
(6)  Traffic control. The application shall specify the proximity of public roadways to the site of the event and to the proposed parking area and shall contain a description of the manner in which traffic control will be handled to ensure the safe ingress and egress of pedestrians and vehicles. Appropriate arrangements shall be made by the person conducting the event to ensure that no interference will occur with the public use of any adjacent public roadways. The traffic control proposal shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(7)  Parking. The application and site plan shall specify the planned accommodations for public parking. The person conducting the event shall provide adequate parking for persons in attendance commensurate with the estimated number of persons that the selected site can accommodate. Under no circumstances will parking be permitted upon public roadways if said parking would be in violation of posted parking restrictions. 
(8)  Sanitation. The application shall include the number and placement of sanitary toilet facilities which will be provided by the person conducting the event. The application shall be accompanied by a letter from the city health officer that indicates that he has reviewed the site plan and estimate of the number of persons in attendance and has determined that the number and kind of proposed toilet facilities is adequate to meet the needs of persons in attendance at the event. 
(9)  Garbage. The application shall include a description of the size and number of available garbage disposal units on the site of the event in addition to the arrangements made to clean up the site after the event has ended. 
(10)  Fencing and barricades. The application shall contain a description of the fencing and barricade system which is intended to control access to the event site, if such event is to be outdoors, and the location of the fencing and barricade system shall be noted on the site plan. If alcoholic beverages are to be dispensed or consumed at the public event, which event is outdoor, the perimeter of the site must be surrounded by a six-foot cyclone-style fence or enclosed within a tent which has four sides. For all events, whether outdoors or indoors, adequate provisions for entrances and exits and access by fire, police and other emergency personnel or vehicles shall also be noted in the application and on the site plan. 
(11)  Signing. The application shall contain a description of the signing which is proposed to control pedestrian and vehicular traffic, parking, and provide appropriate notices to the persons in attendance at the event. The size, wording and placement of the signs shall be included in the description and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(12)  Sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages. If the applicant intends to sell or allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the public event the identity of the alcoholic beverage licensee who will be dispensing said beverages shall be provided. The board may, by resolution or by condition attached to the permit, restrict the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverages to beer or beer and wine only at the event or series of events. Therefore, the person holding the event shall include within the application a description of the efforts that will be taken to prevent the consumption of other alcoholic beverages at the event, including those alcoholic beverages attempted to be brought in by members of the public. At all such events the dispensing of alcoholic beverages in glass bottles, glass drinking cups or any other glass containers shall be prohibited. 
(13)  Security. N.D.C.C. § 53-02-08 requires the city police department to police the event at the expense of the person conducting the event, which payment must be received by the city license officer 72 hours in advance of the event. The application shall contain, in addition to the estimated number of persons in attendance, an estimate of the number of police officers which will be needed to adequately police the event. The chief of police will be responsible for making the final determination of the number of officers that will be required. 
(14)  Bond required. The person conducting the event shall file with the city license officer a cash bond in an amount to be set by resolution of the board. The bond shall be returned to the person after the event if the site has been adequately cleaned and if no additional costs or property damage has resulted from or as a result of the event. 
(15)  Cost to the city. If the proposed event necessitates any expenditures on the part of the city, excluding the cost of providing police security, such costs shall be paid to the city by the person conducting the event. The posted cash bond shall be used by the city to cover the costs associated with the event and the balance, if any, will be returned to the person conducting the event. If the cash bond does not cover the costs resulting from the public event, the person conducting the event shall be assessed the additional costs. Costs within this section include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Costs of cleanup or garbage removal; 
b.  Costs of traffic signing, fencing or barricades; 
c.  Any property damage to public property which occurred during or as a result of the event; and 
d.  Any additional costs associated with crowd control, including injury to city employees or other persons, which occurred during or as a result of the event. 
(16)  Temporary vacation of streets. If the site plan proposed by the applicant requires the use of any public street, alley or right-of-way, the application and the site plan shall clearly designate the portion of the public street, alley or right-of-way to be temporarily vacated. In no event shall more of a public street adjoining one-half of a public block be vacated and, in each instance, adequate access for emergency vehicles shall be provided. The temporary vacation of any public street or right-of-way shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. The board shall determine whether any public street, alley or right-of-way may be temporarily vacated for a public event on a case-by-case basis. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-11; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 12-9-5. - Inquiry and investigation. 
    The board shall make such inquiry and investigation as to the propriety of granting or refusing such permit as shall be deemed necessary. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-12; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 12-9-6. - Refusal and revocation of public event permit for cause. 
(a)  The board may revoke the public event permit at any time for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. The board shall refuse to issue such permit, and shall revoke a permit already issued, where it appears that: 
(1)  The permitted site is or is likely to become a public nuisance or detrimental to public health, safety or order; 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are being violated; 
(3)  An alcoholic beverage or controlled substance is being sold, or given away, except as authorized by terms of the permit; 
(4)  Any of the city ordinances or state laws are being violated; 
(5)  The chief of police determines that adequate security cannot be provided to the public event either by city police officers, special police or a combination thereof; or 
(6)  The board has determined that the number of like events needs to be limited in order to ensure the health, safety and security of the public. 
(b)  The chief of police shall report any violations of the permit or violations of city ordinances or state laws immediately to the board. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, if the chief of police determines that the conduct of any public event has become a public nuisance or injurious to the public peace, health or safety, the chief of police shall immediately cause said event to be closed to the public and thereafter notify the board of the action and reasons therefor. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-14; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 12-9-7. - Restrictions and conditions attached to public event permit. 
    If the board determines that the public event will not unduly interfere with the peace, health or safety of the public or the neighborhood in which the event will occur and that the applicant is in compliance with the requirements for sanitation and garbage disposal; parking, fencing, traffic and crowd control; security; and regulation of alcoholic beverage consumption, the board may approve the issuance of the permit to be effective for the dates designated and subject to any necessary restrictions and conditions, including the following restrictions and conditions: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages may be distributed and consumed, and dancing may be permitted only in those areas specifically designated in the site plan and approved by the board; 
(2)  Dancing and the distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted only during the hours designated by the board, which in no event shall be before the hour of 12:00 noon on the date specified in the permit and after 1:00 a.m. of the following day; 
(3)  No person having a permit to hold a public event at which alcoholic beverages are to be sold, distributed or consumed shall permit in any such event any person who is obviously intoxicated or who is under 21 years of age, except persons under 21 years of age may be permitted at a public event if the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages is segregated and constricted to an area barricaded from the public event by a six-foot cyclone-style fence or structure to which access by such persons is prohibited; 
(4)  The licensee as a condition to the issuance of such permit consents and agrees that any city police officer or special police officer may enter upon and inspect the licensed premises or site or any part at any time for the purpose of determining compliance with the conditions of the permit and city ordinances; and 
(5)  The licensee shall comply with all other applicable ordinances and laws relating to health and sanitation and the use and sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-14; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 12-9-8. - Limits on number of public event permits. 
    The board may, by resolution, set a maximum limit on the number of public event permits which will be granted during any period of time. Notwithstanding any restrictions on the number of events, the board may deny any application for a permit if it determines that adequate provision for traffic control, health, safety or security cannot be provided for the event. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-15; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 12-9-9. - Indemnification of city. 
    A person may not give, hold or conduct a public event, nor may the board approve a permit for such public event, without the person having first filed with the city license officer a bond or certificate of insurance in the amount as specified by resolution of the board, indemnifying the city and the public against personal injury or property damages occurring at or as a result of the public event. The person giving, holding or conducting the public event agrees to save and hold harmless the city for any personal injury or property damage resulting from actions of any city employees, police officers or special officers in the course of their employment, which actions are directly related to the conduct of the public event. 
(Code 1979, § 10-04-07; Code 1994, § 12-03-16; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 1989) 
ARTICLE 10. - GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Games of chance, N.D.C.C. ch. 53-06.1. 

Sec. 12-10-1. - Games of chance. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful to play or conduct games of chance pursuant to N.D.C.C. ch. 53-06.1, any implementing rules and regulations of the attorney general and guidelines established by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-19; Code 1994, § 12-04-01; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-10-2. - Guidelines established for games of chance licenses. 
    In granting licenses for games of chance when authorized by state law, and when granting site authorizations for locations at which eligible organizations licensed by the attorney general may conduct games of chance, the following guidelines and requirements shall apply: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, games of chance will be allowed only in licensed class A, B, C and E on-sale liquor premises. Games of chance shall be permitted only in a location or area within a licensed on-sale liquor premises approved by the board. A diagram or plan designating this area and designating the location shall be submitted with the application for site approval. Games of chance will be allowed in licensed class E on-sale liquor premises only if, in addition to the foregoing requirements, the games of chance are conducted in a separate lounge or other room within the licensed premises where food is not normally served or consumed. 
(2)  Except in the case of a licensed class B liquor establishment, an eligible organization that is the holder of a state class B gambling license may conduct raffles and bingo on the premises of a licensed class A liquor establishment during the times such establishment is authorized to dispense alcoholic beverages. An eligible organization licensed by the city to conduct raffles and bingo may do so subject to such rules and regulations that may be established by the attorney general. 
(3)  Persons under 21 years of age may not conduct, assist or play games of chance, except that individuals 16 years of age or older may conduct, assist or play raffles and bingo. 
(4)  No games of chance shall be conducted in a licensed liquor premises at times other than when licensed liquor premises may lawfully be open for business. 
(5)  Except in the case of class B and class G liquor establishments, no authorized organization shall be permitted to operate more than four blackjack tables at any one location, nor be licensed at more than five locations. The board may grant temporary gaming licenses to an eligible organization even though the eligible organization already operates the maximum number of licensed locations, provided that the temporary gaming license does not exceed a period of three months. The board may grant additional three-month extensions of any temporary gaming licenses. 
(6)  No person, except a member or employee of an eligible organization, or a member of an organized auxiliary to an eligible organization, may assist in the holding, operating or conducting of any games of chance. 
(7)  A copy of all information to be submitted to the state by the applicant seeking a license to conduct games of chance within the city limits must also be provided to the city at the time the application for site approval is submitted. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-20; Code 1994, § 12-04-02; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 668, § 1, 1983; Ord. No. 682, § 1, 1985; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 732, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 755, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 764, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 766, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 825, § 1, 9-6-1994; Ord. No. 890, § 5, 3-30-1999) 
Sec. 12-10-3. - Board approval required for withdrawal of games of chance. 
    If an eligible organization withdraws its games of chance from an approved site without the board's consent, such organization shall not be authorized to conduct games of chance at another location for a 60-day period. An organization must submit to the city administrator a final report for the previous location, including the final money balance and explanation for closing the previous location. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-20; Code 1994, § 12-04-03; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-10-4. - Sale or transfer of liquor license at site of games of chance. 
    If a liquor license for a site at which games of chance are conducted is sold or transferred, site approval for games of chance at that site shall be reauthorized for the remainder of the period for which granted with the consent and approval of the buyer or grantee of the liquor license. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-20; Code 1994, § 12-04-04; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-10-5. - Revocation or suspension-Cause. 
    A failure to comply with any of the requirements of this article, or with any state laws or the rules and regulations of the attorney general governing games of chance, shall be cause for revocation or suspension of an eligible organization's permit to conduct games of chance at a particular site. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-21; Code 1994, § 12-04-08; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-10-6. - Same-Hearing. 
    The board may revoke or suspend a permit to conduct games of chance upon notice to the eligible organization and after hearing to consider revocation or suspension before the board. The notice shall specify the time and place of the hearing and shall be served on the eligible organization in the same manner as provided by law for the service of a summons in a civil action or by first class mail. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-22; Code 1994, § 12-04-09; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-10-7. - Gaming employees work permit; generally. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term "gaming employees" means dealers, overseers, pit bosses, and the gaming committee directly connected with the operation and supervision of the card tables, tip jars and other gaming activities. 
(b)  Gaming site employees shall obtain a work permit from the chief of police. Application for such work permit shall be submitted under oath and contain the past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and such information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of police to determine whether the applicant is a proper person to be issued a work permit. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints and a recent photograph of the applicant, as well as a fee for administration as established by resolution. 
(c)  The chief of police shall deny to such applicant a work permit if the applicant has previously been convicted of a felony, has previously been convicted of any narcotics or dangerous drug violations, or violations of any municipal or state gambling laws, or the applicant, in the opinion of the chief of police, is not a fit and proper person to engage in such work. 
(d)  The action of the chief of police in denying such a permit shall be subject to an appeal to the board upon the applicant's filing of a notice of appeal within ten days after the denial of the work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the prescribed time, the action of the chief of police shall be final and conclusive. 
(e)  Renewal of employee work permits shall be accomplished each year, and each such renewal shall be applied for prior to the expiration of the permit then in force. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-20; Code 1994, § 12-04-05; Ord. No. 660, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 12-10-8. - Failure to obtain work permit. 
    It is unlawful to fail to obtain a work permit as required by section 12-10-7. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-24; Code 1994, § 12-04-06; Ord. No. 668, § 2, 1983) 
Sec. 12-10-9. - Display of work permits; failure to display. 
(a)  Gaming employees shall be required to display, in plain view, their work permits at all times during which time they are working at or supervising gaming activities. 
(b)  A failure to display the work permit shall be cause for revocation or suspension of a gaming employee's work permit to conduct games of chance subject to and in accordance with the notice and hearing provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 10-02-23; Code 1994, § 12-04-07; Ord. No. 668, § 2, 1983) 
Chapter 14 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal court, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-18. 

Sec. 14-1. - Municipal judge. 
    There shall be elected a municipal judge. 
(Code 1979, § 2-03-01; Code 1994, § 2-10-01) 
State Law reference- Term of elected officials, N.D.C.C. § 40-14-02; qualifications of municipal judge, N.D.C.C. § 40-18-01. 
Sec. 14-2. - Judge to report to the board of city commissioners. 
    It shall be the duty of the municipal judge, at the close of each month, to make a report under oath to the board of city commissioners. Such report shall contain the amount of fines, fees and costs collected. The report will be accompanied by a duplicate receipt for the city treasurer for the total amount of the fees and money so collected on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1979, §§ 2-10-02-2-10-04; Code 1994, §§ 2-10-02-2-10-04) 
Sec. 14-3. - Judge availability. 
    The municipal judge must be available as prescribed by Rule 56 NDRCrP. 
(Code 1979, § 2-03-05; Code 1994, § 2-10-05) 
Sec. 14-4. - Bond. 
    At the direction of the board of city commissioners, the municipal judge shall be required to execute and deliver a bond in accordance with N.D.C.C. § 40-13-02. 
(Code 1979, § 2-03-06; Code 1994, § 2-10-06) 
Sec. 14-5. - Fee assessments for funding crime victim and witness programs. 
    The municipal judge may assess a fee in the amount established by resolution as part of a sentence imposed on a defendant who pleads guilty to or is convicted of a violation of N.D.C.C. §§ 12.1-14-05, 12.1-17-01, 12.1-17-07, 12.1-20-07, 12.1-20-12.1, 12.1-25-01, 12.1-25-03, or 12.1-31-01 (all as adopted by reference in section 18-1-1 of this Code) or sections 18-1-2 or 18-1-4 of this Code, or a charge of aiding, accomplice or attempt of these offenses. The fee assessed under this section is in addition to any fine, penalty, costs or administrative fee prescribed by law. The municipal judge may assess the fee when a sentence is imposed or when a sentence is suspended or the imposition of sentence is deferred, unless the defendant is indigent and unable to pay the fee. All fees paid to the municipal court under this section shall be deposited in the general fund monthly for allocation by the board of city commissioners to private, nonprofit domestic violence or sexual assault programs; for a victim and witness advocacy program of which the primary function is to provide direct services to victims of and witnesses to crime; and for the statewide automated victim information and notification system, as provided for under chapter 12.1-34. 
(Code 1994, § 19-08-16; Ord. No. 1264, 6-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Authority for above fee, N.D.C.C. § 27-01-10. 
Chapter 16 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to nuisances, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(44); nuisances generally, N.D.C.C. ch. 42-01. 

ARTICLE 1. - DESCRIPTION 

Sec. 16-1-1. - Nuisance. 
    A public nuisance is a thing, act, failure to act, occupation or use of property which shall: 
(1)  Annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of any considerable number of persons; 
(2)  Offend the public decency; 
(3)  Unlawfully interfere with, obstruct, or tend to obstruct, or render dangerous for passage, a lake, navigable river, bay, stream, canal or basin, or public park, square, street, alley or highway; or 
(4)  In any way render any considerable number of persons insecure in life or in use of property. 
ARTICLE 2. - REMOVAL OF ICE AND SNOW 

Sec. 16-2-1. - Duty of owner to remove snow and ice. 
    The owner of every lot or parcel of land within the city along which sidewalks have been constructed shall clear the sidewalks on or along such lots or parcels of land of all accumulations of snow and ice within 24 hours after the same has fallen or accumulated. The owner shall keep such sidewalks free from accumulation of snow and ice, provided that no person shall be required to clear such sidewalks during the continuance of a snow storm. On lots or parcels of land where the sidewalk runs to alleys or other public ways, the owner of such property shall be responsible to clear snow and ice from said surfaces for one-half of the distance across the alley or public way or to the gutter line of the street. Any owner who refuses or fails to keep sidewalks upon the property free from snow and ice shall be guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a penalty as provided in chapter 1 of this Code. 
Sec. 16-2-2. - Hindering the removal of snow and ice. 
    Any person who interferes with or hinders the removal of said snow and ice by the city, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1979, §§ 8-02-31, 8-02-35; Code 1994, §§ 10-04-15, 10-04-19; Ord. No. 707, §§ 1, 5, 1985) 
Sec. 16-2-3. - City action to remove snow and ice. 
    Upon failure of the property owner to remove snow and ice, the city may take action to remove snow and ice and assess the property as provided in N.D.C.C. §§ 40-29-18 through 40-29-21. 
Sec. 16-2-4. - Placement of snow. 
    Unless a waiver has been issued in writing by the city, a property owner or a contractor hired by a property owner to remove snow from private property shall not place the snow on a sidewalk, driveway apron, on the paved portion of a street or alley or within five feet of a fire hydrant. Snow may be placed in the unpaved portion of the boulevard within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1222, § 1a, 11-3-2015) 
ARTICLE 3. - LOT CLEARING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Junked vehicles, N.D.C.C. ch. 39-26. 

Sec. 16-3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Collection service means the collection and disposal of garbage, and rubbish, and/or the availability or use of any dump, sanitary landfill, or disposal facility of the city. 
    Commercial area garbage means all accumulations of animal and vegetable refuse and offal, waste paper, paper containers, tin cans, bottles, and all other refuse that accumulates as a result of operating a restaurant, tavern, office, store or other business, commercial or industrial establishment, including any apartment buildings having four or more dwelling units. 
    Mobile home or trailer coach shall be deemed a dwelling unit, and each mobile home or trailer park shall be deemed to be a multiple dwelling unit, and the garbage and rubbish collection services and charges applicable to the residential areas of the city shall be applicable to any such units or parks. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, solid market and industrial wastes, inert wastes and any other discarded materials of every kind and character. 
    Residential area garbage means all accumulations of household waste matter, including dry sink refuse, meat, vegetable, and fruit residues, and all tin cans and bottles, but shall not include grass, shrubbery, tree branches, ashes or other similar wastes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as trash, refuse or debris, including, but not limited to, discarded furniture, appliances and other household goods, barrels, rags, cartons, boxes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, noxious weeds, pieces of wood or metal, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials, and any other discarded materials of every kind and character, including junked or abandoned vehicles, equipment and machinery. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-01; Code 1994, § 17-02-01; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 16-3-2. - Accumulation of rubbish prohibited; penalty. 
    No person shall cause, permit, keep, maintain or allow to accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place or premises; upon the boulevard or berm abutting thereon; or upon any street, alley or sidewalk, adjacent to or abutting on any lot, block or place, or premises owned or occupied by him, or for which he may be an agent, within the city limits, any and all refuse or rubbish, nor suffer such yard, lot, place or premises to be or to remain in such condition. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in or about any publicly owned property, or upon any street, alley or sidewalk adjacent to or abutting on any publicly owned property, within the city limits, any and all refuse or rubbish. It is declared a public nuisance for any yard, lot, place or premises; boulevard or berm; or street, alley or sidewalk to remain in such condition and any person or owner, occupant or agent of the yard, lot, place or premises violating the provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-02; Code 1994, § 17-02-02; Ord. No. 749, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 16-3-3. - Deposit of refuse, rubbish, junk or junk vehicles upon publicly owned property prohibited; penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited in or about any publicly owned property, or upon any street, alley or sidewalk adjacent to or abutting on any publicly owned property within the city limits, any and all refuse or rubbish, junk, or junk vehicles. 
(b)  Publicly owned property includes any property owned or maintained by the city, county, Mandan Park District, Lower Heart River Water Resource District and Mandan School District. Any person or owner, occupant or agent of the yard, lot, place or premises violating the provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction. If the publicly owned property is posted with signs identifying the property as publicly owned, any person violating this section is subject to a minimum fine of $150.00. In addition to the imposition of a fine, any person found guilty of this section may also be required to pay restitution to the public entity owning the property to cover the costs of removal of the refuse or rubbish, junk, or junk vehicles. 
(Code 1994, § 17-02-02.1; Ord. No. 958, 4-1-2003) 
Sec. 16-3-4. - Seizure. 
    Any personal property abandoned or left unclaimed upon the streets, alleys or other public ways in the city shall be deemed to be unclaimed or abandoned when the same is permitted to remain in any one place upon said streets, alleys or public ways for a period of ten days or more and shall be seized by any police officer of the city and stored and held in such place as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1979, § 15-02-01; Code 1994, § 17-02-03) 
Sec. 16-3-5. - Records. 
    An accurate record of any abandoned property so taken up by the police department shall be kept in the office of the police department with the date of such seizure. 
(Code 1979, § 15-02-02; Code 1994, § 17-02-04) 
Sec. 16-3-6. - Disposal. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply also to property having value that is seized in the course of abating nuisances or violations of ordinances. 
(b)  Nothing in this section prevents the city from disposing of property by means of an on-line auction conducted by a private company. Such company shall determine the procedures to be followed and notices to be given (and the manner thereof). 
(c)  When, in the judgment of the chief of police, sufficient articles have been seized and held as abandoned property for a period of at least 60 days so as to justify the expense of a sale thereof, the same may be sold by the chief of police or by such person as may be designated by him at public auction. Notice of the time and place of such public auction and a brief description of the articles to be sold shall be published in the official newspaper once each week for two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than ten days prior to the date of sale. Each item of said property so sold shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash. 
(d)  At the time specified in said notice, said property shall be sold by the chief of police of the city or by such person as may be designated by him at public auction to the highest bidder for cash and within three days after the date of said sale, the officer making the sale shall make a report thereof to the board of city commissioners, which report shall contain the description of the property sold, the time and place of sale, the name of the purchaser and the amount received therefor. Said report shall be made under oath and subscribed by the officer making such sale and shall be filed with the city finance director within three days after the date of such sale, and such officer, with said report, shall pay to the city finance director the proceeds of said sale. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of the report of sale of abandoned property, the city finance director shall prepare a bill of sale of the property sold, conveying the same to such purchaser and the same shall be executed and attested by the city administrator and delivered to the purchaser. 
(Code 1979, §§ 15-02-03-15-02-05; Code 1994, §§ 17-02-05-17-02-07) 
Sec. 16-3-7. - Proceeds of sale. 
    The city finance director shall pay such money as is received from such sales over to the city treasurer, who shall retain the same in a separate account for a period of six months from and after the time of such sale. If the proceeds of such sale are not claimed, as provided in this article, by the owner of said property, the said money shall thereupon be transferred to the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 15-02-06; Code 1994, § 17-02-08) 
Sec. 16-3-8. - Redemption. 
    Any person owning such personal property seized as aforesaid may, at any time prior to the sale thereof, upon furnishing satisfactory proof of his ownership thereof to the board of city commissioners, reclaim such property upon paying the expenses incurred by the city for the seizure, storage or advertising the sale thereof, and any person owning such property as aforesaid may, at any time within six months after such sale and upon making satisfactory proof to the board of city commissioners of his ownership thereof, claim the proceeds of such sale, upon payment to the city of the necessary expenses incurred by the city for the seizure, storage and sale of said property. 
(Code 1979, § 15-02-07; Code 1994, § 17-02-09) 
Sec. 16-3-9. - Unlawful to accumulate junk, junk vehicles, trash or rubbish. 
(a)  Nuisance declared. 
(1)  It is declared a nuisance and it is unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise to store, or permit the storage or accumulation in or upon any private property within the city or upon the one half of any street or alley lying next to the property or upon the sidewalks, boulevards or berms abutting thereon of any of the following items: 
a.  Junked, wrecked, partially dismantled, inoperative, discarded or abandoned vehicles. 
b.  Iron, steel and other salvage materials. 
c.  Tires, dilapidated or defunct machinery and equipment of any kind. 
d.  Building and construction materials of any kind. 
e.  Trash, rubbish or junk of any kind. 
(2)  Further, it is unlawful for any person to store or cause the storage, to deposit or cause to be deposited any of the items in subsection (a)(1) of this section in or upon any publicly owned property, or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, boulevard or berm. 
(b)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building and construction materials means litter, refuse, salvage material, inert waste, loose lumber and construction materials, provided that building and construction materials to be used within six months for construction on the premises, where properly authorized by a building permit, may be kept if stored at least 18 inches off the ground and not closer than 48 inches to any wall or fence. 
    Inoperable means a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially, dismantled, discarded, abandoned or unable to perform the functions or purposes for which a vehicle was originally constructed. 
    Salvage material means material which is obtained from construction and building jobs, including blocks of lumber, splinters, planks, stakes, bits of brick, inert waste, rocks and cement blocks, which are the residue and residuals of a construction project. 
    Vehicle means any automobile, truck, tractor or motorcycle which as originally designed contained an engine, regardless of whether it now or at any time contained an engine. 
(c)  Inoperable vehicles. Any one of the following conditions shall raise the presumption that a vehicle is inoperable: 
(1)  Absence of a legally sufficient and valid registration tab or plate upon such vehicle. 
(2)  Placement of the vehicle or parts thereof upon jacks, blocks, chairs or other supports. 
(3)  Absence for more than 30 days of any one or more parts of the vehicle necessary for the lawful operation of the vehicle upon the streets and highways of the city and state. 
(d)  Exceptions. 
(1)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
a.  A vehicle in an enclosed building; 
b.  A vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner and in compliance with the zoning regulations of the city, when such vehicle is necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
c.  Any vehicle in an appropriate storage place on a depository maintained by the city. 
(2)  A vehicle necessary to the operation of such business does not include a vehicle owned by said business which is junked, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or which does not have affixed thereto a legally sufficient current registration tab or plate, unless such vehicle is part of a junk or salvage yard which is operated in compliance with the zoning regulations of the city. 
(e)  Violation. Any person, owner, agent or occupant of any private property which is in violation of this section is guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1979, § 15-02-08; Code 1994, § 17-02-10; Ord. No. 749, § 4, 1989) 
Sec. 16-3-10. - Notice of junk or junk vehicle nuisance; action upon noncompliance. 
(a)  The chief of police is authorized and empowered, through personal contact or by telephone, letter, or other means, to notify the owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent of the owner of any property within the city to abate and remove the trash, rubbish, junk or junk vehicle found accumulated, lying or located on such property or upon the one half of any street or alley lying next to the property or upon the boulevard or berm abutting thereon. Such notice, as provided in this article, shall give the owner, occupant or agent a minimum of five days to abate or remove the nuisance caused by the accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk or junk vehicle. The chief of police shall cause to be posted upon the premises or vehicle or inserted in the official newspaper for the city such official notices as the officer may deem necessary in furtherance of this article. 
(b)  Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or agent of the owner, so notified to abate and remove the nuisance caused by the accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk or junk vehicle, the chief of police is authorized and empowered to pay for the abatement and removal of the trash, rubbish, junk or junk vehicle. If, within five days after the date of any letter containing such notice is returned to the city because of inability to make delivery thereof, provided that the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner, occupant or agent of the owner, and, if the chief of police is unable to contact such owner, occupant, or agent by telephone after reasonable effort, the chief may also pay for the abatement of the nuisance or order its removal by the city. The costs of abatement of the nuisance by the removal of the accumulated trash, rubbish, junk or junk vehicle which are incurred by the city shall be certified by the chief to the city finance director for assessment against the property. 
(Code 1979, § 15-02-08.1; Code 1994, § 17-02-11; Ord. No. 749, § 5, 1989) 
Sec. 16-3-11. - Abandoned, unattended, unused or discarded iceboxes and refrigerators. 
    No person in the city shall leave or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his or its control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, unused or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an air-tight door or lid, snaplock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said door or lid, snaplock or other locking device from said icebox, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1994, § 17-02-12; Ord. No. 675, 1984) 
Sec. 16-3-12. - Restrictions for dismantling automobiles and other devices. 
    It is unlawful for any person to dismantle, cut up, remove parts from, or otherwise disassemble any automobile, appliance or machinery except in a completely enclosed building, or upon the business premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when such vehicle is necessary for the operation of such business enterprise, or in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 15-02-09; Code 1994, § 17-02-13) 
Sec. 16-3-13. - Remedy for dismantling automobiles and other devices. 
(a)  Not less than five days prior to a hearing scheduled by the municipal judge to determine violation of section 16-3-12, the judge shall cause to be served notice of such hearing, personally, upon the owner or occupant of the property, if occupied, or may post such notice in a conspicuous place upon vacant or unoccupied property. 
(b)  Should the municipal judge determine, at such hearing, that said person is in violation of section 16-3-12, the judge may order the removal of any dismantled automobile or other device, by the city, the cost of such to be assessed against said owner or occupant of the property. 
(Code 1979, § 15-02-10; Code 1994, § 17-02-14) 
ARTICLE 4. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE AND EMERALD ASH BORER 

Sec. 16-4-1. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
(a)  The board of city commissioners has determined that there are many elm trees growing on public and private premises within the city, the loss of which would substantially depreciate the value of public and private property, impair the use and enjoyment of public premises and erode the tax base of the city. The health and life of such trees is threatened by the fatal disease known as Dutch elm disease, which is spread by the elm bark beetles Scolytus multisriatus (Eichb.) or Hylurgopinus rufipes (marsh.). The board declares its intention to control and prevent the spread of such disease and the insect pests and vectors which carry such disease. The board declares Dutch elm disease and the elm bark beetles which carry such disease to be public nuisances. 
(b)  The Emerald Ash Borer is an insect that attacks and eventually causes the death of ash trees. The board declares the Emerald Ash Borer to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1979, § 15-03-01; Code 1994, § 17-03-01; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 16-4-2. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city arborist shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises and places within the city to determine whether any public nuisance exists thereon. 
(b)  The city arborist shall inspect or cause the inspection of any elm tree reported or suspected to be infected with Dutch elm disease or any elm bark bearing material reported or suspected to be infested with elm bark beetles. 
(c)  The city arborist shall inspect or cause the inspection of any ash tree reported or suspected to be infected with Emerald Ash Borers. 
(Code 1979, § 15-03-03; Code 1994, § 17-03-03; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 16-4-3. - Right of entry. 
    The city arborist and his agents or employees shall have authority, with a warrant or the consent of the owner, to enter upon private premises at reasonable times for the purpose of carrying out any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 15-03-05; Code 1994, § 17-03-05; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 16-4-4. - Authority of city arborist. 
(a)  The city arborist shall order, direct, supervise and control the abatement of public nuisances by spraying, removal, burning or by other means. 
(b)  The city arborist shall take such action necessary to prevent as fully as possible the spread of Dutch elm disease fungus or the insect pests or vectors known to carry such disease fungus. 
(c)  The city arborist shall take such action necessary to eradicate any infestation of Emerald Ash Borer. 
(Code 1979, § 15-03-06; Code 1994, § 17-03-06; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 16-4-5. - Abatement of nuisances on public property. 
    Whenever the city arborist shall, after inspection or examination, determine that a public nuisance exists on public property in the city, he shall immediately abate or cause the abatement of such nuisance. 
(Code 1979, § 15-03-07; Code 1994, § 17-03-07; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 16-4-6. - Nuisance on private property; notice to owner. 
    When the city arborist shall determine with reasonable certainty that a public nuisance exists upon private premises or upon the strip between the lot line and the curb, he shall immediately serve or cause to be served personally or by first class mail upon the owner of such property or the abutting property, if the property owner can be found, and upon the occupant thereof, a written notice of the existence of such nuisance. Such notice shall describe the nuisance and recommended procedures for its abatement, and shall further state that unless the owner shall abate the nuisance in the manner specified in the notice, or shall request a hearing within fourteen days of receipt of the notice to show that such nuisance does not exist, or does not endanger the health of the elm trees in the city, the city arborist shall cause the abatement thereof at the expense of the property served or abutting property. If the owner cannot be found, such notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the city. 
(Code 1979, § 15-03-08; Code 1994, § 17-03-08; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 16-4-7. - Abatement of nuisances on private property. 
    If, after a hearing held pursuant to section 16-4-6, it is determined by the city arborist that a public nuisance exists, or if no hearing is requested, the city arborist shall forthwith order the immediate abatement thereof. Unless the property owner abates the nuisance as directed within 24 hours after such hearing, the city arborist shall proceed to abate the nuisance and cause the cost thereof to be assessed against the property in accordance with the procedures provided in this article. The city arborist may extend the time allowed the property owner for abatement work but not to exceed ten additional days. 
(Code 1979, § 15-03-09; Code 1994, § 17-03-09; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 16-4-8. - Prohibited acts and penalties. 
    Any person who shall do any of the following acts within the city commits an infraction: 
(1)  Transports any bark-bearing elm wood, bark or material on public streets, highways or other public premises without first securing the written permission of the city arborist; 
(2)  Interferes with or prevents any acts of the city arborist or his agents or employees while they are engaged in the performance of duties imposed by this article; 
(3)  Refuses to permit the city arborist or his duly authorized representative to enter upon his premises at reasonable times to exercise the duties imposed by this article; 
(4)  Permits any public nuisance to remain on any premises owned or controlled by him when ordered by the city arborist to abate such nuisance. 
(5)  Plants an American Elm or Siberian Elm on public or private property. 
(6)  Sells an American Elm or Siberian Elm for planting within the city. 
(7)  Plants ash cultivars that are susceptible to the Emerald Ash Borer on public or private property. 
(8)  Sells ash cultivars that are susceptible to the Emerald Ash Borer for planting within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 15-03-12; Code 1994, § 17-03-12; Ord. No. 1237, § 1, 5-3-2016) 
ARTICLE 5. - NOXIOUS WEEDS AND TALL GRASS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1229, adopted Jan. 5, 2016, repealed the former Art. 5, §§ 16-5-1-16-5-6, and enacted a new Art. 5 as set out herein. The former Art. 5 pertained to noxious weeds and tall grass and derived from Code 1994, §§ 17-04-01-17-04-06; Ord. No. 1049, 1-20-2009; Ord. No. 1104, 9-6-2011. 

Sec. 16-5-1. - Authority. 
    N.D.C.C. § 4.1-47-17 authorizes the board of city commissioners to establish a noxious weed control program overseen by an appointed city weed board. The city has also determined that control of tall grasses is necessary for the health and safety of city residents. 
(1)  Noxious weeds and tall grasses exceeding six inches in height growing within the limits of the city are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and it shall be the duty of every person owning, occupying, or in charge of any premises, lot or parcel of land in the city to keep that premises, parcel or lot, including the adjacent rights-of-way, free from noxious weeds and tall grasses by cutting, eradicating, or controlling them at all times during the growing season. Medians separating street sections shall not be included in the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noxious weeds means all weeds defined by state law as "noxious weeds" and any other weeds declared as noxious weeds by action of the weed board. 
    Tall grasses means all varieties of grasses and all weeds not defined by state law or the weed board as noxious weeds in excess of six inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-2. - City weed board. 
(a)  The weed board shall consist of three, five, or seven members appointed by the board of city commissioners that are qualified electors residing within the city. Terms for all members of the board are for four years or until a successor is appointed and qualified. Terms of appointment shall be staggered so as to allow no more than two to expire each year. Terms of office shall begin on January 1. Board members shall assume office at the first regular board meeting following the beginning of their term or at the first regular board meeting following their appointment if filling a vacancy. The board officers shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, secretary and treasurer. The secretary and treasurer need not be voting members of the board. The weed control officer may serve as a voting member of the board if the weed control officer is qualified to do so. 
(b)  The weed board shall hear any appeal of a notice from the weed control officer. Timing of the hearing and hearing procedures shall be determined by the weed board. Any decision rendered by the weed board may be appealed to the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-3. - Powers and duties of weed board. 
    The weed board shall exercise the powers and duties authorized by the N.D.C.C. including: 
(1)  Meet at least once each year. 
(2)  Establish the time and place of regular board meetings. 
(3)  Call special meetings as needed. 
(4)  Keep minutes of its meetings and a complete record of all official acts. 
(5)  Implement a program for the control of noxious weeds. 
(6)  Implement a program for the control of tall grasses. 
(7)  Prepare budget recommendations for the use of all moneys received by the city from any source for noxious weed control. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-4. - Noxious weed list. 
(a)  The weed board shall enforce the noxious weed list maintained by the state. 
(b)  The weed board may designate as noxious certain weeds that are not on the state noxious weed list, provided the board first consults with the North Dakota State University extension service and the designation is approved by the state agricultural commissioner section 16-5-3. 
(c)  The weed board shall review the noxious weed list every five years starting from January 1, 2010, and by majority vote, may remove any weed from its list. The city weed board shall provide the state agricultural commissioner with at least a 14-day notice of the review and provide the commissioner with written notice of any changes to the city list. 
(d)  The weed board shall immediately remove any noxious weed from the city's noxious weed list when directed to do so by the state agricultural commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-5. - Weed control officer. 
    The city, with advice from the weed board, shall designate a weed control officer. The designated weed control officer shall execute the duties and meet the requirements outlined in N.D.C.C. § 4.1-47-24. The weed control officer's duties include. 
(1)  The weed control officer shall cause a notice of the requirements of this article to be published in the official newspaper of the city once within three days of April 15, May 15, June 15, July 15, August 15 and September 15. These publications shall serve as notice to all landowners, occupants, or persons in charge of maintaining any parcel of land within the city limits to comply with the requirements of this article. These publications shall also serve as the official notice to property owners to cut weeds and tall grass. Other methods of notification, such as the media and the city's website, may also be used to notify landowners, occupants, or persons in charge to control tall grass and weeds. 
(2)  Whenever any person owning, occupying or in charge of any premises, lot, or parcel of land within the city, shall fail, neglect, or refuse to mow the property at least once each month by May 1, June 1, July 1, August 1, September 1 and October 1 of each year in accordance with the provisions of this article, the weed control officer shall arrange for the nuisance to be abated. 
(3)  If the weed control officer determines that land within the city jurisdiction contains noxious weeds, the weed control officer may serve upon the landowner written notice, either personally or by certified mail, requiring the landowner to control the noxious weeds within the time period prescribed by the weed control officer in the notice. The notice shall contain at least the following items: 
a.  The minimum remedial requirements. 
b.  The time within which the landowner must meet the minimum remedial requirements. 
c.  That the landowner may be subject to penalties provided under state law and City Code if the landowner fails to comply with the remedial requirements. 
d.  A statement of costs if the landowner fails to control the noxious weeds. 
e.  That the landowner may challenge the notice of the weed control officer by submitting to the city in writing within seven days of the date of the notice a request that the city weed board hold a hearing on the matter in accordance with this article. 
(4)  Should the landowner fail to control the noxious weeds within the time period specified in the notice sent by the weed control officer, the weed control officer may cause the noxious weeds to be controlled in the absence of a written appeal by the landowner or if any appeal has been denied. 
(5)  When the city has affected the eradication, cutting or control of noxious weeds or tall grasses, the actual cost thereof including allowable city administrative expenses and any penalties approved by the city commission, if not paid by the owner, must be charged and assessed against the property upon which the noxious weeds or tall grasses were eradicated, cut or controlled. The weed control officer shall prepare and the weed board shall approve an assessment list showing the costs against each lot or tract to be assessed. The assessment list shall be forwarded to the board of city commissioners for official action. All procedures under state law for certification, appeal, payment and collection of special assessments shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-6. - Cooperation. 
    Noxious weed and tall grass control or prevent the city from contracting with or cooperating with any other board or jurisdiction for the control of noxious weeds or tall grasses. The weed control officer may delegate all or some of the duties required under this section to other city staff. The city may contract with any person or company to perform services for the city in the control of noxious weeds and tall grasses. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 16-5-7. - Property owner responsibility. 
    Except as noted below, it is the duty of every person owning, occupying or in charge of any premises, lot or parcel of land to cut, eradicate, or control any noxious weeds or tall grasses to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance, a fire hazard and/or unsightly. 
(1)  Steep slopes exceeding 30 degrees (two horizontal feet to one vertical foot) that are difficult or hazardous to mow, as an option, may be planted with selected grass varieties used by the North Dakota Department of Transportation to control erosion. The property owner must apply to the city for a waiver of the grass control requirements for each property where this alternative is to be used. Control of noxious weeds is mandated by state law and no waiver for control of noxious weeds is allowed. A waiver request shall be submitted to the weed control officer or other designated official. The city official shall review the request, inspect the site and either approve or deny the request. 
(2)  The city has no jurisdiction over the control of grass and weeds on property or easements owned or controlled by state and federal agencies. 
(3)  State law limits city action related to grass and weeds on agriculturally zoned land to the control of noxious weeds. 
(Ord. No. 1229, 1-5-2016) 
ARTICLE 6. - NOISE NUISANCES 

Sec. 16-6-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual or unnatural in their time, place and use, affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city. 
(b)  The provisions and prohibitions of this article are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-01; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    dB(A) means the A-weighted sound level in decibels, as measured with a sound level meter that meets the requirements for a type 1, 2, S1A, or S2A in American National Standard Specification for Sound Level Meters ANSI S1.4. 
    Noise means any sound. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-02; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-3. - Noise. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to make any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable people within the limits of the city. Loud, unnecessary or unusual noises or noises which annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable people are defined with reference to subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation exists include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The volume of the noise. 
(2)  The intensity of the noise. 
(3)  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual. 
(4)  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural. 
(5)  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any. 
(6)  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities. 
(7)  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(8)  The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates. 
(9)  The time of the day or night the noise occurs. 
(10)  The duration of the noise. 
(11)  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant. 
(c)  A noise need not exceed the decibel levels in section 16-6-4(b) to be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-03; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-4. - Tables; exceptions. 
(a)  Generally. It is unlawful to project a sound or noise, excluding noise emanating from a motor vehicle from one property into another, within the boundary of a use district which exceeds the limiting noise criteria set forth in table I in subsection (b) of this section as measured at the property line of the property from which the noise is emanating. 
(1)  Sound or noise projecting from one use district into another use district with a different noise level limit may not exceed the limits of the district into which the noise is projected. 
(2)  The permissible levels in decibels set forth in table I in subsection (b) of this section are modified so that any noise occurring on property deemed to be nonconforming use property is determined upon the conforming zoning designation of the property. 
(b)  Limiting noise levels for zoning districts. 
Table I Zoning District Residential Commercial Industrial Maximum dB(A) permitted from 7:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m. daily 55 65 80 Maximum dB(A) permitted from 11:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. of the following day 50 60 75  
(c)  Limiting noise levels for motor vehicles. It is unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle within the city limits which creates a noise or sound which exceeds the noise level limits set out in table II in this subsection. 
Table II Maximum Allowable Limit Trucks, buses, construction equipment, or any motor vehicle with a gross weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more 88 dB(A) measured at 25 feet Passenger cars, pickups, vans, motorcycles, snowmobiles, or any motor vehicle with a gross weight rating less than 10,000 pounds 80 dB(A) measured at 25 feet  
(d)  Exceptions. The following uses and activities are exempt from noise level regulations under this section: 
(1)  Noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency relief valves. 
(2)  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles, when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of any emergency. 
(3)  Noises resulting from work of an emergency nature. 
(4)  Any construction or reasonable and necessary maintenance activities, except in residentially zoned areas between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(5)  Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a special permit therefor has been granted under this section by the city. 
(6)  Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law, federal air regulations, and air traffic control instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted federal air regulations. Any aircraft operating under technical difficulties, in any kind of distress, under emergency orders of air traffic control or being operated pursuant to and subsequent to the declaration of an emergency under federal air regulations are also exempt. 
(7)  All railroad locomotives and railroad operations and motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce. 
(8)  The use of snow removal equipment, including, but not limited to, tractors, plows and snow blowers, in the aftermath of a snowfall. 
(9)  The following events will be exempt: 
a.  Buggies-n-Blues sponsored events. 
b.  Fourth of July city-sponsored events. 
c.  Mandan Racetrack. 
d.  Mandan Shell Concerts in the park. 
e.  Use of fireworks as currently set by the city. 
(e)  Application for special permit. Application for relief from the noise level designated in this section on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the chief of police. Any permit granted by the chief of police shall contain all conditions under which the permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that a permit is effective. The chief of police may grant the relief as applied upon a finding: 
(1)  That additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity or operation to comply with this section; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with other subsections of this section; 
(3)  That no other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant; and 
(4)  The chief of police may prescribe any conditions or requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-04; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-5. - Guests on premises. 
    It is unlawful for any person to permit or allow guests on his premises to make any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable people. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-05; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-6. - Noisy party or gathering prohibited. 
    No person shall participate in any party or gathering consisting of two or more people when the party or gathering occurs in a residentially zoned or used area or building between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. and when the party or gathering gives rise to unreasonable noise likely to cause significant discomfort or annoyance to a reasonable person of normal sensitivities present in the area, considering the time of day and the residential character of the area or building. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-06; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-7. - Order to disperse; refusal prohibited. 
    When a police officer determines that a party or other gathering of people is creating unreasonable noise, disturbing the peace, or is disturbing the quiet or repose of another person, the officer may order all persons present, other than the owner or tenant of the premises where the disturbance is occurring, to disperse immediately. No person ordered to leave the premises by a police officer shall refuse to do so. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-07; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-8. - Tenant or owner; cooperation required. 
    Every owner of a premises, or tenant in charge of a premises, who has knowledge of a disturbance, shall cooperate with police and make reasonable effort to stop the disturbance. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-08; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-9. - Violations; prima facie evidence. 
    The following shall be prima facie evidence of a violation in any prosecutions under this article: 
(1)  As to tenants, and the owner if the owner resides on the premises, if twice or more on the same day or if on successive days, the police department is called upon to enforce the terms of this article, either by citizen complaint or by personal investigation of a police officer. 
(2)  As to the owner if the owner does not reside at the premises, if the police department gives the owner written notices of three violations of this article by his tenants at any single location within a six-month period. 
(3)  Noise of such volume as to be clearly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the structure or building in which the party or gathering is occurring or, in the case of apartment buildings, in the adjacent hallway or apartment, shall be prima facie evidence of unreasonable noise in violation of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-09; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
Sec. 16-6-10. - Penalty. 
    A violation of any provision of this article is an infraction. 
(Code 1994, § 17-05-10; Ord. No. 1090, 3-11-2011; Ord. No. 1098, 8-12-2011) 
ARTICLE 7. - GRAFFITI 

Sec. 16-7-1. - Abatement of graffiti by property owner or city. 
    Property or owner responsibility . It is unlawful for any person who is the owner or responsible party of property to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain defaced for a period of ten days from the date of written notice of the defacement. Notice under this article is sufficient if served upon the owner or responsible person personally or mailed regular mail to the last known address of the owner or responsible person or the last address of the owner shown on the tax rolls of the city. The notice shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The street address and legal description of the property sufficient for identification of the property; 
(2)  A statement that the property is a potential graffiti nuisance property with a concise description of the conditions leading to the finding; and 
(3)  A statement that the graffiti must be abated within ten days after written notice and that if the graffiti is not abated within that time the city shall cause the graffiti to be abated and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the non-complying real property. In addition, an administrative cost equal to 25 percent of the cost of abatement and a $25.00 penalty or $100.00, whichever is greater, shall be assessed against the non-complying real property. 
(Ord. No. 1204, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-7-2. - Failure to comply. 
(a)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal to abate the graffiti during the prescribed period: 
(1)  The city may, by its own work forces or by contract, cause the graffiti to be abated and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the non-complying real property plus an administrative cost equal to 25 percent of the cost of abatement and a $25.00 penalty or $100.00, whichever is greater; and 
(2)  That the assessed amount together with costs and penalties shall constitute a lien on the non-complying real property and will be taxed as a special assessment against the real property. 
(b)  Appeal. The owner or agent may appeal to the city commission within ten days of written notice any determination that they have failed to comply with the requirements of any order. 
(c)  Any person who willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this article is guilty of an offense. 
(Ord. No. 1204, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-7-3. - Abatement and cost recovery proceedings. 
(a)  Annually the city shall prepare a list of all lots, tracts and parcels of real property within the city from which the graffiti was abated by the city and for which such charges and penalties have not yet been paid. The list shall include as a minimum the following: 
(1)  Name as shown by the tax rolls, common address if known; 
(2)  Tax code of the property; 
(3)  Legal description of the lot, tract or parcel; 
(4)  Cost of the graffiti abatement for that property; 
(5)  Administrative costs; and 
(6)  Penalty assessed. 
(b)  The assessment list shall be incorporated into a special assessment resolution in proper form which resolution shall be presented to the city commission for consideration. From and after passage of the resolution, the assessments stated therein, together with administrative costs and penalty shall constitute a special assessment, as provided in NDCC § 40-05-01.1, and a lien on the real property shown on the assessment list. A copy of the resolution after passage shall be certified to the official collecting the city taxes and assessments. 
(Ord. No. 1204, 10-20-2015) 
Sec. 16-7-4. - Prevention provisions. 
    Retro-fit existing graffiti-attracting surfaces; non-residential structures. The following provisions may be incorporated in a graffiti eradication order: 
(1)  At owner's expense . Any surface of a structure on a parcel of land used for non-residential purposes that has been defaced with graffiti more than five times in 12 months shall be declared a public nuisance and may be required to be retro-fitted, at the cost of the property owner, with features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient abatement of graffiti; and 
(2)  Appeal . The owner or agent may appeal within ten days of written notice any determination that they are required to retro-fit the property with features or qualities necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti or to permit more convenient or efficient abatement of graffiti to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1204, 10-20-2015) 
Chapter 18 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to preserve and protect public peace, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(33). 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1-1. - State criminal laws adopted. 
    The provisions of N.D.C.C. titles 12.1 and 62.1 are hereby adopted by reference. No person shall violate any such statute. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to adopt or punish that which is a felony under state law. The classification of such offenses shall be as provided in statute, but the penalty for violation of such provisions shall be as provided in chapter 1 of this Code. 
Sec. 18-1-2. - Indecent conduct. 
(a)  Prohibited. A person is guilty of an ordinance violation if that person: 
(1)  Urinates or defecates in a public place, other than a restroom or bathroom designated for such purposes of the appropriate sex. 
(2)  Appears nude in a public place other than a restroom, bathroom, changing room, or similar facility, designated for the appropriate sex. As used in this section, the term "nude" means that any portion of the pubic areas, anus, vulva, genitals or female breasts below the top of the areola is exposed to view of other persons. 
(b)  Exception . The act of a woman discreetly breastfeeding her child is not a violation of this section. 
(Code 1994, § 19-05-02) 
State Law reference- Indecent exposure, N.D.C.C. § 12.1-20-12.1. 
Sec. 18-1-3. - Throwing of missiles. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw or discharge any stone, snowball, or any similar object or other missile, including fireworks, upon, in or at any vehicle, building or upon or at any person. 
(Code 1979, § 15-01-01; Code 1994, § 19-05-05; Ord. No. 659, § 1, 1982) 
Sec. 18-1-4. - Window peeping. 
    It is unlawful for any person to look, peer or peep into, or to loiter in a position or place affording a view into, any window that is not that person's own property, with intent to annoy, harass or alarm any person, or in reckless disregard of the fact that any person is annoyed, harassed or alarmed. 
(Code 1994, § 19-05-07) 
Sec. 18-1-5. - Open containers prohibited. 
(a)  A person may not consume any alcoholic beverage, or have in their possession any container of an alcoholic beverage, in any municipal or public building not licensed for that purpose. 
(b)  A person may not consume any alcoholic beverage, or be in possession of any open can, bottle, glass, cup or other container of alcoholic beverage, with the intent to consume, within any public street, highway or other right-of-way, or within any commercial establishment open to the public and not licensed for that purpose. 
(c)  Notwithstanding this section, consumption of alcoholic beverages in a commercial bowling establishment open to the public is not unlawful, except in those areas that are posted by the management as areas where consumption of alcoholic beverages is forbidden. 
(d)  A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Code 1994, § 19-06-10) 
Sec. 18-1-6. - Fleeing from officer. 
    It is unlawful for any person who has been apprehended by a police officer to leave the presence of the officer in such a manner as to cause the officer to pursue such person, or for any person being pursued by a police officer for the purpose of apprehension to fail to stop at the command or direction of the officer. A person violating this subsection shall be charged with an offense. 
(Ord. No. 1256, 3-7-2017) 
Sec. 18-1-7. - Possession of marijuana. 
    Except as regulated by N.D.C.C. § 19-24.1, any person in possession of not more than one ounce of marijuana, as that term is defined by N.D.C.C. § 19-03.1-01, within the City of Mandan, shall be charged with an offense. 
(Ord. No. 1256, 3-7-2017; Ord. No. 1266, § 1, 7-10-2018) 
Sec. 18-1-8. - Drug paraphernalia (marijuana). 
    Except as regulated by N.D.C.C. § 19-24.1, a person may not use or possess with the intent to use drug paraphernalia to ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce marijuana into the human body. A person violating this subsection shall be charged with an offense. 
(Ord. No. 1256, 3-7-2017; Ord. No. 1266, § 1, 7-10-2018) 
Sec. 18-1-9. - Loitering or prowling penalty. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm or immediate concern is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstance makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer did not comply with this procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person is true and, if believed by the officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be charged with an offense. 
(Ord. No. 1256, 3-7-2017) 
ARTICLE 2. - JUVENILE CURFEW 

Sec. 18-2-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action that includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means a person, public agency or private agency who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor. 
    Minor means a person under 18 years of age. 
    Operator means any individual or a member, partner or officer of a firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment.. 
    Parent means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
    Serious bodily injury means physical damage to a person that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
Sec. 18-2-2. - Curfew hours. 
(a)  It is unlawful for persons 14 years of age or less to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play in or upon, or drive or ride about in a vehicle or be in or upon, the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, or public buildings, places or grounds between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(b)  It is unlawful for persons 15 years of age to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play in or upon, or drive or ride about in a vehicle or be in or upon, the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, or public buildings, places or grounds between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a person at least 16 years of age but not yet 18 years of age to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play in or upon, or drive or ride about in a vehicle or be in or upon, the public streets, highways, roads, alleys or public buildings, places or grounds between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(d)  A violation of this section is an infraction. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation. 
(e)  Any minor who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to arrest by any police officer without process. 
(Ord. No. 1247, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 18-2-3. - Defense to prosecution. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence, except that this defense does not apply to a violation of the curfew hours; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(9)  Married or had been married, or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(Ord. No. 1247, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 18-2-4. - Responsibility of parents and persons owning or managing public places or businesses. 
    No parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of a minor shall knowingly permit such minor to be abroad, loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, or any retail or wholesale business establishment, during the curfew hours, provided that the provisions of this section do not apply when the juvenile is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult having the care and custody of the minor. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1979, § 15-06-04; Code 1994, § 19-06-08; Ord. No. 1247, 7-19-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1247, adopted July 19, 2016, repealed § 18-2-4, and renumbered § 18-2-5 as set out herein. The former § 18-2-4 pertained to penalty and derived from Code 1979, §§ 15-06-02, 15-06-13; Code 1994, § 19-06-07; Ord. No. 768, § 1, adopted 1990. 
ARTICLE 3. - HANDBILLS AND SIGN CONTRACTORS 

Sec. 18-3-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, placard, poster, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or regulation, any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law, any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public, or any other copyrighted material. 
(Code 1994, § 13-03-01) 
Sec. 18-3-2. - Violation; penalty. 
    A violation of any of the provisions of this article is an infraction. 
(Code 1994, § 13-02-14) 
Sec. 18-3-3. - Exemption; limitation. 
(a)  The provisions of this article do not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers, except that newspapers must be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(b)  Publishers of newspapers that are delivered free and unsolicited must cease delivery upon request of any resident. 
(Code 1994, § 13-03-03) 
Sec. 18-3-4. - Persons liable. 
    This article applies to the persons responsible for the publication and/or circulation of materials covered by this article and their agents. 
(Code 1994, § 13-03-06) 
Sec. 18-3-5. - Posting of handbills, posters and placards. 
(a)  A person may not paste, stick, nail or post handbills, or make, print or mark any word, character or letter, or advertisement of any kind, upon any private house, store or other building, or upon any fence, wall, railing, telephone or electric light pole, or other private property without first obtaining the consent of the owner or occupant. 
(b)  A person may not paste, stick, nail or post handbills, or mark any word, character or letter, or advertisement of any kind, upon any public building, bridge, fence, railing or sidewalk or any other public property within the city except in compliance with the requirements of law in posting of legal notices. The posting of any sign or handbill upon public boulevards is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  A person may not deposit or place any handbill in or upon any vehicle, except in a manner that will prevent the handbill from being blown about or scattered by the elements. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to post, tack, paint or place cards, bills, streamers or banners of any character whatever upon the face of any sign on a wall or billboard used by any licensee without the consent of the owner or licensee of said sign, wall or billboard having first been obtained in writing. 
(Code 1979, § 10-18-08; Code 1994, § 13-03-02) 
Sec. 18-3-6. - Handbill delivery prohibited or regulated. 
(a)  A person may not throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or "No Soliciting," or any such similar notice indicating that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon such premises. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which is apparently uninhabited or vacant. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as to authorize any person to: 
(1)  Scatter or throw upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places, handbills, advertisements or newspapers; 
(2)  Obstruct the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places or to create any nuisance therein; or 
(3)  Prevent the posting of any legal notice required by law to be posted by persons duly authorized to post the same. 
(Code 1979, § 10-18-08; Code 1994, § 13-03-04) 
Sec. 18-3-7. - Handbill delivery procedure. 
    Handbills delivered to private inhabited premises may be delivered only by handing the handbill directly to the owner or occupant or placing the handbill on the premises in such a manner so as to prevent the handbill from being blown about the premises, sidewalks, streets or other public places. 
(Code 1994, § 13-03-05) 
Sec. 18-3-8. - License required; application. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to carry on in this city the business of handbill posting or circulation, bulletin display or card tacking, sign advertisement or installation, or sample distribution without first having obtained a license for that purpose as provided in this article. 
(b)  Application shall be made to the city license officer and shall be accompanied by a fee the amount of which shall be as determined by resolution of the board. Said license shall expire on December 31 following the date of issuance. 
(Code 1979, § 10-18-01; Code 1994, § 13-03-07) 
Sec. 18-3-9. - Exception to license requirement. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent any person residing or transacting business in the city from distributing handbills advertising the business in which such person is directly engaged, or to prevent the proprietor of any licensed theater of motion picture shows in this city from displaying handbills advertising any entertainment in said theater or show on any billboard situated in front of such business, or to prevent any person not engaged in the business of advertising from following his vocation as a printer, engraver, sign painter or otherwise. 
(Code 1979, § 10-18-03; Code 1994, § 13-03-09) 
Sec. 18-3-10. - Bond required for licensees. 
    Any person desiring to be licensed under the provisions of this article shall, before being granted such license, give bond in such sum as shall be determined by resolution of the board. The bond must indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all charges, costs, expenses, judgments or damages caused by reason of any negligence upon the part of the licensee, or of any servant or employee of the licensee. 
(Code 1979, § 10-18-02; Code 1994, § 13-03-08) 
ARTICLE 4. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 18-4-1. - Aiding consummation of crime. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-08-04. 
    12.1-08-04. Aiding consummation of crime. 
1.  A person is guilty of aiding consummation of crime if he intentionally aids another to secrete, disguise, or convert the proceeds of a crime or otherwise profit from a crime. 
2.  Aiding consummation of a crime: 
a.  Is a class C felony if the actor knows of the conduct of the other and such conduct constitutes a class A or class B felony. 
b.  Is a class A misdemeanor if the actor knows of the conduct of the other and such conduct constitutes a class C felony or class A misdemeanor. 
    Otherwise aiding consummation of a crime is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-2. - Refusing to halt. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-08-11. 
    12.1-08-11. Refusing to halt. Any person, other than the driver of a motor vehicle under section 39-10-71, who willfully fails or refuses to stop or who otherwise flees or attempts to elude, in any manner, a pursuing peace officer, when given a visual or audible signal to stop, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor for a first or second offense and a class A misdemeanor for a subsequent offense. A signal to stop complies with this section if the signal is perceptible to the person and: 
1.  If given from a vehicle, the signal is given by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren, and the vehicle is appropriately marked showing it to be an official law enforcement vehicle; or 
2.  If not given from a vehicle, the signal is given by hand, voice, emergency light, or siren, and the officer is in uniform or prominently displays the officer's badge of office. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-3. - Impersonating officials. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-13-04. 
    2.1-13-04. Impersonating officials. 
1.  A person is guilty of an offense if he falsely pretends to be: 
a.  A public servant, other than a law enforcement officer, and acts as if to exercise the authority of such public servant. 
b.  A public servant or a former public servant and thereby obtains a thing of value. 
c.  A law enforcement officer. 
2.  It is no defense to prosecution under this section that the pretended capacity did not exist or the pretended authority could not legally or otherwise have been exercised or conferred. 
3.  An offense under subdivision b or c of subsection 1 is a class A misdemeanor. An offense under subdivision a of subsection 1 is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-4. - Simple assault. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-17-01. 
    12.1-17-01. Simple assault. 
1.  A person is guilty of an offense if that person: 
a.  Willfully causes bodily injury to another human being; or 
b.  Negligently causes bodily injury to another human being by means of a firearm, destructive device, or other weapon, the use of which against a human being is likely to cause death or serious bodily injury. 
2.  The offense is: 
a.  A class C felony when the victim is a peace officer or correctional institution employee acting in an official capacity, which the actor knows to be a fact; an employee of the state hospital acting in the course and scope of employment, which the actor knows to be a fact, and the actor is an individual committed to or detained at the state hospital pursuant to chapter 25-03.3; a person engaged in a judicial proceeding; or a member of a municipal or volunteer fire department or emergency medical services personnel unit or emergency department worker in the performance of the member's duties. 
b.  A class B misdemeanor for the first offense when the victim is an actor's family or household member as defined in subsection 4 of section 14-07.1-01 and a class A misdemeanor for a second or subsequent offense when the victim is an actor's family or household member as defined in subsection 4 of section 14-07.1-01 and the actor has a prior conviction for simple assault under this section or an assault offense under section 12.1-17-01.1 or 12.1-17-02 involving the commission of domestic violence as defined in subsection 2 of section 14-07.1-01. For purposes of this subdivision, a prior conviction includes a conviction of any assault offense in which a finding of domestic violence was made under a law or ordinance of another state which is equivalent to this subdivision. 
c.  A class B misdemeanor except as provided in subdivision a or b. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-5. - Harassment. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-17-07. 
    12.1-17-07. Harassment. 
1.  A person is guilty of an offense if, with intent to frighten or harass another, the person: 
a.  Communicates in writing or by electronic communication a threat to inflict injury on any person, to any person's reputation, or to any property; 
b.  Makes a telephone call anonymously or in offensively coarse language; 
c.  Makes repeated telephone calls or other electronic communication, whether or not a conversation ensues, with no purpose of legitimate communication; or 
d.  Communicates a falsehood in writing or by electronic communication and causes mental anguish. 
2.  The offense is a class A misdemeanor if it is under subdivision a of subsection 1 or subsection 4. Otherwise it is a class B misdemeanor. 
3.  Any offense defined herein and committed by use of electronic communication may be deemed to have been committed at either the place at which the electronic communication was made or at the place where the electronic communication was received. 
4.  A person is guilty of an offense if the person initiates communication with a 911 emergency line, public safety answering point, or an emergency responder communication system with the intent to annoy or harass another person or a public safety agency or who makes a false report to a public safety agency. 
a.  Intent to annoy or harass is established by proof of one or more calls with no legitimate emergency purpose. 
b.  Upon conviction of a violation of this subsection, a person is also liable for all costs incurred by any unnecessary emergency response. 
5.  Any offense defined herein is deemed communicated in writing if it is transmitted electronically, by electronic mail, facsimile, or other similar means. Electronic communication means transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photo-electronic, or photo-optical system. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-6. - Criminal mischief. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-21-05. 
    12.1-21-05. Criminal mischief. 
1.  A person is guilty of an offense if that person: 
a.  Willfully tampers with tangible property of another so as to endanger person or property; or 
b.  Willfully damages tangible property of another. 
2.  The offense is: 
a.  A class B felony if the actor intentionally causes pecuniary loss in excess of ten thousand dollars. 
b.  A class C felony if the actor intentionally causes pecuniary loss in excess of two thousand dollars but not in excess of ten thousand dollars or damages tangible property of another by means of an explosive or a destructive device. 
c.  A class A misdemeanor if the actor recklessly causes pecuniary loss in excess of two thousand dollars or if the actor intentionally causes pecuniary loss of from one hundred dollars through two thousand dollars. 
    Otherwise the offense is a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-7. - Criminal trespass. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-22-03. 
    12.1-22-03. Criminal trespass. 
1.  An individual is guilty of a class C felony if, knowing that that individual is not licensed or privileged to do so, the individual enters or remains in a dwelling or in highly secured premises. 
2.  An individual is guilty of a class A misdemeanor if, knowing that that individual is not licensed or privileged to do so, the individual: 
a.  Enters or remains in or on any building, occupied structure, or storage structure, or separately secured or occupied portion thereof; or 
b.  Enters or remains in any place so enclosed as manifestly to exclude intruders. 
3.  An individual is guilty of a class B misdemeanor if, knowing that that individual is not licensed or privileged to do so, the individual enters or remains in any place as to which notice against trespass is given by actual communication to the actor by the individual in charge of the premises or other authorized individual or by posting in a manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders. The name of the person posting the premises must appear on each sign in legible characters. An individual who violates this subsection is guilty of a class A misdemeanor for the second or subsequent offense within a two-year period. 
4.  An individual is guilty of a class B misdemeanor if that individual remains upon the property of another after being requested to leave the property by a duly authorized individual. An individual who violates this subsection is guilty of a class A misdemeanor for the second or subsequent offense within a two-year period. 
5.  This section does not apply to a peace officer in the course of discharging the peace officer's official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-8. - Theft of property. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-23-02. 
    12.1-23-02. Theft of property. A person is guilty of theft if he: 
1.  Knowingly takes or exercises unauthorized control over, or makes an unauthorized transfer of an interest in, the property of another with intent to deprive the owner thereof; 
2.  Knowingly obtains the property of another by deception or by threat with intent to deprive the owner thereof, or intentionally deprives another of his property by deception or by threat; or 
3.  Knowingly receives, retains, or disposes of property of another which has been stolen, with intent to deprive the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-9. - Theft of services. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-23-03. 
    12.1-23-03. Theft of services. A person is guilty of theft if: 
1.  He intentionally obtains services, known by him to be available only for compensation, by deception, threat, false token, or other means to avoid payment for the services; or 
2.  Having control over the disposition of services of another to which he is not entitled, he knowingly diverts those services to his own benefit or to the benefit of another not entitled thereto. Where compensation for services is ordinarily paid immediately upon their rendition, as in the case of hotels, restaurants, and comparable establishments, absconding without payment or making provision to pay is prima facie evidence that the services were obtained by deception. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-10. - Inciting riot or engaging in a riot. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. §§ 12.1-25-01 and 12.1-25-03. 
    12.1-25-01. Inciting riot. 
1.  A person is guilty of an offense if he: 
a.  Incites or urges five or more persons to create or engage in a riot; or 
b.  Gives commands, instructions, or directions to five or more persons in furtherance of a riot. 
2.  "Riot" means a public disturbance involving an assemblage of five or more persons which by tumultuous and violent conduct creates grave danger of damage or injury to property or persons or substantially obstructs law enforcement or other government function. 
3.  A person shall be convicted under section 12.1-06-01, 12.1-06-03, or 12.1-06-04 of attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit an offense under this section only if he engages in the prohibited conduct under circumstances in which there is a substantial likelihood that his conduct will imminently produce a violation of this section. 
4.  The offense is a class C felony if it is under subdivision b of subsection 1 and the riot involves one hundred or more persons. Otherwise it is a class A misdemeanor. 
    12.1-25-03. Engaging in a riot. 
1.  A person is guilty of a class B misdemeanor if he engages in a riot, as defined in section 12.1-25-01. 
2.  The provisions of subsection 3 of section 12.1-25-01 are applicable to attempt, solicitation, and conspiracy to commit an offense under this section. Mere presence at a riot is not an offense under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-11. - Disorderly conduct. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-31-01. 
    12.1-31-01. Disorderly conduct. 
1.  An individual is guilty of a class B misdemeanor if, with intent to harass, annoy, or alarm another person or in reckless disregard of the fact that another person is harassed, annoyed, or alarmed by the individual's behavior, the individual: 
a.  Engages in fighting, or in violent, tumultuous, or threatening behavior; 
b.  Makes unreasonable noise; 
c.  In a public place, uses abusive or obscene language, knowingly exposes that individual's penis, vulva, or anus, or makes an obscene gesture; 
d.  Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic or the use of a public facility; 
e.  Persistently follows a person in or about a public place or places; 
f.  While loitering in a public place for the purpose of soliciting sexual contact, the individual solicits the contact; 
g.  Creates a hazardous, physically offensive, or seriously alarming condition by any act that serves no legitimate purpose; 
h.  Engages in harassing conduct by means of intrusive or unwanted acts, words, or gestures that are intended to adversely affect the safety, security, or privacy of another person; or 
i.  Uses a fixed optical device that enhances or records a visual occurrence to view through any window of another person's property; or uses a surveillance camera to capture an image from the dwelling or accessory structure of another person; however, an individual using a surveillance camera has seven days from notice by a law enforcement officer to direct or shield the camera so as to not capture an image from another person's dwelling or accessory structure before there is an offense. 
2.  This section does not apply to constitutionally protected activity. If an individual claims to have been engaged in a constitutionally protected activity, the court shall determine the validity of the claim as a matter of law and, if found valid, shall exclude evidence of the activity. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-12. - Disorderly conduct at a funeral-Penalty. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-31-01.1. 
    12.1-31-01.1. Disorderly conduct at a funeral-Penalty. 
1.  For purposes of this section: 
a.  "Funeral" means the ceremonies, rituals, processions, and memorial services held at a funeral site in connection with the burial, cremation, or memorial of a deceased individual. 
b.  "Funeral site" means a church, synagogue, mosque, funeral home, mortuary, cemetery, gravesite, mausoleum, or other place at which a funeral is conducted or is scheduled to be conducted within the next hour or has been conducted within the last hour. 
2.  An individual is guilty of disorderly conduct at a funeral if the individual: 
a.  Engages, with knowledge of the existence of a funeral site, in any loud singing, playing of music, chanting, whistling, yelling, or noisemaking within one thousand feet [300.48 meters] of any ingress or egress of that funeral site if the volume of the singing, music, chanting, whistling, yelling, or noisemaking is likely to be audible at and disturbing to the funeral site; or 
b.  Displays, with knowledge of the existence of a funeral site and within one thousand feet [300.48 meters] of any ingress or egress of that funeral site, any visual images that convey fighting words or actual or veiled threats against any other individual. 
3.  Disorderly conduct at a funeral is a class B misdemeanor. A second or subsequent violation of this section is a class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-13. - Sale of tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products to minors and use by minors prohibited. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-31-03. 
    12.1-31-03. Sale of tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products to minors and use by minors prohibited. 
1.  a.  It is an infraction for any person to sell or furnish to a minor, or procure for a minor, cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products. As used in this subdivision, "sell" includes dispensing from a vending machine under the control of the actor. 
b.  It is an infraction for any person to display or offer for sale cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products through a self-service display. This subdivision does not apply to a: 
(1)  Vending machine or other coin-operated machine that is permitted under section 12.1-31-03.1; or 
(2)  Self-service display that is located in a tobacco specialty store. 
2.  It is a noncriminal offense for a minor to purchase, possess, smoke, or use cigarettes, cigars, cigarette papers, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products. However, an individual under eighteen years of age may purchase and possess tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products as part of a compliance survey program when acting with the permission of the individual's parent or guardian and while acting under the supervision of any law enforcement authority. A state agency, city, county, board of health, tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products retailer, or association of tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products retailers may also conduct compliance surveys, after coordination with the appropriate local law enforcement authority. 
3.  It is a noncriminal offense for a minor to present or offer to another individual a purported proof of age which is false, fraudulent, or not actually the minor's own proof of age, for the purpose of attempting to purchase or possess cigarettes, cigars, cigarette papers, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products. 
4.  A city or county may adopt an ordinance or resolution regarding the sale of tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products to minors and use of tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products by minors which includes prohibitions in addition to those in subsection 1, 2, or 3. Any ordinance or resolution adopted must include provisions deeming a violation of subsection 2 or 3 a noncriminal violation and must provide for a fee of not less than twenty-five dollars for a minor fourteen years of age or older who has been charged with an offense under subsection 2 or 3. The failure to post a required bond or pay an assessed fee by an individual found to have violated the ordinance or resolution is punishable as a contempt of court, except a minor may not be imprisoned for the contempt. 
5.  A minor fourteen years of age or older found to have violated subsection 2 or 3 must pay a fee of twenty-five dollars. 
a.  Any individual who has been cited for a violation of subsection 2 or 3 may appear before a court of competent jurisdiction and pay the fee by the time scheduled for a hearing, or if bond has been posted, may forfeit the bond by not appearing at the scheduled time. An individual appearing at the time scheduled in the citation may make a statement in explanation of that individual's action and the judge may waive, reduce, or suspend the fee or bond, or both. If the individual cited follows the procedures of this subdivision, that individual has admitted the violation and has waived the right to a hearing on the issue of commission of the violation. The bond required to secure appearance before the court must be identical to the fee. This subdivision does not allow a citing officer to receive the fee or bond. 
b.  If an individual cited for a violation of subsection 2 or 3 does not choose to follow the procedures provided under subdivision a, that individual may request a hearing on the issue of the commission of the violation cited. The hearing must be held at the time scheduled in the citation or at some future time, not to exceed ninety days later, set at that first appearance. At the time of a request for a hearing on the issue on commission of the violation, the individual cited shall deposit with the court an appearance bond equal to the fee for the violation cited. 
c.  The failure to post bond or to pay an assessed fee is punishable as a contempt of court, except a minor may not be imprisoned for the contempt. 
6.  The prosecution must prove the commission of a cited violation under subsection 2 or 3 by a preponderance of the evidence. 
7.  A law enforcement officer that cites a minor for violation of this section shall mail a notice of the violation to the parent or legal guardian of the minor within ten days of the citation. 
8.  A person adjudged guilty of contempt for failure to pay a fee or fine may be sentenced by the court to a sanction or order designed to ensure compliance with the payment of the fee or fine or to an alternative sentence or sanction including community service. 
9.  As used in this section: 
a.  "Alternative nicotine product" means any noncombustible product containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. The term does not include any cigarette, cigar, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, any electronic smoking device, or any product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration under chapter V of the federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act [21 U.S.C. 501 et seq.]. 
b.  "Electronic smoking device" means any electronic product that delivers nicotine or other substances to the individual inhaling from the device, including, an electronic cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, or e-hookah. Electronic smoking device includes any component, part, or accessory of such a product, whether or not sold separately. Electronic smoking device does not include drugs, devices, or combination products approved for sale by the United States food and drug administration, as those terms are defined in the federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act [52 Stat. 1040; 21 U.S.C. 301 et seq.]. 
c.  "Self-service display" means a display that contains cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products and is located in an area that is openly accessible to the retailer's customers, and from which customers can readily access those products without the assistance of a salesperson. A display case that holds those products behind locked doors does not constitute a self-service display. 
d.  "Tobacco specialty store" means a retail store that: 
(1)  Derives at least seventy-five percent of its revenue from the sale of cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products; and 
(2)  Does not permit minors to enter the premises unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
e.  "Vending machine" means a machine, appliance, or other mechanical device operated by currency, token, debit card, credit card, or other means of payment that is designed or used for vending purposes, including machines or devices that use remote control locking mechanisms. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-14. - Vending machines prohibited-Penalty. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-31-03.1. 
    12.1-31-03.1. Vending machines prohibited-Penalty. 
1.  It is an infraction for any person to sell or furnish cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products through a vending machine, except as provided in subsection 2. 
2.  Subsection 1 does not apply to: 
a.  A vending machine that is located in an area in which minors are not permitted access; or 
b.  A vending machine that dispenses cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products through the operation of a device that requires a salesperson to control the dispensation of such product. 
3.  It is an infraction for any person to sell or furnish cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products through any vending machine, if those products are placed together with any nontobacco product, other than matches, in the vending machine. 
4.  As used in this section, "electronic smoking devices" and "alternative nicotine products" have the same meaning as in section 12.1-31-03. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-15. - Retail theft act. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. ch. 51-21. 
    Chapter 51-21 Retail Theft Act 
    51-21-01. Definitions. As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise: 
1.  An item is "concealed" within the meaning of this chapter if, even though there is some notice of its presence, the item itself is not visible through ordinary observation. 
2.  "Full retail value" means the merchant's stated or advertised price of the merchandise. 
3.  "Merchandise" means any item of tangible personal property and specifically includes shopping carts. 
4.  "Merchant" means an owner or operator of any retail mercantile establishment or any agent, employee, lessee, consignee, officer, franchisee, or independent contractor or such owner or operator. 
5.  "Person" means any natural person or individual. 
6.  "Premises of a retail mercantile establishment" includes, but is not limited to, the retail mercantile establishment, any common-use areas in shopping centers, and all parking areas set aside by a merchant, or on behalf of a merchant, for the parking of vehicles for the convenience of the patrons of said retail mercantile establishment. 
7.  "Retail mercantile establishment" means any place where merchandise is displayed, held, offered, or stored for sale to the public. 
8.  "Shopping cart" means those pushcarts of the type or types which are commonly provided by grocery stores, drugstores, or other retail mercantile establishments for the use of the public in transporting commodities in stores and markets and, incidentally, from the stores to a place outside the store. 
    51-21-02. Presumption. Any person concealing upon that person's person or among that person's belongings, or causing to be concealed upon the person or among the belongings of another, unpurchased merchandise displayed, held, offered, or stored for sale in a retail mercantile establishment and removing it to a point beyond the last station for receiving payments in that retail mercantile establishment shall be prima facie presumed to have so concealed such merchandise with the intention of permanently depriving the merchant of possession or of the full retail value of such merchandise. 
    51-21-03. Detention of suspect-Procedure. Any peace officer or merchant who reasonably believes that a person has committed, or is in the process of committing, theft may detain such person, on or off the premises of a retail mercantile establishment, in a reasonable manner and for a reasonable length of time for all or any of the following purposes: 
1.  To require the person to identify oneself. 
2.  To verify such identification. 
3.  To determine whether such person has in the person's possession unpurchased merchandise and, if so, to recover such merchandise. 
4.  To inform a peace officer of the detention of the person and surrender custody of that person to a peace officer. 
5.  In the case of a minor, to inform a peace officer, the parents, guardian, or other private person interested in the welfare of that minor of this detention and to surrender custody of said minor to the person informed. 
    51-21-04. Civil and criminal immunity for acts of detention. Any peace officer or merchant who detains any person as permitted under section 51-21-03 may not be held civilly or criminally liable for any claim for relief allegedly arising from such detention. 
    51-21-05. Civil remedy against adult shoplifters or the parent of a minor shoplifter. 
1.  An adult who commits the offense of theft from a merchant is civilly liable to the merchant for the retail value of the merchandise, plus exemplary damages of not more than two hundred fifty dollars, costs of the civil action, and reasonable attorney's fees. 
2.  The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who while living with the parent or legal guardian commits the offense of theft from a merchant is civilly liable to the merchant for the retail value of the merchandise, plus exemplary damages of not more than two hundred fifty dollars, costs of the civil action, and reasonable attorney's fees. If the merchant knows or reasonably should know that the individual believed to have committed theft is a minor, the merchant may not request that the individual sign an admission of theft or other similar declaration unless the minor's parent, guardian, or attorney is present. An admission in violation of this subsection is not valid and is inadmissible in a civil or criminal action. 
3.  A conviction or plea of guilty for the theft is not a prerequisite to the bringing of a civil action under this section. However, if a criminal theft charge is filed against the individual, the merchant may not pursue civil damages until completion of the criminal action. 
4.  A parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor is not civilly liable under this section if it is determined by the court that one of the principal rationales for the shoplifting was a desire on the part of the minor to cause the minor's parent or legal guardian to be liable under this section. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-16. - Discharge of firearm within city. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 62.1-02-6. 
    62.1-02-06. Discharge of firearm within city-Penalty-Application. A person who discharges a firearm within a city is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. This section does not apply to the lawful discharge of firearms by law enforcement officers, by citizens in defense of person or property, or by participants in lawful activities in which discharge of firearms is a recognized part of the activity, including shooting galleries and ranges. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-17. - Carrying loaded firearm in vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 62.1-02-10. 
    62.1-02-10. Carrying loaded firearm in vehicle-Penalty-Exceptions. An individual may not keep or carry a loaded firearm in or on any motor vehicle in this state. An individual violating this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. This prohibition does not apply to: 
1.  A member of the armed forces of the United States or national guard, organized reserves, state defense forces, or state guard organizations while possessing the firearm issued to the member by the organization and while on official duty. 
2.  A law enforcement officer, except while the officer is engaged in hunting or trapping activities with a rifle or shotgun. 
3.  An individual possessing a valid North Dakota concealed weapons license or a valid license issued by another state authorizing the individual to carry a firearm or dangerous weapon concealed if that state permits a holder of a valid North Dakota concealed weapons license to carry a firearm or dangerous weapon concealed in that state without obtaining a similar license from that state, except while that individual is in the field engaged in hunting or trapping activities. 
4.  An individual in the field engaged in lawful hunting or trapping of nongame species or fur-bearing animals. 
5.  A security guard or private investigator properly licensed to carry firearms. 
6.  An individual possessing a valid special permit issued pursuant to section 20.1-02-05. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-4-18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1279, adopted Nov. 21, 2017, repealed § 18-4-18, which pertained to false information or report to law enforcement officers or security officials and derived from Ord. No. 1219, § 1k, adopted Oct. 6, 2015. 
ARTICLE 5. - ABANDONED, FOUND, RECOVERED AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 

Sec. 18-5-1. - Abandoned or unclaimed property. 
    Abandoned or unclaimed property, excluding contraband, vehicles and firearms, shall be disposed of in the following manner. 
(1)  Held for not less than 15 days before being offered for public sale or disposed of. 
a.  Items that have a value of less than $50.00 may be disposed of. 
b.  An item may be given to a city department that has use for the item. 
1.  The department receiving the item shall take full possession of the item and log it into their inventory as appropriate. 
2.  If the owner of the item appears within six months to lay claim to the item, the department receiving the item shall return it to the owner upon payment to the city of expenses incurred by the city in acquiring, storing and disposing of the item. 
c.  Items that have a value of $50.00 or more that have not been transferred to a department under subsection b. shall be offered for sale. 
(2)  Sale shall be either by local auction administered by the city or a contract agent or by an on-line auction administered by an on-line auction company. 
(3)  Notice of sale giving time, place and contact information shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to sale. Notice of the sale may also be posted on the city's web site. 
(4)  Proceeds of sale shall be deposited in the general fund and an itemized record kept by the city finance director for six months of items sold and the value received. 
(5)  If the owner of an item sold at auction appears within six months of the date of the auction and presents proof of ownership acceptable to the city, the city shall pay to the owner the proceeds of the sale less any expenses incurred by the city in acquiring, storing and disposing of the item. 
(6)  Should an item offered for sale not be sold, it may be donated by the city to any appropriate entity. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-2. - Fair treatment standards for victims and witnesses. 
    The city shall follow the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-34-02(9). 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-3. - Return of recovered stolen or embezzled property. 
    The return of recovered stolen property that has entered the court system shall be governed by the requirements of N.D.C.C. §§ 29-01-20 through 29-01-23. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-4. - Forfeiture of dangerous weapon or firearm by person arrested and convicted of crime. 
    In conformance with the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 62.1-01-02, a dangerous weapon or firearm may be seized and disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-5. - Finder-Depositary for hire-Assumption of ownership by finder. 
    A person who finds lost property or money and turns it in to the city may claim the property or money after it has been held by the city for 30 days and no one has appeared to provide suitable evidence of ownership. Should the person who turned in the property not return to claim it, the property shall be disposed of as provided in section 18-5-1. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-6. - Compensation and reward to finder. 
    As set forth in N.D.C.C. § 60-01-37, a person who finds and preserves lost property is entitled to compensation if the owner subsequently appears to claim the item. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-7. - Abandoned motor vehicle. 
    Abandoned motor vehicles shall be disposed of in conformance with the requirements of N.D.C.C. § 39-26, except as noted below. 
(1)  An abandoned motor vehicle may be disposed in the manner described in section 18-5-1. 
(2)  Once the city has reimbursed itself from the proceeds of the sale of an abandoned motor vehicle for expenses incurred in the towing, preserving or storing of the abandoned motor vehicle and expenses incurred in the issuance of notices or publication of notices in a newspaper of general circulation for the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle, any remaining amounts shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 18-5-8. - Immediate ticketing and towing. 
    Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from immediately ticketing and towing a vehicle that is found to be blocking a public street travel lane, a private driveway, a fire hydrant or a fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 1245, § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Chapter 20 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Allocation means the assignment of a position to an appropriate class on the basis of the kind, difficulty and responsibility of the work actually performed in the position. 
    Beneficiary means any person in receipt of the benefit provided by the city employee pension plan or any person designated by a participating member of the plan to receive benefits. 
    Benefits means benefits offered by the city to its eligible employees, including hospitalization insurance, worker's compensation coverage, unemployment compensation, leave and participation in the city employee pension plan. 
    Class of positions means a group of one or more positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority and responsibility to justify the positions in the class, and the same class title, qualifications and schedule of pay to all positions in the group. 
    Classification means grouping positions which are substantially similar in duties and responsibilities into classes. 
    Compensation means the actual dollars paid to an employee or participant in the pension plan for the employee's services. 
    Demotion means a change in status from a position in one class to a position in another class having a lower rank, lesser duties or responsibilities or lower maximum salary. 
    Department director means a person recommended by the human resources director and appointed by the board of city commissioners who functions as the head of a department, regardless of actual title within the city classification schedule. 
    Disability means a physical or mental condition which, in the judgment of the human resources director, based on medical reports and other evidence satisfactory to the human resources director, presumably permanently prevents the employee from satisfactorily performing the employee's usual duties for the city or the duties of such other positions or jobs which the city makes available to the employee and for which such employee is qualified by reason of training, education or experience. 
    Eligible means a person whose name is on an original entrance, promotional or re-employment register for a specific class or position. 
    Employee means any person employed by the city. 
    Employee contribution account means the account maintained by the trustee of the employee pension plan for the participant to record contributions and adjustments relating thereto. 
    Employer contribution account means the account maintained by the trustee of the employee pension plan for the participant to record the contributions of the city and adjustments relating thereto. 
    Examination means employment applications, written or oral tests, background investigations, oral interviews, fitness tests, or any other device used to determine the fitness or qualifications of applicants for a position. 
    Forfeiture means that portion of the participant's employer contribution account which is forfeited because of termination of employment before full vesting. 
    Former participant means a participant whose employment with the city has terminated but who has a vested account balance under the employee pension plan which has not been paid in full and, therefore, continues to participate in the allocation of trust fund income. 
    Full-time employee means any employee employed for 40 or more hours per week. 
    Income means the net gain or loss of the trust fund from investments as reflected by interest payments, dividends, realized and unrealized gains and losses on securities, other investment transactions and expenses paid from the trust fund. 
    Participant means an employee participating in the employee pension plan in accordance with this chapter. 
    Part-time employee means any employee employed for less than 30 hours per week.. 
    Position means any office and place of employment where the duties and responsibilities appertaining thereto are exercised by one person. 
    Prior service means service or employment with the city prior to the effective date of the creation of the employee pension plan. 
    Prior service credit means such credit towards retirement benefits and vesting as determined by the employee pension plan. 
    Probationary period means a working test period during which the human resources director is required to note the work and conduct of all new employees and determine whether they merit permanent appointments. 
    Promotion means a change in status from a position in one class to a position in another class having a higher rank, greater duties or responsibilities or a higher maximum salary. 
    Register means a list of eligibles for a specific class or position. 
    Regular part-time employee means any employee employed for more than 21 hours but less than 30 or more hours per week for a continuous period of 12 or more months. 
    Related by blood means spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, or the spouse of any of them. All relationships include those arising from adoption. 
    Salary plan means the schedules of pay for each class of positions in the city's classification plan, showing minimum and maximum salary rates. 
    Seasonal administrative employee means an employee who is responsible for the administrative functioning of seasonal activities. 
    Temporary employee means any part-time or full-time employee whose duration of employment is limited to a period of need not to exceed one year.. 
    Transfer means a change of an employee from one position to another position in the same or another class having essentially the same rank, duties, responsibilities, and same maximum salary rate. 
    Trust fund means the fund maintained in accordance with the terms of a trust agreement, as from time to time amended, which supplements the employee pension plan. 
    Trustee means the corporation appointed by the board to administer the employee pension plan. 
    Valuation date means the last day of each year or the date on which special valuation is made relating to the employee pension plan. 
(Code 1979, § 16-01-01; Code 1994, § 4-01-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-2. - Employees covered; exceptions. 
    All full-time, regular part-time and seasonal administrative employees, appointive employees and department directors of the city are included in, and come under, the provisions of this chapter, except: 
(1)  Elected officers and officials. 
(2)  Members and employees of commissions and boards appointed by the board of city commissioners. 
(3)  Part-time employees, temporary employees, or other employees who have not been in continuous employment of the city for a period of more than one year. 
(4)  Persons retained by or employed to perform professional services under contract with or appointment by the city. 
(5)  Volunteers appointed to serve without salary or other compensation, except per diem or other reasonable expenses. 
(Code 1979, § 16-01-02; Code 1994, § 4-01-02; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-3. - Scope of chapter. 
    The rules and regulations provided for by this chapter shall cover the following: 
(1)  Preparation, installation and maintenance of the classification plan covering all positions in the city. 
(2)  Establishment of procedures governing the announcement of vacancies and application for employment. 
(3)  Selection and/or preparation of examinations and the development of other techniques designed to assist in passing on the qualification of applicants for original appointment or promotion within city departments. 
(4)  Establishment of original entrance, promotional and re-employment lists containing the names of eligibles. 
(5)  Certification and appointment of eligibles to fill vacancies. 
(6)  Provision for a probationary period. 
(7)  Promotion from a position of lesser to one of greater responsibility. 
(8)  Demotion from a position of greater to one of lesser responsibility. 
(9)  Transfer from a position in one department to a position in the same class in another department. 
(10)  Standardization of hours to work. 
(11)  Attendance and leave regulations. 
(12)  Establishment, installation and maintenance of a performance appraisal system. 
(13)  Establishment, installation and maintenance of employee health and welfare programs. 
(14)  Termination of the service of employees, including layoffs due to lack of work or funds, suspension for disciplinary purposes and dismissals for just cause. 
(15)  Certification of payrolls. 
(16)  Preparation, installation and maintenance of necessary personnel records and forms. 
(17)  Establishment of procedures governing city employee pension plans. 
(Code 1979, § 16-01-03; Code 1994, § 4-01-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-4. - Nonguarantee of employment. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as: 
(1)  A contract of employment between the city and any employee; 
(2)  A right of any employee to be continued in the employment of the city; or 
(3)  A limitation of the right of the city to discharge its employees with or without cause. 
(Code 1979, § 16-01-04; Code 1994, § 4-01-04; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-5. - Application of Fair Labor Standards Act. 
    All employees are covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act which includes provisions governing minimum and maximum ages, minimum wages, requirements for overtime for exempt and nonexempt positions and other work-related requirements. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, if any section or part of this chapter is in conflict with the minimum requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act, said Act shall supersede the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 16-01-05; Code 1994, § 4-01-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-6. - Application of chapter in times of emergency, military mobilization, or declaration of war. 
    Whenever a job vacancy is caused by the declaration of state or national emergency, military mobilization or the declaration of war, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply and the position may be filled or reclassified on a case-by-case basis as recommended by the human resources director and approved by the board. 
(Code 1979, § 16-01-06; Code 1994, § 4-01-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 776, § 1, 1991) 
Sec. 20-1-7. - Application of Americans with Disabilities Act. 
    All employees and applicants for employment are covered by the Americans with Disabilities Act which includes provisions to eliminate artificial impediments to the employment and advancement of disabled workers by striving to remove barriers to employment, whether physical, social, or arising from misconceptions concerning the abilities of disabled persons. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, if any section or part of this chapter is in conflict with the minimum requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, said Act shall supersede the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 16-01-07; Code 1994, § 4-01-07; Ord. No. 801, § 1, 1992) 
Sec. 20-1-8. - Political activity. 
    An employee may not engage in political activities while on duty or in uniform. However, nothing in this section shall prevent any employee from becoming or continuing to be a member or officer of a political club or organization, from attendance at a political meeting, from contributing to or otherwise supporting candidates of the employee's choice, or otherwise engaging in political activities while off duty, or from enjoying entire freedom from all interference in casting a vote or favoring candidates. For the purposes of this section, the term "political activities" means those activities defined in N.D.C.C. § 39-01-04. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-01; Code 1994, § 4-03-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-9. - Discrimination prohibited. 
    An employee or applicant for employment may not be appointed, promoted, demoted, dismissed, or in any way favored or discriminated against on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, physical or mental disability or status with regard to marriage or public assistance. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-02; Code 1994, § 4-03-02; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-10. - Corruption prohibited. 
    A person may not willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certificate or appointment held or made or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of the personnel rules or the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-03; Code 1994, § 4-03-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
State Law reference- Bribery, N.D.C.C. § 12.1-12-01. 
Sec. 20-1-11. - Private work prohibited. 
    No department director may authorize or provide, nor may any employee perform any work on behalf of any private business, organization or individual during working hours, nor may any city equipment or service be provided or utilized on behalf of same even though the work is performed outside of regular working hours. The board of city commissioners may, by resolution, approve exceptions to this general rule if the work to be performed meets any of the following criteria: 
(1)  There is an emergency situation or exigent circumstances, and the portfolio commissioner has been consulted and has given prior approval. 
(2)  The work is being performed at the request and on behalf of another public subdivision. 
(3)  The work is being performed at the request and on behalf of a nonprofit association. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-04; Code 1994, § 4-03-04; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-12. - Membership in organizations. 
    No employee may be denied the right to be a member of an organization of employees or be intimidated or coerced in a decision to communicate or affiliate with such an organization. Employees have the right to request payroll deduction of dues for membership in an organization of employees if a minimum of five employees have requested the deduction. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-05; Code 1994, § 4-03-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-13. - Residence requirements. 
    Residence requirements for entrance to examinations or as a condition of appointment may be determined by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-06; Code 1994, § 4-03-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-14. - Nepotism. 
(a)  Two persons related by blood or marriage may not work in the same city department if one is in a supervisory position over the other. 
(b)  If two city employees, one having supervisory responsibilities with regard to the other, are employed within the same department and marry, it is required that one or the other of them resign from their position with the city government. The person resigning will be eligible for employment with one of the other city departments. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-07; Code 1994, § 4-03-07; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-1-15. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  An employee shall not engage in outside employment or other outside activity not compatible with the full and proper discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the employee's government employment, whether on the employee's behalf or for private individuals, firms, companies, institutions, professional societies, or county or state governments. Incompatible activities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Outside employment or activity, including the acceptance of a fee, compensation, gift, payment of expenses or any other thing of monetary value, which may result in or create the appearance of a conflict of interest. 
(2)  Outside employment or activity which tends to impair the employee's mental or physical capacity to perform the employee's government duties and responsibilities in an acceptable manner. 
(3)  Outside employment or activity that takes the employee's time and attention during the employee's official working hours. 
(4)  Outside employment or activity which may be construed by the public to be official acts of the city or of a nature closely paralleling the work of the city. 
(5)  Outside employment or activity which results in or creates the impression of a conflict of interest with the regulatory or enforcement responsibilities of the employee or the employee's department. 
(6)  Outside employment or activity which involves the use of information secured as the result of employment in the city and to the detriment of public service. 
(7)  Outside employment or activity which may tend to bring criticism of, or cause embarrassment to, the city. 
(8)  Outside employment or activity which would involve the use by the employee of official facilities, e.g., office space, office machines, supplies, telephones, or the services of other employees. 
(b)  An employee of the city may not receive remuneration in any form from any individual, business or corporation for services rendered while as an agent or employee of the city. 
(c)  With the prior approval of the human resources director, an employee of the city may hold outside employment or engage in other activities, provided that it does not conflict with other requirements of this chapter or tend to create a conflict of interest, or an appearance of conflict of interest, between the private interest of an employee and the employee's official responsibilities. The employee's outside employment or activity shall not reflect discredit on the city. 
(d)  The term "outside employment or activity," as used in this section, does not include: 
(1)  Memberships in, or volunteer work with, charitable, religious, social, fraternal, recreational, public service, civic, political, or similar nonbusiness and nonprofit organizations; 
(2)  Memberships in professional organizations; 
(3)  Performance of duties in the Armed Forces, the Reserve or the National Guard; or 
(4)  Acting as an officer of an employee organization or union. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-08; Code 1994, § 4-03-08; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
State Law reference- Conflicts of interest, N.D.C.C. § 44-04-22. 
Sec. 20-1-16. - Use of alcohol and drugs by employees prohibited. 
    Consistent with the provisions of the Drug-Free Workplace Act, the purpose of this section is to provide a safe and healthy work environment and to have all employees report to work in a condition to perform their duties safely and efficiently. The presence of alcohol and/or drugs on the job, and the influence of these substances on employees during work hours are inconsistent with this objective and the city's responsibility to the community. For the purposes of this section, the term "illegal drug" means any drug which is not legally obtained and prescription drugs not prescribed for the employee. 
(1)  The use, possession, distribution or sale of illegal drugs or illegally obtained legal drugs on city property is strictly prohibited and employees who engage in these acts shall be subject to discharge. Any illegal drugs found on city property will be turned over to the appropriate law enforcement agency and may result in criminal prosecution. 
(2)  Alcohol may not be brought onto city property by a city employee unless as part of a sanctioned event. Violations of this policy will subject employees to discharge. 
(3)  In the event of a city-sponsored or related activity on or off city property at which alcoholic beverages may be served or allowed, employees are expected to conduct themselves in such a manner so they do not represent a danger to themselves, to other employees, to the general public, or to the city's reputation. For any city-sponsored activity at which alcohol will be served or allowed, the alcoholic beverages may only be dispensed by an alcoholic beverage licensee pursuant to a catering permit issued by the board. 
(4)  Employees will not be permitted to work while under the influence of alcohol or with a detectable level of illegal drugs in their systems. Individuals who appear unfit for work will be subject to a fitness-for-duty examination. Violations of this fitness-for-duty policy will result in discharge. 
(5)  Employees taking controlled substances, which may include prescription medications prescribed by a licensed physician, shall not be subject to discipline nor considered to be in violation of this section. Employees taking over-the-counter medications, which could impact on vigilance, judgment, coordination or job performance, may also be compromising fitness-for-duty and should consult with their physician when in doubt. Instructions provided by the manufacturer on such over-the-counter medications should be followed. 
(6)  Employees arrested, indicted or convicted off the job for alcohol- or drug-related offenses raise a question as to compliance with city policy. In determining what action to take, the city will consider the nature of the charge, the circumstances of the arrest, the employee's record with the city, current job assignment, and the impact the arrest may have on other employees, the public, and the city's general reputation. 
(7)  Contractors, vendors and suppliers will be expected to observe the city alcohol and drug policy and will be required to be fit for duty while on city property, in city vehicles, or on city assignment. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-09; Code 1994, § 4-03-09; Ord. No. 801, § 2, 1992) 
Sec. 20-1-17. - Sexual harassment prohibited; policy required. 
    Department directors and employees shall not engage in any activity constituting sexual harassment. Anyone engaging in activity constituting sexual harassment will be subject to disciplinary action, including demotion or dismissal. The board shall adopt a policy to prevent sexual harassment by education and training of all employees and to establish a procedure for processing complaints and investigations of sexual harassment. 
(Code 1979, § 16-03-10; Code 1994, § 4-03-10; Ord. No. 801, § 3, 1992) 
ARTICLE 2. - EMPLOYMENT PROCEDURES 

Sec. 20-2-1. - Announcement of vacancies. 
(a)  The human resources director may make announcements of vacancies in positions in the city. Such announcements may include posting notices in the city hall and may include publishing notices in at least one newspaper of general circulation. The announcements should specify: 
(1)  The title and salary range of the class for which the position is announced; 
(2)  The nature of the work to be performed and the minimum qualifications required; 
(3)  The time, place and manner of making applications; 
(4)  The closing date for receiving applications; and 
(5)  Any other pertinent information. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-01; Code 1994, § 4-04-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-2. - Application forms. 
    Application for employment with the city shall be made on forms or in a manner approved by the human resources director. Such application shall include information covering training, experience, references and other pertinent information. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-02; Code 1994, § 4-04-02; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-3. - Disqualification and rejection of applications. 
(a)  Rejection of application. The human resources director may reject any application if any of the following reasons exist: 
(1)  The applicant is found to lack any of the preliminary requirements established for the class of position. 
(2)  The applicant is so disabled as to be unable to perform essential job functions for the position, with reasonable accommodation. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of any felony or other crime involving moral turpitude within the previous ten years. 
(4)  The applicant has made a false statement of material fact in application. 
(5)  The applicant has previously been dismissed from any public service for delinquency, misconduct, or other similar cause. 
(6)  The applicant has used or attempted to use political pressure or bribery to secure an advantage in obtaining employment. 
(7)  The applicant has, directly or indirectly, obtained information regarding examinations to which an applicant is not entitled. 
(8)  The applicant has failed to submit an application correctly or within the prescribed time limits. 
(9)  The applicant has taken, without permission, part of the compilation, administration or correction of the examination. 
(10)  The applicant is not a citizen of the United States of America or authorized to work in the United States of America. 
(11)  The applicant has otherwise violated provisions of these regulations. 
(12)  The applicant declines an appointment or states that the applicant no longer desires consideration for a position with the city. 
(b)  Notice of rejection. Whenever an application is rejected, notice of such action with a statement of the reason shall be mailed to the applicant. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-03; Code 1994, § 4-04-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-4. - Competitive examinations. 
(a)  The relative fitness of applicants for appointment to or promotion within the city must be determined by competitive examinations. The human resources director may conduct the examination, or the city may contract with the governing body of any other municipality or with any state department or other agency or person for the holding of competitive examinations. Examinations may consist of written applications, written or oral tests, personal interviews, or any combination thereof, and may include consideration and rating of any or all of the following qualification factors: education, training, experience, general adaptability, special aptitudes, physical fitness as determined by physical tests and medical examination, knowledge, skill, personality, character and such other qualifications as may be deemed necessary by the human resources and the board for the satisfactory performance of the duties of the respective position. 
(b)  The human resources director shall see that competitive examinations are administered in a manner to give all applicants equal opportunity to demonstrate their fitness. In order to avoid the possibility of discrimination, the identity of applicants will be concealed in all written examinations. The human resources director may require applicants to submit proof of their age, citizenship, and military service at the time of application or examination and shall keep a record of this information. 
(c)  Competitive examinations shall be open to all applicants who meet the standards or requirements fixed by the human resources director or the board with regard to residence, experience, character, age, education, physical condition and such other factors as may be held to be related to the ability of the applicant to perform with reasonable efficiency the duties of the position. 
(d)  Promotional examinations may be limited to a single department. Competitive examinations may take into consideration the quality of employment of the individual in the city. 
(e)  Present employees will be given first consideration when filling vacancies. When this becomes impractical, any person with the required abilities will be considered. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-4; Code 1994, § 4-04-04; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-5. - Methods of rating. 
    Sound measurement techniques and procedures should be used in rating the results of tests and determining the eligibility of the applicants for employment and promotion. In all written examinations, the minimum rating by which eligibility may be achieved shall be established by the human resources director prior to the administration of the examination. Applicants may be required to attain at least a minimum rating on each part of the test in order to receive a passing grade or to be rated on the remaining parts of the test. The final earned rating of the applicant shall be determined by computing the earned rating on each part of the examination. Each person who takes a written examination shall be given written notice as to whether the applicant passed or failed the examination. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-05; Code 1994, § 4-04-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-6. - Ranking of applicants. 
    On the basis of ratings obtained in the competitive examinations, applicants must be ranked in the relative order of their final earned rating. In case two or more applicants obtain the same or equivalent final earned ratings, applicants shall be given preference and ranked ahead of other applicants obtaining the same or equivalent final earned rating in the following order: 
(1)  Full-time employees of the city. 
(2)  Former employees who held a position in the city who were laid off without cause or who resigned in good standing within the previous 12 months. 
(3)  Part-time or provisional employees of the city employed continuously for a period of three months or more. 
(4)  Other applicants. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-06; Code 1994, § 4-04-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-7. - Veterans' preference. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 20-2-6, veterans who are state residents shall be entitled to preference, over all other applicants, for original employment examinations, pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 37-19.1-02, as follows: 
(1)  No distinction or discrimination may be made in the administration of an examination because the applicant may be a veteran. Upon completion of an examination with a passing grade, the applicant must be informed of a veteran's right to employment preference. The applicant shall be required to furnish proof of the applicant's status as a veteran and, if disabled, proof of disability. Proof of eligibility for veterans' preference shall be provided in the form of a certified copy of discharge papers or other satisfactory evidence of honorable discharge. 
(2)  Upon receipt of required proof, five percentage points must be added to the examination grade of a nondisabled veteran and ten percentage points shall be added to the examination grade of a disabled veteran. 
(3)  Upon request for certification of eligibles to employment pursuant to section 20-2-8, such persons must be identified as veterans, disabled veterans or nonveterans. 
(4)  In the event the certified list of eligible persons includes veterans, the selection must be made as follows: 
a.  A disabled veteran, without regard to examination grade, shall first be entitled to the position and, in the absence of justifiable cause, documented in writing, for not making such selection, shall be appointed. 
b.  If the list does not include disabled veterans and includes only veterans, then the one with the highest rating shall first be entitled to the position and, in the absence of justifiable cause, documented in writing, shall be appointed. 
c.  If the list includes both veterans and nonveterans, but not disabled veterans, the one with the highest rating, whether veteran or nonveteran, shall be entitled to the position, and, in the absence of justifiable cause, documented in writing, shall be appointed. 
(5)  The provisions of this section do not apply to the appointment of a chief deputy, assistant department director or private secretary of an elected or appointed official. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-07; Code 1994, § 4-04-07; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-8. - Employment registers. 
(a)  Eligible register; original employment. The human resources director shall establish and maintain such eligible registers for various classes of positions subject thereto as deemed necessary or desirable to meet the needs of the city. Qualified applicants may be placed on the register in the order of the rating as established by the human resources director. 
(b)  Re-employment register. An employee who has resigned in good standing may request to have their name placed on a re-employment register in the classification formerly held, subject to approval or disapproval of the human resources director, provided that the employee presents their request in writing to the human resources director prior to the date that the resignation becomes effective. The ranking of the individual on the register shall be in the order of the length of service with the city. Any individual whose re-employment eligibility expires, or who fails to request re-employment eligibility within the specified time period, shall be treated as a new applicant. 
(c)  Promotional register. The human resources director shall establish and maintain such promotional registers as deemed necessary and desirable to meet the needs of the city. On each promotional register, the eligibles shall be ranked in the order of their ratings earned in the tests given for this purpose. In the case of ties in the final ratings of eligibles on the promotional register, all other factors being equal, seniority shall prevail. An employee appointed from a promotional register who does not successfully complete the probationary period shall be reinstated to the former position in the class occupied by the employee immediately prior to the promotion if said position is available. 
(d)  Duration of employment registers. All registers shall be open and continuous and shall be supplemented from time to time as the needs of the city require; however, any applicant who is placed on the register and is not selected for a period of one year shall be dropped from the register, provided that the human resources director may, before the expiration of the register, extend the time during which such register shall remain in force when the needs of the city so require. In no event shall the total period during which an individual remains on the register exceed two years from the date on which they were originally placed on the register. 
(e)  Removal from the registers. The name of any person appearing on a register shall be removed by the human resources director if the individual requests, in writing, that their name be removed or if they cannot be located by ordinary means within five days following the date of notification, except for employees on approved leave. The name of an individual may be removed if the individual has waived appointment twice in the same class of positions. Any cause specified in this article for rejection of applications may likewise be cause for the removal of the name from the eligible register on which it appears. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-08; Code 1994, § 4-04-08; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-9. - Appointment procedure. 
(a)  Requisition. Whenever a vacancy occurs, the department director shall notify the human resources director giving pertinent facts relative to the duties, responsibilities and qualification requirements of the position which is to be filled. The human resources director shall either post a notice of an open position or utilize the appropriate register if one has been established. 
(b)  Priority of the registers. The employment registers will be used by the human resources director in the following order: 
(1)  Re-employment. 
(2)  Promotion. 
(3)  Eligible. 
(c)  Certification. The human resources director shall furnish the names and addresses of the individuals having the three highest standings on the register. These names shall be listed in alphabetical order. Whenever there is more than one vacancy in the same class in the same department, the number of names to be presented shall be increased by the number of additional vacancies. If a lesser number of names are on the register, the human resources director may submit the available names or a new recruitment may be initiated in order to develop a new register with additional names. Promotional registers will be ranked in numerical order, and the human resources director will certify only the person standing the highest on the proper register. 
(d)  Exception. This section does not apply to recruitment and appointment of department directors. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-09; Code 1994, § 4-04-09; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-10. - Transfers. 
    Transfers may be made by the human resources director to fill vacancies whenever deemed necessary to meet the needs of the city or when requested by an employee, provided that such transfers are in the proper class. Transfers may also be made by the human resources director to adjust personnel within or between departments, provided that such transfers are in the proper class or the employee has requested transfer to a position with a lower maximum salary rate. All transfers are subject to approval by the board. Transfers shall be given preference ahead of re-employment, promotion or eligible employment. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-10; Code 1994, § 4-04-10; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-11. - Appointments. 
(a)  Probationary appointments. If the applicant accepts the appointment and appears for duty within such period of time as the human resources director shall prescribe, the applicant shall be deemed to have received a probational appointment, otherwise the applicant shall be deemed to have declined the appointment. 
(b)  Temporary appointments. Temporary appointments for short-term employments may be made when necessary. If no register exists or if certification from registers is impracticable because of nonavailability of eligibles for temporary work, a temporary appointment of an individual to be designated by the human resources director may be made. Successive appointments of the same person to the same position shall not total more than one year. The acceptance or refusal by an eligible of a temporary appointment shall not affect the eligible's standing on the register. 
(c)  Emergency appointments. When an emergency makes it impossible to fill a position utilizing the normal competitive process, the human resources director may appoint any person to such position in order to prevent stoppage of public business or loss or serious inconvenience to the public. Any such person shall be employed only during such emergency and for a period not exceeding ninety days. A vacancy of which the human resources director has had a reasonable notice, or an employment condition of which the human resources director had or might with due diligence have had previous knowledge, shall not be considered an emergency under this section. Emergency appointments shall be reported immediately to the board. 
(d)  Provisional appointments. If necessary to prevent the stoppage of public business or inconvenience to the public, but not otherwise, provisional appointments of persons not on the eligible list may be approved by the human resources director in the event that no appropriate eligible list has been prepared for the position or that those on the eligible list are not immediately available. Provisional appointments may be made for a term of no longer than three months. Pension rights or civil service benefits may not be given for service rendered under the provisional appointment. 
(Code 1979, § 16-04-11; Code 1994, § 4-04-11; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-2-12. - Fingerprinting and criminal history records of applicants. 
(a)  Each applicant for a job with any department of the city may be required to provide fingerprints as part of the application process. A determination of whether the applicants for a position will be required to provide fingerprints for the purpose of conducting a criminal history background check will be made by the human resources director in consultation with the portfolio commissioner. The fingerprinting shall be done by the city's police department or for applicants living outside the city by any police department or sheriff's office. The city may charge the applicant a reasonable fee to offset the cost of fingerprinting and fees charged by the bureau of criminal investigation for criminal history information. 
(b)  The city may submit fingerprints to the bureau of criminal investigation for nationwide criminal history record information that includes resubmission of the fingerprints by the bureau of criminal investigation to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Federal Bureau of Investigation criminal history record information obtained by the city is confidential. For a request for nationwide criminal history record information made by the city under this section, the bureau of criminal investigation is the sole source to receive fingerprints. 
(Code 1994, § 4-04-10; Ord. No. 971, 10-21-2003) 
Sec. 20-2-13. - Grievance and appeal procedure. 
(a)  Notice of grievance; attempt to resolve; written reply. Within 15 days after its occurrence, an employee who is adversely affected by a decision of the employee's immediate supervisor or the employee's department director shall submit a written grievance report to the human resources director. The written grievance report shall identify the decision in question and the employee's requested relief. The human resources director shall provide a copy of the grievance to the city commissioner assigned the portfolio for the department. The human resources director shall meet with the employee and the employee's immediate supervisor and/or department director to clarify the issue, identify if the issue relates to city or departmental policy, and attempt to resolve the matter. Within five working days after the meeting, the human resources director shall furnish the employee, the department director and portfolio commissioner with a written reply to the grievance. If the issue relates to the layoff, suspension, demotion or dismissal of an employee, the employee may immediately appeal to the civil service commission and need not attempt to resolve the matter by way of this step. 
(b)  Appeal to the civil service commission. If the written reply of the human resources director to the grievance is not satisfactory to the employee, the employee may, within five working days of receipt of the decision on the grievance, submit an appeal in writing to the civil service commission. This appeal shall be filed with the human resources director and be referred forthwith to the civil service commission for its review and recommendations. Following the civil service commission's review, its written findings and recommendations shall be transmitted to the aggrieved employee, the employee's department director, the human resources director and the board of city commissioners. 
(c)  Report to board when policy revision recommended. If the city commissioner assigned the portfolio determines that the issue is related to city or departmental policy, which policy is in need of revision, the commissioner shall report to the board of city commissioners for its review and any appropriate action. The review of the policy by the board shall not interrupt the grievance procedure and is not intended to circumvent the process. Any revision of the policy shall not be applied retroactively to the grievance which prompted its review, unless specifically approved by the board. 
(d)  Civil Service commission review; written findings. 
(1)  The civil service commission, upon receiving notice of the appeal, shall set a date for a hearing, which may not be less than five or more than 20 days after the date of the filing of the notice of appeal. Notice of the time and place of the hearing must be served upon the appealing official or employee and upon the authority imposing the layoff, suspension, demotion or dismissal, personally or by first class mail at least five business days before the date of the hearing. 
(2)  The civil service commission shall hear the appeal at the time set by it. The civil service commission may hear the evidence and facts to be presented by the appealing officer or employee and the authority imposing the layoff, suspension, demotion or dismissal, in the order it deems appropriate so long as all parties are given a full opportunity to be heard. The evidence of the parties may be through sworn testimony of witnesses or through exhibits introduced through sworn witnesses. After all parties have presented their evidence and have been given a full opportunity to be heard, the civil service commission may call other persons or witnesses to ascertain the facts and may make any further investigation which it deems proper. A hearing may be continued from time to time by the civil service commission. After having completed the hearing and any investigation which it has chosen to undertake, the civil service commission shall issue written findings and recommendations. In all cases, the civil service commission shall issue its findings and recommendations within five days of the close of the hearing. Copies shall be sent to the appealing employee or official, the department director, the human resources director and the board of city commissioners. 
(e)  Findings and recommendations of civil service commission. If the appeal is related to the reprimand, suspension, demotion or dismissal of an appealing employee or official, the following findings and recommendations may be made to the board of city commissioners: 
(1)  There was just cause for the imposition of the discipline imposed upon the appealing employee or official, and recommend upholding the decision. 
(2)  There was not just cause for the imposition of the discipline, and recommend that the employee be reinstated to the status held immediately prior to the discipline and restore to the employee any pay lost as a result of the discipline. 
(3)  There was just cause to discipline the employee or official, but the level of discipline imposed did not fit the offense committed, and recommend a different form of discipline. 
(f)  Final action by board of city commissioners; appeal. Upon receipt of the findings and recommendations of the civil service commission, the board shall set a date and time to consider the report and to take appropriate action on the grievance, which decision shall be final. The board may affirm, reverse or modify the recommendations of the civil service commission. No hearing need be scheduled by the board unless an appeal has been timely filed. Within five working days of the receipt of the written findings and recommendations of the civil service commission, any employee aggrieved by the decision of the civil service commission may file a written notice of appeal with the human resources director. The notice of appeal shall set forth any facts that the employee believes the civil service commission did not consider in reaching its findings and recommendations. The board, at the date and time set for consideration of the report, may receive additional information and testimony relating to the grievance and the civil service commission's findings and recommendations before reaching its decision. The hearing before the board shall be governed by the same rules as apply before the civil service commission to ensure that all parties have a full opportunity to be heard. 
(g)  Time extensions. The time limits in this section may be extended for good reason and for specified time periods by agreement between the grievant and management or between the grievant and the civil service commission. An employee may withdraw a grievance at any time. If, at any level of the grievance procedure set forth in this section, the aggrieved employee accepts the decision rendered by management or the civil service commission, the grievance will be considered resolved. For the purposes of this section, the term "management" includes the department director, human resources director, portfolio commissioner and the board of city commissioners. 
(h)  Conflict of interest. If the employee's grievance involves the human resources director, the board shall appoint another person to serve as the clerk of the civil service commission. 
(i)  Standard grievance form adopted. In order to facilitate the procedures provided in this section, a standard form for reporting any grievance shall be developed and adopted. The human resources director shall make copies of such form available to all city employees. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-11; Code 1994, § 4-08-10; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
ARTICLE 3. - CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION 

Sec. 20-3-1. - Established. 
    There is created for the city a three-member civil service commission to be appointed by the board of city commissioners on recommendation of the president of the board of city commissioners. The terms of office of civil service commission members shall be five years beginning January 1 and ending when a written resignation is submitted, the member misses three consecutive meetings or a replacement is appointed at the end of the term. The terms shall be staggered. The board of city commissioners shall appoint a person to fill the remainder of any unexpired term. 
(Code 1979, § 16-02-01; Code 1994, § 4-02-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
State Law reference- Civil service commission authorized, N.D.C.C. § 40-44-04. 
Sec. 20-3-2. - Organization. 
    The civil service commissioners shall meet and organize as a commission within 30 days after the appointment of a new member and shall hold meetings whenever there is business to conduct. The human resources director serves as the nonvoting secretary of the civil service commission. The civil service commission shall elect its own chairperson and vice-chairperson each year in January. Two members of the civil service commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of official business. 
(Code 1979, § 16-02-02; Code 1994, § 4-02-02; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-3-3. - Salary of civil service commissioners. 
    The salary of civil service commissioners shall be fixed by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 16-02-03; Code 1994, § 4-02-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 869, 2-3-1998) 
Sec. 20-3-4. - Duties of civil service commission. 
    The duties of the civil service commission shall be as follows: 
(1)  To recommend such rules and regulations as may be necessary and proper to implement the intent and purposes of this chapter. The civil service commission shall be empowered to put into effect any necessary details to carry out the general rules and regulations adopted by the board. 
(2)  To make investigations, either on complaint or on its own motion, concerning any matters relating to the administration of the city, and otherwise to represent the public and the city interest in the improvement of personnel administration and the protection of the merit principle. 
(3)  To hear appeals on disciplinary matters as specified in this chapter and make recommendations regarding the same to the human resources director and board of city commissioners. 
(4)  To perform such other duties relating to personnel administration of the city, not inconsistent with this chapter, as the board may require. 
(Code 1979, § 16-02-04; Code 1994, § 4-02-04; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-3-5. - Human resources director. 
    The city administrator shall serve as the human resources director and be responsible for the administration of the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the human resources director to maintain a record of the official proceedings of the civil service commission. The human resources director shall present to the civil service commission all matters arising in the course of administration which require consideration by the civil service commission and shall do such other tasks as the civil service commission may direct or the circumstances indicate as necessary and proper in order to facilitate and implement the actions of the civil service commission within the scope of its powers and duties. 
(Code 1979, § 16-02-05; Code 1994, § 4-02-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-3-6. - Forms and records. 
    The civil service commission shall develop and implement the appropriate forms and records for the various personnel activities.. 
(Code 1979, § 16-02-06; Code 1994, § 4-02-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
ARTICLE 4. - EMPLOYEE SEPARATION AND DISCIPLINE 

Sec. 20-4-1. - Employee separation. 
    The human resources director may: 
(1)  Lay off an employee in the city whenever necessary because of a change in duties or organization, shortage of work or funds, the abolition of the position or other material change in the duties or organization, or for related reasons which are outside the employee's control and which do not reflect discredit upon the service of the employee. 
(2)  Suspend an employee without pay up to a period of 30 days within one calendar year. 
(3)  Demote an employee from a position in one class to a position in a lower class. 
(4)  Dismiss an employee for cause. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-01; Code 1994, § 4-08-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-4-2. - Layoff. 
    The human resources director may lay off any employee for any of the reasons listed. The duties performed by an employee laid off may be reassigned to other employees in appropriate classes, provided that no regular employees shall be laid off while another person is employed on a temporary or provisional basis in the same class in that department; provided, further, that no separation as a penalty of disciplinary action shall be considered as a layoff. All employees laid off shall, if qualified, be entitled to transfer if available, and the department director and human resources director shall, on request of the employee, enter such employees' names on the re-employment register. 
(1)  Order of layoff. The order in which employees will be laid off must be determined in accordance with the employee's evaluation reports and ratings, if such have been adopted, and length of service with the city. The evaluation reports and ratings will be given greater weight than length of service in the determination of the layoff order. A temporary or provisional employee shall be laid off before a probationary employee, and a probationary employee shall be laid off before a regular employee in the same class. 
(2)  Notice of layoff. The human resources director shall give written notice to the employee of the proposed layoff and the reasons therefor not less than 14 calendar days before the effective date of the layoff. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-02; Code 1994, § 4-08-02; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 801, § 7, 1992) 
Sec. 20-4-3. - Seniority. 
(a)  Seniority of an employee shall be established by computing the amount of continuous service, including vacation, sick leave and authorized leave of absences, since the completion of the first year of employment, or the employee's date of re-employment, whichever is applicable. 
(b)  Any and all seniority rights accrued during any period of employment shall be automatically terminated and forfeited by the resignation of the employee, and, in the event of the employee's future re-employment in the same or any other position, the resignation shall be considered a break in continuous service for purpose of computation of seniority; provided, however, that an employee reinstated to a former position as a result of failure to successfully complete a probationary period upon appointment to a higher classification or position as provided in this chapter shall not be considered to have incurred a break in continuous service thereby. 
(c)  Leave of absence without pay shall not be considered a break in continuous service to warrant forfeiture of previously earned seniority rights, but the period of such leave of absence without pay shall not be included in the computation of seniority; provided, however, that such leave of absence taken for military service during time of an emergency, plus six months thereafter, shall be included in computation of seniority. 
(d)  The rules providing for computation of seniority shall apply in all situations in which seniority rights and privileges are involved. Specifically, the rules shall apply in any consideration of seniority for promotional purposes, to computation of years of service for purposes of allowed annual vacations of employees with pay, and to priority of selection of time for annual vacation in the event of otherwise unresolved conflicts pertaining thereto. 
(e)  Employees under temporary, provisional or emergency appointment shall not accrue seniority by virtue of such appointments. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-03; Code 1994, § 4-08-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-4-4. - Suspension. 
    When, in the judgment of the human resources director, an employee's work performance or conduct justifies disciplinary action short of dismissal, the employee may be suspended without pay for such length of time as is considered appropriate but not exceeding 30 calendar days in any 12-month period. A written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for the suspension shall be furnished to the affected employee. The suspension period may be lengthened pending an investigation or hearing of the charges. A regular employee who is suspended may appeal to the civil service commission. Health insurance will continue during the suspension period. Annual and sick leave will not accrue during the suspension period. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-04; Code 1994, § 4-08-04; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-4-5. - Demotion. 
    The human resources director may, for cause, reduce the salary of an employee within the range provided for the class or demote an employee from a position in one class to a position in a lower class. A written statement of the reasons for such action shall be furnished to the employee at least five days prior to the effective date of the action. No demotion shall be made for disciplinary action unless the employee to be demoted is eligible for employment in the lower class and shall not then be made if any regular employee in the lower class would be laid off by reason of this action. An employee demoted may appeal to the civil service commission. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-05; Code 1994, § 4-08-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-4-6. - Dismissal. 
    The human resources director may, for misconduct, inefficiency or other just cause, dismiss any employee at any time, effective immediately, without pay, with the approval of the city attorney as to legality. The employee being dismissed shall be furnished a written statement of the reasons for the dismissal. An employee who has been dismissed may file an appeal with the civil service commission. If the civil service commission recommends, following a hearing, that the dismissal is not warranted, and the board of city commissioners concurs, the employee shall be reinstated to the former position with full restitution of salary, seniority status and all other benefits. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-06; Code 1994, § 4-08-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-4-7. - Resignation. 
    To resign in good standing, an employee must give the human resources director 14 calendar days' prior notice, provided that the human resources director may, because of extenuating circumstances, agree to a shorter period of notice. A written resignation shall be supplied by the employee. Failure to comply with this section shall be entered on the service record of the employee and may be cause for denying future employment by the city. Any unauthorized absences from work for a period of three of more consecutive working days may be considered by the human resources director as a resignation. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-07; Code 1994, § 4-08-07; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-4-8. - Cause for suspension, demotion or dismissal. 
    An employee may be subject to disciplinary action for conduct impairing the performance of the employee or that of the city government, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages or unlawful use of any drugs, narcotic or other controlled substance while on duty, or reporting to work when under the influence of intoxicants or any narcotic or controlled substance. 
(2)  Failure to follow orders of superiors. 
(3)  Inability to get along with fellow employees resulting in interference with the performance of duties of any employee. 
(4)  Being absent from work without permission or failure to report to the supervisor or department director when one is absent. 
(5)  Being habitually tardy. 
(6)  Continued failure to perform the assigned work in a satisfactory manner. 
(7)  Being habitually wasteful of material, property or working time. 
(8)  Failure to pay just debts to the best of one's ability and means, if such failure impairs job performance or interferes with normal and efficient city government. 
(9)  Conviction of a felony or conviction of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral turpitude. 
(10)  Engaging in criminal, infamous, dishonest or notoriously disgraceful conduct, or other conduct prejudicial to the government. 
(11)  Violation of city ordinances or official written policies adopted by the board of city commissioners or departments. 
(12)  Careless or negligent operation of city vehicles or equipment. 
(13)  Engaging in conduct or making public statements which adversely affect the confidence of the public in the integrity of the board of city commissioners, the department directors or city government or which, directly or indirectly, condemns or criticizes the policies of the city or any of its departments. 
(14)  Taking any action which might prejudice the city's interest in a criminal or civil action. 
(15)  Betting or participation in any gambling activity, including the operation of a gambling device, conducting a lottery or pool, or selling or buying a number slip or ticket while on city-owned or city-leased property or while on duty for the city. 
(16)  Displaying discourtesy or disrespect to a member of the public when acting in an official capacity. 
(17)  Having a suspended or revoked driver's license when a current license is required as part of the employee's job description and responsibilities. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-08; Code 1994, § 4-08-08; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-4-9. - Notice of layoff, suspension, demotion or dismissal. 
    A written notice of proposed layoff, suspension, demotion or dismissal, stating the reason for the action and when it is to be effective, must be given to the official or employee or mailed by first class mail to the last known place of residence, or personally served upon the employee within the required time period. The notice shall state that the employee has a right to file an appeal and the right to an opportunity to be heard at a hearing before the civil service commission, upon request. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-09; Code 1994, § 4-08-09; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-4-10. - Grievances which may be appealed to civil service commission. 
(a)  The civil service commission is authorized to review grievances which are characterized as alleged violations of departmental rules and regulations, city personnel policies or allegations of impropriety and to make recommendations to the board of city commissioners. If the civil service commission believes any grievance violates a criminal law or N.D.C.C. ch. 34-11.1, said grievance shall be reviewed by the city attorney to determine whether it should be properly referred to the state's attorney. 
(b)  The civil service commission is not authorized to review allegations of criminal acts. Any alleged violation by any city employee of state law or municipal ordinances for which a criminal penalty applies shall be reported to the city attorney's office. Allegations of criminal violations reported to the city attorney's office shall be promptly investigated and a report of the action taken shall be made to the board of city commissioners. 
(c)  The civil service commission is authorized to hear appeals from any employee or official who alleges discrimination due to race, color, creed, sex, age, marital status, national origin, or physical or mental disability, or other grievance relating to employment law, rules, regulations or ordinances, or any other grievance relating to personnel matters. 
(d)  Additional matters over which appeals may be filed include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Working conditions; 
(2)  Unfair treatment, including coercion, restraint or reprisal; 
(3)  Failure to follow promotion plans and procedures; 
(4)  Personnel actions which are based on marital status, political affiliations, or other nonmerit factors; 
(5)  Layoff decisions; and 
(6)  Disciplinary actions, including suspensions, demotions and dismissals. 
(e)  The commission is not authorized to consider appeals concerning: 
(1)  Prohibited political activities as defined in state law; 
(2)  Retirement, life insurance or health insurance; 
(3)  The classification of any position that does not result in the reduction in grade or pay of an employee; 
(4)  The content of published city or departmental regulations and policies; 
(5)  An action which terminates a temporary promotion within a maximum period of two years and returns the employee to the position from which the employee was temporarily promoted, or reassigns or demotes the employee to a different position that is not at a lower grade or pay than the position from which the employee was temporarily promoted; and 
(6)  The separation of any employee serving a probationary, provisional, temporary or emergency, or trial period, or the termination of a nonpermanent employee. 
(Code 1979, § 16-08-10; Code 1994, § 4-08-10; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
ARTICLE 5. - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 20-5-1. - Probationary period. 
(a)  Objective. The probationary or working period shall be regarded as an integral part of the examination process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's work, for securing the most effective adjustment of a new employee to the position, and for rejecting any employee whose performance does not meet the required work standards. 
(b)  Duration. Every person appointed to a regular position, including those appointed from the re-employment register, and those receiving a different classification, shall be required to complete successfully a working test during a probationary period which shall be of sufficient length to enable the human resources director to observe the employee's ability to perform the various principal duties pertaining to the position. Except as provided in this section, the working test or probationary period shall begin immediately upon appointment, and shall continue for a period of six months. The working test or probationary period shall continue for one year for full-time employees of the fire department and for sworn officers in the police department. The probationary period for a sworn officer shall begin immediately after certification or licensure, provided that, if the department director requests an extension, the human resources director may approve the extension of the probationary period up to a total of 18 months from the date the probation started. No period of employment under an appointment, temporary in character, whether temporary, provisional or emergency, shall be counted as part of the working test or probationary period. 
(c)  Dismissal. At any time during the probationary period, the human resources director may remove an employee if, in the human resources director's opinion, the working test indicates that such employee is unable or unwilling to perform the duties of the position satisfactorily, or that the employee's habits and dependability do not merit the employee's continuance in employment with the city. Upon such removal, the human resources director shall forthwith report, in writing, to the city commission and to the employee removed, the human resource director's action and reasons therefor, but no right to review of any kind shall be given to the employee. An employee who is found to have been appointed through fraud or error shall be removed within ten days of notification to this effect by the human resources director. 
(d)  Probationary period reports. At the end of every three months during the probationary period, the department director shall submit to the human resources director a rating of the probationary employee's performance. At least ten days prior to the expiration of an employee's probationary period, the department director shall either notify the human resources director in writing that the services of the employee have been satisfactory and that the employee should be retained in the position, or that the probationary period for the employee should be extended or that the employee should be dismissed. Failure to file such a report shall automatically extend the probationary period until such report has been filed, but shall not adversely affect the status of the employee as to the date of completion if the late filing was through no fault of the employee. 
(e)  Restoration of dismissed employee to appropriate register. If an employee is removed from a position during or at the end of the probationary period and the human resources director determines that the dismissed employee is suitable for appointment to another position, the dismissed employee's name may be added to any appropriate register. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-01; Code 1994, § 4-05-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-5-2. - Work conditions. 
    The civil service commission shall review working conditions and propose to the board of city commissioners programs designed to attract the best-qualified persons into the city's employment. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-03; Code 1994, § 4-05-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-5-3. - Standard workweek and time of work period. 
(a)  Civilian personnel. The normal work period for employees shall consist of seven days beginning at 12:01 a.m. Sunday and ending at 12:00 midnight the following Saturday. The workweek shall consist of 40 hours. 
(b)  Fire department. The normal work period for firefighters shall consist of 19 days with the work time beginning at 8:00 a.m. and ending at 7:59 a.m. for a 24-hour period. The period shall consist of 144 hours in the 19-day period. 
(c)  Police department. 
(1)  The normal work period for police officers who hold the rank of sergeant and above and who perform patrol duties shall consist of 14 days beginning at 7:00 a.m. Sunday and ending at 6:59 a.m. the second following Sunday. The workweek shall consist of 84 hours for the police officers who hold the rank of sergeant and above and who perform patrol duties. 
(2)  The normal work period for a police patrol officer, patrol supervisor and detective shall consist of 28 days with the work time beginning at 7:00 a.m. and ending at 6:59 a.m. for a 24-hour period. The work period shall consist of 168 hours in the 28-day period. 
(3)  The normal work period for police department employees who perform work as dispatchers and employees who perform clerical and administrative duties, shall consist of seven days beginning at 7:00 a.m. Sunday and ending at 6:59 a.m. the following Sunday. The workweek shall consist of 40 hours. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-04; Code 1994, § 4-05-04; Ord. No. 746, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 778, § 1, 1991) 
Sec. 20-5-4. - Modified workweek. 
    With prior human resources director approval, an employee may be required to work at other than usual working hours, or in excess of the standard workweek and specified work period, whenever necessary to fulfill the work requirements of the department or to facilitate the efficient use of equipment or personnel. An employee who works in excess of the standard workweek or specified work period will be compensated or provided the option of compensatory time in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-05; Code 1994, § 4-05-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-5-5. - Substitution of work schedules. 
    An employee may substitute scheduled work times with another employee if the substitution is voluntarily undertaken and agreed to by the employees and if prior approval of the department director is obtained. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-06; Code 1994, § 4-05-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-5-6. - Pay days. 
    An employee will receive pay on a biweekly basis on the Friday following the completion of the pay period. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-07; Code 1994, § 4-05-07; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-5-7. - Coffee breaks. 
    An employee may be allowed a 15-minute coffee break or rest period during each one-half shift period, subject to the work load requirements or emergency conditions within the department on any given day. The coffee break or rest period, if taken, must be scheduled near the middle of each one-half shift period whenever this is feasible. The department director, with the approval of the human resources director, may promulgate other reasonable rules relating to coffee breaks or rest periods in order to promote the efficiency and public image of the department's operation. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-08; Code 1994, § 4-05-08; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-5-8. - Absence records and reports. 
    The human resources director shall maintain records of the absences of city employees. Each absence from duty of any employee, appointed official or department director must be reported biweekly by the administrative officer of each department to the human resources director. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-09; Code 1994, § 4-05-09; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-5-9. - Evaluation or appraisal of performance. 
    It is the policy of the city to evaluate on a fair and equitable basis the performance of its employees. Appraisals must be done in accordance with policies and procedures promulgated by the city commission and without regard to race, sex, age, national origin, religion, political affiliation, physical or mental handicap or status, marital status, or other nonmerit factors. The city commission will establish and carry out this policy by utilizing the appraisal system set forth in this section. 
(1)  General purposes. 
a.  General purposes of the appraisal system are to: 
1.  Provide supervisors and employees with an opportunity to discuss work and related matters. 
2.  Inform employees as to how well they are performing their present duties and responsibilities and to offer suggestions, assistance and support in helping employees perform their job more effectively. 
3.  Encourage employees to evaluate their own performance, in terms of specific or general problems, work unit and individual objectives, and career goals and interests. 
4.  Provide meaningful data to administrators in making key personnel management decisions, such as salary increases, transfers, promotions, layoffs and disciplinary actions. 
5.  Assist supervisors in recognizing employee capabilities, potential, interests and goals. 
6.  Provide supervisors with an opportunity to sense cause of and problems in job satisfaction and morale among employees individually or as a group. 
7.  Provide department directors with an opportunity to discuss with the human resources director and their portfolio commissioner the department's annual work plan, including goals and objectives as well as the personal and professional goals of the department director. 
b.  Through the proper use of this performance appraisal system, an increased and meaningful exchange of thoughts and ideas can occur between employees and supervisors and between department directors and the board of city commissioners. 
(2)  The appraiser. 
a.  Each employee covered by this chapter will be appraised by the person in the best position to do so. Normally, the appraiser will be the employee's immediate supervisor who has the responsibility for assigning, directing and reviewing the work of the employee. If, because of rotational assignments or other reasons, it is not clear to whom an employee reports, a decision will be made by the human resources director as to who is best able to appraise the employee based on actual observation. 
b.  Department directors will be appraised by the human resources director in consultation with their portfolio commissioner. Any city commissioner may provide input for the appraisal. 
(3)  Who is appraised . All full-time and regular part-time employees and department directors will be appraised. 
(4)  Probationary appraisal. An appraisal of performance will be made every three months prior to the conclusion of the probationary period. The appraisal will be geared to helping the new employee, and will allow sufficient time before the end of the probationary period for the appraiser to note improvements in performance. A final appraisal at the end of the probationary period will be made to provide the basis for retention or termination of the employee. 
(5)  Frequency of appraisal. Appraisals will be held once a year during the month of the hiring anniversary date for all employees who have completed the probationary period, unless the department director or human resources director schedules all appraisals for the same period of the year. 
(6)  Appraisal follow-up. A periodic discussion between the supervisor and the employee will be part of the formal appraisal system. This discussion will focus on progress the employee has made in improving performance in weak areas, where job assignments can be changed to better meet employee goals, where progress can be made in meeting work objectives, and other areas of interest or concern. 
(7)  The appraisal form. A separate appraisal form will be completed for each employee. It is important to the validity of the system that supervisors be: 
a.  As objective as possible in completing appraisal forms; and 
b.  Realistic in determining performance levels for individual performance. 
(8)  Signatures . The employee and the appraiser will sign and date the form after they have made comments. They will again sign the form after they have reviewed and discussed the appraisal form together. 
(9)  Higher-level review. After completion of the performance appraisal discussion between the appraiser and employee, there will be at least one further review of the completed performance appraisal form at a higher level of supervision or management, unless the appraisee is director or the human resources director. 
(10)  Distribution of employee appraisal form. After all levels of review have taken place, the employee will receive a copy of the appraisal and a copy will be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-10; Code 1994, § 4-05-10; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-5-10. - Employee training and development. 
    It is the responsibility of each employee to acquire the training needed to adequately perform the job and to qualify for promotions as they occur. In order that employees may perform their work more efficiently and be able to qualify for positions of increasing difficulty and responsibility, the human resources director, in consultation with the civil service commission, shall develop a system of employee training. The human resources director may encourage employees to take courses in night schools; suggest programs of supervisory and foremanship training; provide for necessary facilities to accommodate employee education; ensure the employees are informed on activities and functions of the various departments of the city government; promote employee training programs; encourage, counsel and advise employees about the possibilities of advancement in the city service; and suggest required additional training. Training of individual employees shall be conducted as needs require and the availability of training shall be provided all employees on an equitable basis. 
(Code 1979, § 16-05-11; Code 1994, § 4-05-11; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
ARTICLE 6. - CLASSIFICATION AND SALARY PLANS 

Sec. 20-6-1. - Classification plan. 
    The classification plan, allocations of positions, class of positions and class specifications shall be reviewed and updated from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-01; Code 1994, § 4-06-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-2. - Updating of classification plan. 
    The classification plan shall be kept current. Revisions of class specifications and re-allocations of positions within the approved plan shall be made in the following manner: 
(1)  The human resources director shall study the duties and responsibilities of each new position as it is developed, allocate the position in the appropriate class, and create class specifications. 
(2)  Whenever a new position is created or a change is made in the duties and responsibilities of an existing position, involving the addition, subtraction or modification of such duties and responsibilities, such changes shall be reported to the city commission by the human resources director. 
(3)  When an employee is proposed to be transferred permanently to another position, the human resources director shall investigate the duties of the new position to determine if the employee will be properly classified and can perform the duties of the new position. 
(4)  An employee, may, at any time, submit a written request to the human resources director for a review of the allocation of the employee's position. This request must set forth the employee's reasons for the review. 
(5)  The human resources director periodically shall check the classification of positions, and, upon the basis of these investigations, recommend such alterations or corrections to the overall classification plan as may be deemed necessary and desirable to the board for approval. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-02; Code 1994, § 4-06-02; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-3. - Effect of re-allocation of positions. 
(a)  Any employee occupying a position re-allocated to a different class shall continue in the position only if the employee is eligible for and actually appointed to the position in the new class in accordance with the regulations governing promotion, transfer or demotion, provided that any employee whose position is so re-allocated may compete in any test held to fill the re-allocated positions, or, upon approval of the human resources director, the employee may attain status in the re-allocated position if the employee achieves a satisfactory grade on a noncompetitive test for fitness for the class to which the position was re-allocated. 
(b)  If the incumbent of any position develops the position by the assumption of additional and progressively more difficult duties and responsibilities, so that it warrants a higher classification, a re-allocation of the position may be made, but in all such instances the effect of the re-allocation shall be as determined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-03; Code 1994, § 4-06-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-4. - Use of class titles. 
    The class title set forth in the classification plan shall be used to designate such positions in all official records, vouchers, payrolls and communications. No person shall be appointed to, or employed in, any position under class title, except temporarily, provisionally, or on an emergency basis, who has not been approved by the human resources director. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-04; Code 1994, § 4-06-04; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-5. - Job descriptions. 
    Each department director shall develop and maintain current clearly defined job descriptions for each employee within the department. Employees shall not be required to perform those duties that are not enumerated in their job description without a change in the job description or a change in job classification. At no time will an employee be required to perform personal duties of another not related to city business. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-05; Code 1994, § 4-06-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-6. - Age limits. 
    The class specifications for positions in the city may contain age limits as may be determined by the board of city commissioners, provided such limits are consistent with federal and state laws and regulations. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-06; Code 1994, § 4-06-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-7. - Preparation of salary plan. 
    A salary committee of the board of city commissioners may meet with employees' representatives, after consultation with the human resources director and department directors, and shall be responsible for the development of a uniform and equitable salary plan which shall consist of minimum and maximum rates of pay for each class of positions and such intermediate rates as they consider necessary or equitable. Salary ranges shall be linked directly to the position classification plan and shall be determined with due regard to ranges of pay for other classes, requisite qualifications, prevailing rates of pay in other public and private employment in the area, cost of living factors, the financial policy of the city, and other economic considerations. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-07; Code 1994, § 4-06-07; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-8. - Adoption of salary plan. 
    The proposed pay plan shall be submitted by the salary committee to the board for adoption. In increasing or decreasing items in the city budget, the board shall not increase or decrease any individual salary item but shall act solely with respect to classes of positions as established by the classification and salary plans. After adoption by the board, no positions shall be assigned a salary higher than the maximum or lower than the minimum salary provided for the class of position unless the salary schedule for the class is amended. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-08; Code 1994, § 4-06-08; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-9. - Amendment of salary plan. 
    The salary committee shall submit to the board amendments to the salary plan when changes in responsibilities or work or classes, living costs, recruiting experience, prevailing rates of pay, the city's financial condition and policies, or other pertinent conditions warrant such action. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-09; Code 1994, § 4-06-09; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-6-10. - Administration of salary plan. 
(a)  Pay rate. The minimum rate of pay for a class shall be paid upon appointment to the class. Appointment at a rate above the minimum may be paid if in the opinion of the department director and the human resources director it is justified on the basis of exceptional qualifications of an eligible or a lack of available eligibles at the minimum rate. Appointments above the minimum rate shall not be a rate above that paid to those presently employed in the same class and department for positions below the grade of foreman. If a former employee is re-employed in a class in which the employee was previously employed, the human resources director may make an appointment at the same rate of pay which the employee had been receiving at the termination of the employee's previous service. 
(b)  Total remuneration. Any salary rate established for an employee shall represent the total remuneration for the employee, not including reimbursement for official travel. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no employee shall receive pay from the city in addition to the salary authorized under the schedule provided in the salary plan for services rendered by the employee or which the employee may undertake or volunteer to perform, provided that any cost of living adjustment authorized by the board shall not be considered as additional pay. No reward, gift or other form of remuneration in addition to regular compensation shall be received from any source by employees for the performance of their duties.. 
(c)  Pay for part-time work. Whenever an employee works for a period less than the regularly scheduled number of hours a day, days a week, or weeks a month, the amount paid shall be proportionate to the time actually worked. The payment of a separate salary from two or more departments for duties performed in each is permissible if the total salary received is not in excess of the maximum rate of pay for the class. 
(d)  Salary increases. Subject to the level of municipal appropriations and the approval of the board, performance increases will be granted based upon a merit system. Appraisers will recommend to the human resources director employees for a performance increase. The human resources director will in turn forward the list of employees recommended for performance increases to the personnel director for final approval. Salary increases approved by the personnel director must meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Employees who have been promoted or demoted shall not be eligible for a merit increase until six months after the action was taken. 
(e)  Hourly and daily rates. The hourly and daily rates shall be determined by dividing the annual salary based on the current wage being paid, by the number of work hours/days in the year. All personnel, except those enumerated in this section, shall be paid on the basis of an eight-hour day, 40-hour week, 52-week year. The hourly and daily rates for police officers shall be based upon 168 hours in a 28-day period and for fire department employees the basis shall be 144 hours in a 19-day work period. 
(f)  Overtime; holiday; call out; emergency pay rates. 
(1)  All personnel may be required to work by the department director at other than usual working hours, in excess of the standard workweek or regularly scheduled weekly shift, whenever it is necessary to carry out the work of the department or to facilitate the efficient use of equipment or personnel. Work performed by employees in excess of the standard workweek or regularly scheduled weekly shift within the department will be compensated as provided in this subsection. The salaries of employees which are classified as exempt from the overtime provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act contemplate and include all anticipated overtime work, and additional pay for overtime will not be made to these employees. 
(2)  Additional hours over the standard workweek or period for the department shall be paid at a rate of 11/2 of the regular hourly salary. To determine the number of hours worked by an employee within a week or work period, time spent on vacation, personal days, sick and holiday leave will not be counted as time worked in calculating overtime. Compensatory leave and funeral leave will not be counted as time worked in the calculation of overtime. Authorized leave must be included in straight time pay for employees but is not included in calculating overtime pay. 
(3)  Holiday pay will be paid to all employees required to work on a holiday at the rate of 11/2 of the regular hourly salary. The holidays are on the dates specified in section 20-7-2 and not when actually observed. 
(4)  A nonexempt employee called to work, with supervisor approval during unscheduled hours, will be paid as overtime with a minimum of two hours paid. 
(Code 1979, § 16-06-10; Code 1994, § 4-06-10; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 746, § 3, 1989; Ord. No. 801, § 5, 1992; Ord. No. 831, § 1, 12-10-1994; Ord. No. 1043, § 6, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 1050, § 7, 2-3-2009; Ord. No. 1145, 5-7-2013; Ord. No. 1175, 11-19-2013; Ord. No. 1257, 3-7-2017) 
ARTICLE 7. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS AND LEAVE 

Sec. 20-7-1. - Eligibility for benefits. 
(a)  Full-time employees. Full-time employees shall be eligible for all employee benefits and privileges. These benefits include all leave and holiday privileges, worker's compensation coverage, unemployment compensation and participation in the city's group insurance program and employee pension plan. 
(b)  Regular part-time employees. Regular part-time employees are eligible for participation in the city's group insurance program and in the employee pension plan subject to the plan's eligibility requirements. Regular part-time employees are entitled to holidays, annual, sick, personal and funeral leave on a pro rata basis to be calculated as follows: 50 percent of leave benefits if the employee works 21 to 29 hours per week. 
(c)  Seasonal administrative employees. Seasonal administrative employees are entitled to full benefits during the period of seasonal employment if the employee works 30 hours per week, and, if not, the employee is entitled to holidays, annual and sick leave on the same pro rata basis as regular part-time employees. 
(d)  Part-time, temporary, provisional, etc., employees. Part-time employees, temporary employees, provisional employees and those employees whose duration of employment is limited to a period of need not to exceed one year will not be eligible for any leave or benefit programs. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-01; Code 1994, § 4-07-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-2. - Holidays. 
(a)  Holidays for eligible city employees are as follows: 
(1)  New Year's Day, January 1. 
(2)  Martin Luther King Day, third Monday in January. 
(3)  President's Day, third Monday in February. 
(4)  Good Friday, Friday preceding Easter Sunday. 
(5)  Memorial Day, last Monday of May. 
(6)  Independence Day, July 4. 
(7)  Labor Day, first Monday in September. 
(8)  Veteran's Day, November 11. 
(9)  Thanksgiving Day, fourth Thursday in November. 
(10)  Christmas Eve, December 24 (four hours). 
(11)  Christmas Day, December 25. 
(12)  Any day declared by the city commission, governor or president to be a holiday, excluding the state-declared holiday of every Sunday. 
(b)  The four hours granted for holiday on Christmas Eve only occur when it falls on a Monday through Thursday. 
(c)  With the exception of Christmas Eve, when any of the holidays in subsection (a) of this section falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as the holiday, and when any of the holidays in subsection (a) of this section falls on a Sunday, the following Monday is considered the holiday. 
(d)  Full-time employees whose duties require them to work a regular shift on a holiday, excluding fire department personnel, must either be given the following day off as a holiday or be given eight hours of annual leave at the discretion of the department director. 
(e)  Fire department employees who have a regular workweek in excess of the 40 hours per week are granted additional time at a rate adjusted to take into account the extra hours so that their holiday computation is comparable to a 40-hour-per-week employee. 
(f)  Shift workers whose duties require them to work an irregular workweek, excluding fire department personnel, must be given additional hours of annual leave if they do not work on a holiday because the holiday coincides with a regularly scheduled time off. If an employee is on annual or sick leave at the time of the holiday, the day will be credited as a holiday and not deducted as annual or sick leave. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-01; Code 1994, § 4-07-02; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 743, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-3. - Annual leave. 
(a)  Annual leave is a part of an employee's compensation. All full-time employees are encouraged to take at least 80 hours annual leave per year with department director approval. 
(b)  Based on the standard 40-hour workweek, annual leave shall accrue on the following basis: 
An employee in the first year of employment with the City of Mandan may be awarded 16 hours of annual leave in advance of accrual which is a payroll advance. On notice of early termination, payment for annual leave which has been awarded by the city but not yet earned by an employee may be withheld from the employee's final paycheck(s). The employee will be responsible to reimburse the city all remaining amounts owed to it. An official request for an advanced award of annual leave must be made on the advance accrual form. Effective for the first full pay period in January. 
FT Non-Exempt and FT Exempt Vacation - Current Rate 2017 New Rate in 2018 Initial: 3.69 Initial: 4.31 After 3 years: 4.61 hours After 3 years: 5.23 hours After 7 years: 5.53 hours After 7 years: 6.15 hours After 12 years: 6.46 hours After 12 years: 7.08 hours After 18 years: 7.38 hours After 18 years: 8.00 hours After 24 years: 8.30 hours After 24 years: 8.92 hours  
FT Non-Exempt Fire Fighter 2017 New Rate in 2018 Initial: 5.07 Initial: 5.69 After 3 years: 6.23 hours After 3 years: 6.85 hours After 7 years: 7.38 hours After 7 years: 8.00 hours After 12 years: 8.76 hours After 12 years: 9.38 hours After 18 years: 9.92 hours After 18 years: 10.54 hours After 24 years: 11.07 hours After 24 years: 11.69 hours  
50% PT Non-Exempt 2017 New Rate in 2018 Initial: 1.84 Initial: 2.15 After 3 years: 2.3 hours After 3 years: 2.61 hours After 7 years: 2.76 hours After 7 years: 3.07 hours After 12 years: 3.23 hours After 12 years: 3.54 hours After 18 years: 3.69 hours After 18 years: 4.0 hours After 24 years: 4.15 hours After 24 years: 4.46 hours  
75% PT Non-Exempt 2017 New Rate in 2018 Initial: 2.76 Initial: 3.23 After 3 years: 3.46 hours After 3 years: 3.93 hours After 7 years: 4.14 hours After 7 years: 4.61 hours After 12 years: 4.84 hours After 12 years: 5.31 hours After 18 years: 5.53 hours After 18 years: 6.0 hours After 24 years: 6.22 hours After 24 years: 6.69 hours  
(c)  New employees must begin employment prior to the 15th of the month in order to accrue the benefit for the first month of employment. 
(d)  Days of annual leave shall be working days only. Holidays shall not be considered workdays, which are credited against the employee's annual leave account. Annual leave hours shall not be computed on overtime hours. 
(e)  Years of service shall be computed from beginning employment dates, which shall become each employee's anniversary date. 
(f)  Annual leave must be taken in increments of one-half of an hour or more but not more than 80 hours at one time unless approved by the department director. 
(g)  The vacation period will be determined by consulting with the department director, who will take into consideration the work load at the time of the vacation request. Vacation requests must be in writing and submitted to the payroll office. 
(h)  Employees shall be credited with annual leave which may be earned during the year; however, only that portion earned may be used. 
(i)  Unused annual leave up to a total of 240 hours (30 days) may be carried forward on the employee's anniversary date. Any accrued annual leave hours over 240 hours on the employee's anniversary date will be lost unless the employee requests an extension to be allowed to use the excess accrued annual leave and the extension is granted by the human resources director. 
(j)  An employee who works on a temporary basis and later becomes regular without a break in employment shall be entitled to earn benefits for the most recent continuous period of active temporary employment, but not exceed that which would be earned while on a comparable probationary status. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-03; Code 1994, § 4-07-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 801, § 6, 1992; Ord. No. 1103, § 9, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 1265, 7-11-2017, eff. 3-10-2017; Ord. No. 1280, 1-2-2018) 
Sec. 20-7-4. - Sick leave. 
(a)  Sick leave is a privilege granted to all regular employees, and is not a benefit considered to be earned by the employee such as annual leave. Sick leave enables employees to build a reserve of days that may be used for illnesses or medical reasons. Abuse of this privilege may be grounds for disciplinary action or dismissal. 
(b)  As of December 31, 2014, all existing sick leave balances will be frozen. As of January 1, 2015, based on the standard 40-hour workweek, sick leave will accrue on the following basis: 
(1)  Eight hours (one working day) per month for all full-time employees with s maximum accumulation of 960 hours for employees and 1,320 hours for career firefighters. 
(c)  Sick leave may be used for an employee's illnesses where the employee is unable to work and for medical and dental appointments. An employee absent for three days or more due to illness may not return to work without a medical certificate from an attending physician. Where deemed necessary, an employee may be required to undergo a physical examination at the employee's expense by a physician designated by the department director before being allowed to return to work. 
(d)  Sick leave shall be granted for treatment of chemical dependency for the duration of inpatient care at a hospital or treatment facility, provided that the employee completes said treatment as certified by the attending physician of the institution. Such leave shall be granted not more than two times. 
(e)  Up to 40 hours of sick leave, per calendar year, may be used for illness of a family member who requires care from the employee. As used in this section, the term "family member" means the employee's spouse, child, step-child, parent or step-parent. 
(f)  When an employee is on extended sick leave compensation and certified by the attending physician, the employee will receive full compensation and accrual of benefits and sick leave. 
(g)  Sick leave must be taken in increments of one-half of an hour or more and subject to the approval of the department director. 
(h)  Any employee injured while under their scope of employment, if physically able to do so, must make written notification to the department director within 24 hours of the incident during which the injury occurred. The department director shall then notify the human resources director. 
(i)  The city commission may adopt a shared leave policy providing for the sharing of annual and sick leave among city employees. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-04; Code 1994, § 4-07-04; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 801, § 7, 1992; Ord. No. 1181, 4-15-2014) 
Sec. 20-7-5. - Payback of annual and unused sick leave for pre-January 1, 2015 employees. 
(a)  Employees terminating their employment shall be paid for all earned and unused annual leave. Employees earning this benefit must terminate employment after the 15th of the month in order to accrue the benefit for the last month of employment. Upon the death of an employee, the employee's beneficiary or estate shall be entitled to payment for all unused annual leave. 
(b)  Subsequent to December 31, 2014, during each year, the excess of earned and unused hours over 960/1320 will be paid annually at a rate of 40%. The balance of hours and the employee's rate of pay will be determined as of the last completed pay period of each year. Payment shall be made to each qualifying employee on the second payroll following the hour calculation. At the time of payment, the employee's sick leave hours will be reduced to 960 hours for employees and 1320 hours for career firefighters. 
(c)  Upon retirement, employees employed as of December 31, 2014, who are 62 years of age through 64 years of age will be compensated for one-third of their accumulated sick leave up to 480 hours. An employee who is 65 years of age or older will be compensated for all accumulated sick leave not exceeding 480 hours. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-05; Code 1994, § 4-07-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 1308, 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 20-7-6. - Compensatory leave. 
(a)  Compensatory leave may be permitted upon mutual agreement of the employee and the department director. All compensatory leave is time off in lieu of payment for overtime pay. Compensatory leave for all employees, except as provided in this section, shall be allocated at the premium rate of 11/2 hours for each hour worked in excess of the standard workweek or work period. To determine the number of hours worked by an employee within a week or work period, time spent on annual, sick or personal leave and holidays will be counted as time worked in calculating compensatory leave. 
(b)  All compensatory leave earned, except as provided in this section, by an employee constitutes a financial liability of the city, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No employee may carry more than 60 hours of compensatory leave for more than one month. Once an employee has accumulated more than 50 hours of compensatory leave, the department director shall schedule time off for the employee in order to reduce the accumulated compensatory leave to less than 40 hours. 
(2)  There will not be an annual carryover of unused compensatory leave. The city will pay compensatory leave annually on the employee's anniversary date. 
(c)  The city has exempted elected, appointed, executive and administrative employees from overtime payment requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act. However, these exempt employees may also accumulate compensatory leave at an hour-for-hour rate for time worked beyond the standard workweek. These exempt employees will not be permitted to carry more than 60 hours. Exempt employees will not be paid for unused compensatory leave and all unused compensatory leave will be forfeited at the end of each calendar year. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-06; Code 1994, § 4-07-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-7. - Maternity leave. 
(a)  Pregnant employees are encouraged to report the existence of pregnancy to their department director. A female employee of the city may work as long as she desires before childbirth. Prior to or after childbirth, the employee may use sick leave, annual leave and leave without pay for a maximum of up to six weeks. Approved leave without pay may be utilized only when there is no reserve of sick or annual leave. The employee will receive full pay compensation during the use of sick and annual leave. The employee will also continue to accrue leave and benefits during this maternity leave period. 
(b)  A doctor's report will be required for any leave of absence in excess of six weeks. Leave taken beyond six weeks will be governed by the Family Medical Leave Act. 
(c)  All leave in excess of six weeks, with or without pay, must be in written form, submitted to the human resources director, and then forwarded to the payroll office to be filed in the employee's personnel file. This written request should state the expected delivery date, length of absence, and approximate date of return. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-07; Code 1994, § 4-07-07; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-8. - Jury and witness leave. 
(a)  An employee called for jury duty or subpoenaed as a witness before a court or other public body in the public interest but not for personal violations shall be granted time off with pay, but if a jury fee is received, it must be reimbursed to the city. Jury fees may be retained if the employee is on authorized annual leave. 
(b)  When an employee is called as a witness on behalf of the city, where the city is a party to the action and the city reimburses the employee for mileage, sustenance and room, which it may do, no fees or mileage shall be charged by said employee as a witness, and no time shall be deducted for the absence of such employee, and such employee shall be deemed to be performing duties or services for the city. 
(c)  When an employee is called as a witness when the city is not a party to the action and does not reimburse such employee for mileage, sustenance and room, the employee may collect witness fees and mileage from the party issuing the subpoena. The employee will take appropriate leave or leave without pay. 
(d)  When law enforcement personnel are called as witnesses in a criminal case as a result of matters arising out of official duties, they are deemed to be performing duties and services for the city, and as such shall not be subject to any loss of time or pay. If they received reimbursement for travel, sustenance and room from the city, they shall not collect witness fees or mileage as a witness. Where witness duties are performed during off-duty time, the employee may receive witness fees and mileage. When the witness fee is returned to the city, an employee may receive additional hours paid at a rate of 11/2 time in either compensatory time or overtime salary. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-08; Code 1994, § 4-07-08; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-9. - Military leave. 
(a)  All military leave shall match laws established by the state for state employees. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-09; Code 1994, § 4-07-09; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-10. - Funeral leave. 
(a)  Funeral leave shall be granted to employees up to six days per year based upon the following relationship to the employee: spouse, child, parent, sister, brother, grandparent, grandchild, son-in-law or daughter-in-law; a grandparent, parent, sister or brother of the employee's spouse; and step relatives with the aforementioned relationships. 
(b)  Funeral leave shall not be cumulative from year to year. Funeral leave must be taken in increments of one-half of an hour or more and with the prior approval of the department director. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-10; Code 1994, § 4-07-10; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1280, adopted Jan. 2, 2018, repealed § 20-7-11, which pertained to personal leave and derived from Code 1979, § 16-07-11; Code 1994, § 4-07-11; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988. The user's attention is directed to § 20-7-3 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 20-7-12. - Storm day policy. 
    All employees shall make every effort to get to work each day of employment with the city. The city administrator, after consulting with and receiving approval from the president of the board of city commissioners, will make the decision and announcement if there is no work or a delay in work due to bad weather. If this should happen, every effort will be made to put this announcement over local radio and television stations by 7:00 a.m. 
(1)  Any full-time or regular part-time employee on an undeclared storm day who can't make it to work because of bad weather will have to use annual leave or will be docked time on their next paycheck for all time missed. 
(2)  Part-time employees working on an hourly basis will only be paid for time in which they actually work. 
(3)  All regular part-time or full-time employees who are absent on sick leave during which time only an hourly portion of storm leave is authorized are to receive no credit time privilege. 
(4)  All full-time and regular part-time employees receive complete credit if the entire workday is designated as a storm day. 
(5)  Full-time employees who work at least 50 percent of the normal workday that elect to go home on annual leave before storm leave is authorized will receive credit for the time that is authorized. 
(6)  The guidelines in subsections (1) through (5) of this section apply only to those employees whose services are not essential to maintain the safety and welfare to the citizens of the city. 
(7)  Full-time and regular part-time (pro rata basis) employees whose service is essential during a full declared storm day shall receive a personal day of leave. Part days will be prorated. Storm day hours shall be considered from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. unless specifically noted otherwise by the city administrator. All employees, part-time or full-time, who are absent on sick leave are to receive no credit time privilege. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-12; Code 1994, § 4-07-12; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-13. - Leave without pay. 
(a)  Leave without pay shall be governed by the Family Medical Leave Act where appropriate. 
(b)  All leave without pay exceeding three days must be recommended by the city administrator and approved by the board of city commissioners and shall not be granted for a period longer than six months unless an extension is approved by the board of city commissioners. 
(c)  All leave without pay requests must be in writing. After 30 days, benefits cease. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-13; Code 1994, § 4-07-13; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-14. - Absence without leave. 
    An absence of an employee from duty, including any absence for a single day or part of a day, that is not authorized by a specific grant of leave of absence under the provisions of these rules shall be deemed to be an absence without leave. Any such absence shall be without pay and may be subject for disciplinary action. In the absence of such disciplinary action, any employee who is absent for three consecutive days without leave shall be deemed to have resigned. Such action may be reconciled by a subsequent grant of leave if the condition warrants. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-14; Code 1994, § 4-07-14; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-15. - Group health insurance. 
(a)  Employees, other than police department sworn officers, who work 20 or more hours per week and who are 18 years of age or older shall be eligible to enroll in the group health insurance program. The city will pay the premium of the insurance according to the following schedule: 
Years of Employment Premium Cost 0 to less than 1 year 100% of single policy 1 to less than 2 years 100% of single policy plus 10% of difference between single policy and family or single plus spouse or dependent(s) policy 2 to less than 3 years 100% of single policy plus 20% of difference between single policy and family or single plus spouse or dependent(s) policy 3 to less than 4 years 100% of single policy plus 30% of difference between single policy and family or single plus spouse or dependent(s) policy 4 to less than 5 years 100% of single policy plus 40% of difference between single policy and family or single plus spouse or dependent(s) policy 5 to less than 6 years 100% of single policy plus 60% of difference between single policy and family or single plus spouse or dependent(s) policy 6 to less than 7 years 100% of single policy plus 80% of difference between single policy and family or single plus spouse or dependent(s) policy 7 or more years 100% of single and family policy  
(b)  Police department sworn officers who work 20 or more hours per week and who are 18 years of age or older shall be eligible to enroll in the group health insurance program. The city will pay the premium of the insurance for a single or family policy at 100 percent upon employment. 
    Police department sworn officers will be reimbursed the difference between the above schedule and family insurance paid elsewhere upon providing proof of payment within 30 days. The reimbursement period will commence March 1, 2018 and terminate on December 31, 2018. 
(c)  Upon termination of employment, except for cause, an employee may be eligible for health insurance coverage as provided by law. Upon termination, the city will provide insurance for the month of termination and for one month thereafter. Further continuation of coverage shall be at the expense of the former employee, who shall arrange for payment of the monthly premium with the human resources director. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-15; Code 1994, § 4-07-15; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 914, 6-1-2000; Ord. No. 1252, § 1, 11-1-2016; Ord. No. 1287, 4-3-2018, eff. 3-1-2018) 
Sec. 20-7-16. - Worker's compensation. 
    In the event an employee is injured on the job and cannot report to work, compensation will be paid in accordance with the state worker's compensation laws. To be compensated, an employee must report the injury to the department director immediately and file a claim on forms prescribed, signed and kept on file by the human resources director. During the time it takes to process the worker's compensation claim, the city will continue paying the employee's regular salary and will deduct time absent from work from the employee's accumulated balance of sick leave. Thereafter, payments received from worker's compensation will be assigned to the city and the appropriate amount of sick leave will be credited to the employee's account. If the period of disability exceeds the employee's accrued sick leave, only the actual accrued sick leave will be credited back to the employee. Employees must notify the human resources director of all payments made by worker's compensation. Worker's compensation also pays medical bills for the treatment of injuries which occur on the job; however, the employee is responsible for filing the claims for medical care either directly with the provider or utilizing the claim form available from the human resources director. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-16; Code 1994, § 4-07-16; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-7-17. - Reimbursement of employee expenses. 
    All city employees who have prior approval of the human resources director for travel shall be reimbursed for travel expenses at the rate established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. Canadian travel shall be reimbursed at regular out-of-state rates rather than international rates. Employees claiming travel expense reimbursement shall submit only one voucher for each month. Verification of meal costs is not required, but a lodging receipt must be attached to the voucher as well as an itemized statement of mileage. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-17; Code 1994, § 4-07-17; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 774, § 1, 1990) 
Sec. 20-7-18. - Employee assistance program. 
    The board may offer, as part of its employee benefit package, an employee assistance program for all full-time and regular employees, which provides confidential counseling and referral to treatment for substance abuse and other personal problems. Participation in any employee assistance program shall be confidential. Volunteering to participate in an employee assistance program shall neither cause nor prevent discipline for violations of city policy. Participation in an employee assistance program does not relieve the employee from job performance requirements. Coverage of treatment costs will be subject to individual employee medical benefit plans. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-18; Code 1994, § 4-07-18; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 801, § 4, 1992) 
Sec. 20-7-19. - The Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. 
    The city will follow the requirements of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. 
(Code 1979, § 16-07-19; Code 1994, § 4-07-19) 
Sec. 20-7-20. - Long Term Disability Insurance Benefit. 
    Effective January 1, 2015, the city shall provide a Long Term Disability Insurance Benefit for all eligible employees. 
ARTICLE 8. - PENSION PLAN 

Sec. 20-8-1. - Participation and employee contribution. 
(a)  Participation. On October 9, 1977, by resolution of the board of city commissioners, the city established a pension plan for the employees of the city. This plan was amended effective January 1, 1989 in order to comply with TRA-86 IRS requirements. All full-time employees with six months' service to the city as of the date of the adoption of the city employee pension plan became participants in the plan. All employees who meets the plan's eligibility requirements may shall participate in the city employee pension plan, unless at the time of employment the employee elects in writing not to participate. Any employee who elects to join the plan will be unable to terminate or withdraw from the plan unless he resigns, retires or dies. 
(b)  Eligible employee. All full-time and regular part-time employees of the City of Mandan, Morton Mandan Public Library, Mandan Park District and Mandan Airport Authority, who are eighteen years of age or older and who have completed the probationary period are eligible to participate in the plan at their discretion. 
(c)  Employee contribution. Each participating employee shall be required to make a contribution of not less than a minimum of two percent of the employee's compensation each month to the trustee, provided that if an employee desires to increase the contribution above the minimum, the employee shall notify the trustee in writing on or before June 1 of the amount of additional contribution the employee desires to make, which must be for not less than a 12-month period commencing as of that date of the first pay period in July of that year. In the event an employee desires to decrease the contribution (but in no event less than two percent of the employee's compensation), the employee shall notify the trustee in writing on or before June 1 of the employee's desire to reduce the contribution to become effective on the first pay period of the following July. Any increase or decrease in an employee's contribution must be increments of two percent. 
(d)  Sworn police officers and career firefighters eligible contribution levels. 
(1)  Sworn police officers and career firefighters are eligible for an eight percent contribution to the plan when a participant's salary reduction contribution to the 457 Plan is two percent or three percent. 
(2)  Sworn police officers and career firefighters are eligible for a ten percent contribution to the plan when a participant's salary reduction contribution to the 457 Plan is four percent or greater. 
(3)  Sworn police officers and career firefighters are eligible for a zero percent contribution to the plan when a participant's salary reduction contribution to the 457 Plan is less than two percent. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-01; Code 1994, § 4-09-01; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 1195, § 4-09-01, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 20-8-2. - Pension committee. 
(a)  The city shall appoint a committee, which committee shall be designated as the pension committee. At least three persons appointed by the board shall constitute the pension committee. All committee members shall be participants in the city employee pension plan. The city will file the designation of the committee with the trustee. The trustee is authorized to rely solely on the committee to determine matters concerning benefits and payments. The committee shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To construe and interpret the plan, decide all questions of eligibility and determine the amount, manner and time of payment of any benefits under this section. 
(2)  To prescribe procedures to be followed by participants or beneficiaries filing application for benefits. 
(3)  To prepare and distribute in such manner as the committee determines the appropriate information explaining the plan. 
(4)  To receive from the employer and from participants such information as shall be necessary for the proper administration of the plan. 
(5)  To furnish the employer upon request such annual reports with respect to administration of the plan that is reasonable and appropriate. The committee may rely on the trustee to furnish the information for such reports, to receive, review and keep on file the reports of benefit payment by the trustee and reports of disbursements for expenses directed by the committee. 
(6)  To appoint or employ individuals to assist in the administration of the plan and other agents it deems advisable, including legal and accounting counsel. 
(7)  To consult with the trustee relating to an investment policy to be pursued by the trustee. 
(b)  The committee shall have no power to add or subtract from or modify any of the terms of the plan or to change or to add to the benefits provided for the plan or to waive or to fail to apply any requirements of eligibility for benefit under the plan. 
(c)  The committee shall issue directions to the trustee concerning all benefits which are to be paid from the trust fund pursuant to the origins of the plan and shall warrant that all such directions are in accordance with this plan. 
(d)  The committee may require a participant to complete and file with the committee an application for a benefit on the forms approved by the committee and furnish all pertinent information requested by the committee. The committee may rely upon all such information so furnished it, including the participant's current mailing address. 
(e)  The committee and the individual members thereof shall be indemnified by the city and not from the trust fund against any and all liabilities arising by reason of any act or failure to act made in good faith pursuant to the provisions of this plan, including expenses recently incurred in defense of any claims relating thereto. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-02; Code 1994, § 4-09-02; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-8-3. - Trust fund. 
    All contributions under the city employee pension plan shall be paid to a trustee and deposited in the trust fund. Except as provided above, all assets of the trust fund, including investment income, shall be retained for the exclusive benefit of the participants, former participants and beneficiaries and shall be used to pay benefits to such persons or may be used to pay administrative expenses of the plan and trust fund to the extent not paid by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-03; Code 1994, § 4-09-03; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-8-4. - Fiscal year. 
    The city employee pension plan will be kept on a 12-month period commencing on January 1 and ending on December 31. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-04; Code 1994, § 4-09-04; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-8-5. - Contributions of city. 
    The city shall each year pay to the trustee an amount for allocation, which amount shall be eight percent of the compensation of the employees, except for employees defined in section 20-8-1(d). 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-05; Code 1994, § 4-09-05; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 1176, 12-3-2013; Ord. No. 1195, § 4-09-05, 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 20-8-6. - Designation of beneficiary. 
(a)  Each participant or former participant from time to time may designate any person as the beneficiary to whom the participant's plan benefits are to be paid if the participant dies before receipt of all such benefits. Each beneficiary designation shall be in the form prescribed by the trustee. Said form shall be effective only when filed with the trustee during the participant's lifetime, and if the trustee allows, may specify the method of payment of benefits to the beneficiary. 
(b)  If any participant or former participant fails to designate a beneficiary in the manner prescribed in subsection (a) of this section or if the beneficiary designated by a deceased participant dies before the participant or before complete distribution of the participant's benefits, the trustee in the trustee's discretion may distribute such participant benefits either: 
(1)  To one or more of the next of kin. 
(2)  To the estate of the last to die of such participant and beneficiary. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-06; Code 1994, § 4-09-06; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-8-7. - Allocation to participant's accounts. 
(a)  Individual account. The trustee shall create and maintain adequate records to disclose the interest in the trust of each participant, former participant and beneficiary. Such records shall be in the form of individual accounts and shall reflect credits and charges made to such accounts in the manner described in this section. When appropriate, a participant shall have two separate accounts: an employer contribution account and an employee contribution account. The maintenance of individual accounts is only for accounting purposes and the segregation of the assets of the trust fund to each account shall not be required. Distribution and withdrawals made from an account shall be charged to the account as of the date paid. 
(b)  Account adjustments. The accounts of the participants, former participants or of a participant's beneficiary shall be adjusted in accordance with the following. The income for the trust fund for each year shall be allocated to the account participants, former participants and beneficiaries whose unpaid balances in their account on the last day of the year are in proportion to the balances in such accounts at the beginning of the year but, after first reducing each such account balance by any distribution from the account during the year. The valuation shall be based on the fair market value of the trust fund on the valuation date. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-07; Code 1994, § 4-09-07; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-8-8. - Computation of benefit distributions. 
(a)  Retirement or disability . If a participant's employment with the city is terminated at or after the participant attains 65 years of age or if the participant's employment is terminated at an earlier age because of disability, the participant shall be vested in and entitled to receive the entire amount of contributions in each of the participant's accounts. The entire amount in a participant's account at termination of employment shall include any city contributions. 
(b)  Death . In the event of a participant's death, the beneficiary shall be vested in and paid the entire amount of the participant's accounts. 
(c)  Termination for other reasons . If a participant's employment with the city is terminated before 65 years of age for any reason other than disability or death, the participant shall be entitled to: 
(1)  The entire amount credited to the participant's employee contribution account. 
(2)  The participant shall be vested in and entitled to receive an amount equal to a percentage of the value of the participant's employer contribution account, if any. Such percentage is to be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Years of Service Vesting Percentage Less than 1 0% 1 25% 2 50% 3 75% 4 100%  
(d)  Normal participant retirement age . 
(1)  A participant attains normal retirement age under the plan when the participant attains the age of 65 years. 
(2)  The plan designates attainment of age 55 years for sworn police officers and career firefighters. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-08; Code 1994, § 4-09-08; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 1195, § 4-09-08, 12-16-2014; Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 20-8-9. - Payment of benefits. 
(a)  Upon a participant's entitlement to payment of benefits, the participant shall file with the trustee a written election as to such form of distribution and subject to what conditions the participant wishes to distribute the amounts due from the participant's accounts in one of the following methods: 
(1)  A lump sum distribution. 
(2)  A monthly payment distribution. 
(b)  The amount which a participant, former participant or beneficiary is entitled to receive at any time and from time to time may be paid in cash or securities or any combination thereof, provided no discrimination in value results therefrom. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-09; Code 1994, § 4-09-09; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-8-10. - Recognized service. 
    A participant's eligibility for benefits under the plan shall be based on the participant's period of service determined in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Service prior to adoption of the plan. For a participant as of the effective date who has been an employee of the city, the last period of continuous employment with the city prior to the adoption date, shall be counted as service, including such periods of authorized leaves of absence which did not break continuity of employment. A partial year of the participant's last period of continuous employment shall be deemed one full year of service as of the adoption date. 
(2)  Service for employees participating from and after the effective date. A participant shall acquire a year's service for each year in which the participant has 1,000 or more hours of employment, except that for employees who become participants on or after the effective date, only the last continuous period of employment prior to the effective date shall be counted. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-10; Code 1994, § 4-09-10; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-8-11. - Amendments. 
    The city reserves the right to make from time to time any amendments to this plan which do not cause any part of the trust fund to be used for or diverted to any purpose other than the exclusive benefit of the participant, former participants or their beneficiaries; provided, however, that the employer may make any amendment it determines necessary and desirable with or without retroactive effect, to comply with ERISA. XI. The city is authorized to execute a trust agreement with the trustee to establish the trust fund. The city may change trustees by amending the trust instrument at any time. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-11; Code 1994, § 4-09-11; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Sec. 20-8-12. - Nonguarantee of employment. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as a contract of employment between the city and any employee or as a right of any employee to be continued in the employment of the city, or as a limitation of the right of the city to discharge its employees with or without cause. In the event of a permanent discontinuance of contributions to the plan by the city, the accounts of all participants shall be as of the date of discontinuance 100 percent vested and nonforfeitable. 
(Code 1979, § 16-09-12; Code 1994, § 4-09-10; Ord. No. 737, § 1, 1988) 
Chapter 22 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE 1. - LODGING AND RESTAURANT TAX 

Sec. 22-1-1. - Lodging and restaurant tax imposed; voluntary payment of tax by alcohol beverage licensees. 
    In addition to the tax imposed under section 22-1-2, there is hereby imposed a city tax of one percent upon the gross receipts of retailers on the leasing or renting of hotel, motel or tourist court accommodations within the city for a period of less than 30 consecutive days or one month, and upon the gross receipts of a restaurant from any sales of prepared food or beverages, which are subject to state sales taxes; provided, however, that such tax shall be imposed upon the gross receipts from all sales of alcoholic beverages where purchased from a licensee holding a class A, B, C, D and D-1 beer or liquor license. For purposes of this section, the term "restaurant" means any place where food is prepared and intended for individual portion service for consumption on or off the premises, and the term "prepared" includes heating prepackaged food. Accommodations, food and beverages are all, each, or in any combination thereof, subject to the tax under this section, if all items in any category which are taxable under the state law are taxable, except as otherwise provided in this section. The tax imposed under this section is in addition to state sales taxes on rental accommodations and restaurant sales. All proceeds from this tax shall be deposited in the city visitors' promotion capital construction fund and shall be spent only as provided in section 22-1-3. 
(Code 1994, § 3-02-01; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 833, 5-2-1995; Ord. No. 960, § 1, 5-20-2003; Ord. No. 1262, § (2), 6-6-2017, eff. 8-1-2017) 
State Law reference- Lodging and restaurant tax authorized, N.D.C.C. § 40-57.3-01.1. 
Sec. 22-1-2. - City lodging tax imposed; amount; disposition. 
    There is hereby imposed a city tax, not to exceed two percent, upon the gross receipts of retailers on the leasing or renting of hotel, motel, or tourist court accommodations within the city for periods of less than 30 consecutive calendar days or one month. The tax imposed by this section shall be in addition to the state sales tax on rental accommodations provided in N.D.C.C. ch. 57-39.2. All proceeds from the tax upon gross receipts described in this section shall be deposited in the city visitors' promotion fund. Moneys deposited in the city visitor's promotion fund shall be spent only as provided in section 22-1-3. 
(Code 1994, § 3-02-01.1; Ord. No. 960, § 2, 5-20-2003) 
State Law reference- Lodging authorized, N.D.C.C. § 40-57.3-01. 
Sec. 22-1-3. - City visitor's promotion fund and city visitor's capital construction fund established; purpose. 
(a)  There is created a city visitor's promotion fund, and all moneys collected under section 22-1-2 must be used generally to promote, encourage, and attract visitors to come to the city and to use the travel and tourism facilities within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(b)  There is created a city visitors' capital construction fund, and all moneys collected under section 22-1-1 shall be deposited in said fund and shall be used generally for the purchase, equipping, improving, construction, maintenance, repair and acquisition of buildings or property consistent with visitor attraction or promotion. 
(Code 1994, § 3-02-02; Ord. No. 726, § 2, 1987; Ord. No. 960, § 3, 5-20-2003) 
State Law reference- Visitor's promotion fund, N.D.C.C. § 40-57.3-02. 
Sec. 22-1-4. - Visitors' committee established. 
    The members of the visitors' committee, established and appointed pursuant to the resolution of the board of city commissioners of the city on June 2, 1981, shall serve as an advisory committee to the city commission in administering the proceeds of the tax imposed by this article. Such committee consists of five members appointed by the city commission to serve for a term of four years without compensation, except for reimbursement for necessary expenses. Vacancies on the committee are filled by appointment by the city commission. The committee elects a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members to serve for a term of two years. 
(Code 1994, § 3-021-03; Ord. No. 726, § 3, 1987; Ord. No. 960, § 4, 5-20-2003) 
State Law reference- Visitor's committee, N.D.C.C. § 40-57.3-02. 
Sec. 22-1-5. - Budget, contracts, bonds and capital construction. 
    The city commission shall annually set the budget, if any, under which the committee shall operate and may contract with any person, firm, association or corporation to carry out the purposes of the city visitors' promotion capital construction fund created under section 22-1-3(b). The city commission may from time to time irrevocably dedicate any portion of revenues from the tax authorized under this chapter and may authorize and issue bonds or other evidences to be paid by those revenues for any purpose that monies in the city visitors' promotion capital construction fund may be used. The proceeds from the tax imposed under this chapter may be used only for payment of bonds issued under this section or capital construction, maintenance, and repair or acquisition of property consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1282, 2-20-2018) 
ARTICLE 2. - SALES AND USE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local sales and use taxes, N.D.C.C. §§ 40-05.1-06(16), 57-01-02.1. 

Sec. 22-2-1. - Definitions. 
    Where a term is used in this article, the meaning of that term as defined in N.D.C.C. chs. 57-39.2 and 57-40.2, if that term is so defined, and as those chapters may be amended from time to time, is adopted by reference and incorporated in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 17-01-01; Code 1994, § 3-03-01; Ord. No. 775, 1991) 
Sec. 22-2-2. - Sales tax imposed. 
(a)  There is imposed a tax of one percent upon the gross receipts of retailers from all sales at retail, including the leasing and renting of tangible personal property, within the corporate limits of the city, of those items subject to taxation under N.D.C.C. ch. 57-39.2. 
(b)  There is imposed an additional tax of three-fourths percent upon the gross receipts of retailers from all sales at retail, including the leasing and renting of tangible personal property, within the corporate limits of the city, of those items subject to taxation under N.D.C.C. ch. 57-39.2, until such time as bonds for the construction of certain Park District improvements, subject of a June 9, 2015 special election are paid in full, at which time the additional tax of three-fourths percent shall terminate. 
(Ord. No. 1210, 6-30-2015; Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 22-2-3. - Sales tax on alcoholic beverages and tobacco products. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the sales taxes imposed by this article apply to the gross receipts of retailers from all sales at retail of alcoholic beverages as defined in N.D.C.C. § 5-01-01, whether mixed or unmixed at the time of sale or thereafter, and whether sold for consumption on the premises or through off-sale outlets for consumption off the premises, and cigarettes, cigars and other tobacco products including electronic cigarettes, provided that gross receipts from the sale thereof shall mean and include any other taxes imposed on such merchandise or its use or on the retail or other sale thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, there is imposed a tax of one percent on the gross receipts of retailers from all sales at retail of alcoholic beverages subject to tax under N.D.C.C. ch. 57-39.2, which is in lieu of and not in addition to any other tax imposed by this chapter. 
Sec. 22-2-4. - Sales tax on sales through vending machines. 
    Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property costing sixteen cents or more sold through a coin-operated vending machine shall be subject to the sales tax imposed by this article, and gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property costing fifteen cents or less sold through a coin-operated vending machine shall be specifically exempted from the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 22-2-5. - Use tax on alcoholic beverages and tobacco products. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the use taxes imposed by this article apply to the storage, use or consumption in this city of alcoholic beverages as defined in N.D.C.C. § 5-01-01, whether mixed or unmixed at the time of sale or thereafter, and whether sold for consumption on the premises or through off-sale outlets for consumption off the premises, and cigarettes, cigars and other tobacco products including electronic cigarettes, provided that gross receipts from the sale thereof shall mean and include any other taxes imposed on such merchandise or its use or on the retail or other sale thereof. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, there is imposed a tax of one percent on the storage, use or consumption in this city of alcoholic beverages, which is in lieu of and not in addition to any other tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 17-01-02; Code 1994, § 3-03-02; Ord. No. 775, 1991) 
Sec. 22-2-6. - Use tax imposed. 
    An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or consumption in this city of tangible personal property that is subject to taxation under N.D.C.C. ch. 57-40.2 at the rate of one percent of the fair market value of such property at the time it was brought into this city. 
(Code 1979, § 17-01-06; Code 1994, § 3-03-06; Ord. No. 775, 1991) 
Sec. 22-2-7. - Dedication of tax proceeds. 
(a)  All revenues raised and collected under this article, less administrative expenses, shall be dedicated only to reducing property taxes and municipal debt, street, water and sewer system improvements, and for job and economic development. All revenues shall be maintained in a fund, to be known as the sales tax fund, separate and apart from all other funds, except as provided by this article. 
(b)  The board of city commissioners shall determine the amount by which property tax levies will be reduced each year prior to adoption of the city's budget. An amount equivalent to the estimated property tax revenue lost due to the property tax reduction may thereafter be transferred from the sales tax fund to the general fund. 
(c)  Additional funds may be transferred to appropriate debt reduction, street, water and sewer system improvements, job and economic development funds, and as directed by the Board. 
(d)  Remaining revenues and any income therefrom shall accumulate in the sales tax fund until expended by the board as permitted by this article. 
Chapter 24 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic, N.D.C.C. title 39. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1-1. - Adoption of code. 
    The provisions of N.D.C.C. title 39, except those administrative provisions reserved to the state and those offenses which have penalties prescribed in excess of the city's Class B misdemeanor jurisdiction, including all subsequent amendments thereto, of which not less than one copy has been and is now on file at the city, is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the jurisdictional limits of the city. The provisions of N.D.C.C. title 39 shall apply to all provisions in this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 20-01-01) 
Sec. 24-1-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which another criminal penalty is not provided specifically is guilty of an infraction. As used in this section, the term "another criminal penalty" includes provision for payment of a fixed fee for violating another section in this chapter, but does not include any other administrative sanction which may be imposed. 
(b)  Except for article 7 of this chapter or as provided by state law, the fine for violating this chapter shall be $50.00 unless another amount for a specific infraction is established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(c)  The fine for violating article 7 of this chapter is $10.00 unless another amount for a specific infraction is established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, §§ 20-01-07, 20-20-08; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991; Ord. No. 933, § 1, 12-6-2001; Ord. No. 1039, 6-13-2008; Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1283, § (1), 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 24-1-3. - Use of coasters, roller skates, and similar devices restricted. 
    A person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, skate board, toy vehicles, or similar device, may not go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, such person must be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-10-13; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
ARTICLE 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 24-2-1. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It is the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws. 
(b)  Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
Sec. 24-2-2. - Impoundment of vehicle number plates. 
    The municipal judge is authorized to order impoundment of motor vehicle number plates in the manner provided in N.D.C.C. § 39-06-42(5). 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-03-01; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
State Law reference- Authority to so provide, N.D.C.C. § 36-06-43(5). 
Sec. 24-2-3. - Duty of police department. 
    It is the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the city engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the department by this article and the traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-02-01; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-4. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The police department shall keep a record of all traffic citations. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-02-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-5. - Investigation of accidents. 
    It is the duty of the police department to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-02-03; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-6. - Traffic accident studies. 
    Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police department shall cooperate with the city engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-02-04; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-7. - Traffic accident reports. 
    The police department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports must be available for the use and information of the city engineer. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-02-05; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-8. - Authority to place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices. 
    The city engineer, or any person authorized by the governing body, shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of the ordinances, and may place and maintain such additional traffic control devices as deemed necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under the traffic ordinances of this city or under state law. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-04-01; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-9. - Speed limitations. 
    The city engineer or authorized person may designate and post special areas of highways where lower speed limits than those provided for in state law shall apply. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-05-03; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
State Law reference- Local alteration of speed limits, N.D.C.C. § 39-09-03. 
Sec. 24-2-10. - Regulations of speed by traffic signals. 
    The city engineer or authorized person may regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-05-07; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-11. - Turns restricted. 
(a)  Authority to place device altering normal course for turns. The city engineer or other authorized person may place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as otherwise prescribed by law. 
(b)  Authority to place restricted turn signs. The city engineer or other authorized person may determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same must be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(c)  Turning signs; obedience required. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, a driver of a vehicle may not disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(d)  Other restrictions. The city engineer may cause official traffic control devices to be placed and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in N.D.C.C. § 39-10-35 to be traveled by turning vehicles, and when such devices are so placed, no driver of a vehicle may turn at an intersection other than as directed and required by such devices. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, §§ 20-06-01-20-06-04; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-12. - Authority to sign one-way streets and alleys. 
    The city engineer or authorized person may designate any highway, roadway, street, alley, part of any highway, roadway, street, alley, or specific lanes upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed only in one direction at all times and shall place and maintain official traffic control devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective unless such devices are in place. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-07-01; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
State Law reference- One-way streets. N.D.C.C. § 39-10-16. 
Sec. 24-2-13. - Designation of walks, lanes, etc.; driver to stay within boundaries. 
    The city engineer, or any person authorized by the governing body, shall, as deemed necessary: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as directed by the governing body. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians or as directed by the governing body. 
(3)  Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. Where such traffic lanes have been marked, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or performing other lawful traffic movements. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-04-06; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-2-14. - Use of street by certain vehicles restricted. 
(a)  The city engineer or authorized person may determine and designate those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles, or other nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(b)  When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, a person may not disobey the restrictions stated on such signs. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-18-07; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
ARTICLE 3. - GENERAL RULES OF VEHICLE OPERATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- General rules of the road, N.D.C.C. ch. 39-10. 

Sec. 24-3-1. - Driving on boulevard or private property prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any driver of a motor vehicle to: 
(1)  Drive on or across a boulevard, lawn or any private property except where authorized or permitted or with the consent of the owner. 
(2)  Drive off of a street or highway and across a private driveway or private or public lot to another street or highway or another point on the same street or highway so as to avoid a traffic signal or sign or to take a shortcut from one street or highway to another. 
(Code 1994, § 20-09-36) 
Sec. 24-3-2. - Motorized scooters. 
(a)  A person may operate a motorized scooter on the public sidewalks within the city, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A motorized scooter may not be operated on a public street, and an operator must dismount and push a motorized scooter on a street within a crosswalk. A motorized scooter may not be operated within the Central Business District (which includes the blocks from Main Street North to 2nd Street NW and the blocks between 6th Avenue NW and 6th Avenue NE). 
(2)  An operator of a motorized scooter must be at least 12 years of age. An operator of an electric scooter must be at least ten years of age. 
(3)  An operator of a motorized scooter under 18 years of age must wear a helmet. 
(4)  No passengers shall be allowed on a motorized scooter. 
(5)  Motorized scooters shall be operated only during the hours between sun-up and sunset. 
(6)  Operators of motorized scooters shall, in all situations, yield the right-of-way to pedestrians. 
(7)  Operators of motorized or electric scooters who do not have a valid driver's license must have a certificate issued by an authorized motorized scooter dealer which confirms the operator's completion of a written safety exam in their possession at the time of operation. The chief of police shall provide a copy of the written exam to each authorized dealer and shall establish a monitoring system to ensure the dealer's compliance with testing requirements. 
(8)  Operators of motorized or electric scooters who do have a valid driver's license must have a written authorization to operate the same, signed by a parent or legal guardian, in their possession at the time of operation of a motorized or electric scooter. 
(9)  All motorized scooters operated on the public sidewalks must be equipped with factory supplied stock mufflers, exhaust systems and braking systems. 
(10)  For the purposes of this section, the term "public sidewalks" does not include the park district's multi-use trail system, unless signs have been posted permitting the use of motorized or electric scooters. 
(b)  Any person who violates any provision of subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal traffic offense, which shall be processed by the municipal court, and shall be assessed a fine of $100.00. 
(Code 1994, § 20-12-12; Ord. No. 980, § 1, 8-17-2004) 
Sec. 24-3-3. - Snow emergency routes. 
    The streets or portions of the streets within the city which are to be used as snow emergency routes shall be as so designated by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 9-05-13; Code 1994, § 20-16-01) 
Sec. 24-3-4. - Snow emergency route signs. 
    Each snow emergency route is to be posted with snow emergency route signs at intervals not exceeding 400 feet or at least one sign between every two intersecting streets with the wording: "Snow Emergency Route. Tow Away Zone." These signs shall be distinctive and uniform in appearance and shall be plainly readable to a person traveling on the street or highway. 
(Code 1979, § 9-05-09; Code 1994, § 20-16-02) 
Sec. 24-3-5. - Declaration of snow emergency. 
(a)  When the city engineer or designate determines, on the basis of existing weather conditions or a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau, that a snow emergency declaration is necessary, it must be broadcast by local radio and television stations and announced in the official newspaper when feasible. At the time the city engineer shall make any declaration pursuant to this article, he shall inform the chief of police and the director of public works. 
(b)  The declaration must include a list of the snow emergency routes on which a parking prohibition is in effect, unless the declaration is in effect for all designated snow emergency routes, in which case the declaration shall so state. The city engineer shall make or cause to be made a record of each time and date when any declaration to the public is announced in accordance with this section. 
(c)  The snow emergency declaration and parking prohibition are effective until terminated or modified by the city engineer by public announcement, except that any street area which has been substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded from the parking prohibition. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, a parking prohibition shall automatically go into effect on any part of any snow emergency route on which there has been an accumulation of snow or ice of three inches or more between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. of any day. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-05-01, 9-05-06, 9-05-07; Code 1994, § 20-16-03) 
Sec. 24-3-6. - Parking may be prohibited on streets during snow emergency. 
(a)  Whenever the city engineer or designate determines, on the basis of existing weather conditions or a forecast by the U.S. Weather Bureau, that weather and street conditions will make it necessary that vehicular traffic be expedited and/or that parking on city streets be prohibited or restricted for snow removal and other purposes, the city engineer shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or all of city streets as necessary by declaring a parking prohibition in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(b)  While the parking prohibition is in effect, no person shall stop, park or allow to remain parked, any vehicle on any street to which such prohibition applies. 
(c)  The parking prohibition shall remain in effect until terminated or modified by the public announcement of the city engineer, except that any street area which has become substantially cleared of snow and ice from curb to median line for the length of an entire block shall be automatically excluded therefrom. 
(Code 1979, § 9-05-02; Code 1994, § 20-16-04) 
Sec. 24-3-7. - Parking during snow emergency prohibited. 
(a)  Following the declaration of a snow emergency and/or parking prohibition it is illegal to stop, park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any affected routes. 
(b)  When a vehicle stalls on a snow emergency route or street designated by the city engineer pursuant to section 24-3-6 during a parking prohibition, the operator has half of an hour to secure the assistance needed to remove the stalled vehicle. It is no defense to a prosecution for a violation under this section that the vehicle became stalled wholly or partly because the vehicle was not equipped with effective tire chains or snow tires, that the motor fuel was exhausted or that the battery became inoperative. 
(c)  Any vehicle parked, stopped or abandoned in violation of this article may be impounded by the police department in accordance with the procedures of section 24-7-2. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law. 
(e)  In prosecuting parking violations of this article, proof that the vehicle listed in the complaint was parked in violation of this article and that the defendant was the registered owner of the vehicle gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the defendant was the person who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this article. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-05-01, 9-05-04, 9-05-05, 9-05-10, 9-05-12; Code 1994, § 20-16-05) 
ARTICLE 4. - BICYCLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Bicycles, N.D.C.C. ch. 39-10.1. 

Sec. 24-4-1. - Obedience to traffic control devices required for bicycles. 
(a)  Any person operating a bicycle must obey the instructions of official traffic control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle may disobey the direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-12-08; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-4-2. - Riding bicycles on sidewalks. 
(a)  No person may ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business district. 
(b)  The chief of police or authorized person may erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person, and, when such signs are in place, no person may disobey the same. 
(c)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and must give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-12-09; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-4-3. - Parking of bicycles. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-12-10; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
ARTICLE 5. - OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1283, § (2), adopted March 20, 2018, repealed the former Art. 5, §§ 24-5-1, 24-5-2. Section (3) of said ordinance enacted a new Art. 5 as set out herein. The former Art. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1979, §§ 9-01-01, 9-07-02, 9-07-03; Code 1994, §§ 20-15-05, 20-15-06; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991; Ord. No. 1166, adopted Nov. 29, 2013; Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), adopted August 4, 2015. 

Sec. 24-5-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires: 
(1)  "Off-highway vehicle" , "OHV" means any motorized vehicle not designed for use on a highway and capable of cross-country travel on land, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain. 
(2)  "Class III off-highway vehicle" weighs less than 8,000 pounds (3628.74 kilograms); travels on tracks, or four or more tires; has a seat; has a wheel for steering control; and is designated for or capable of cross-country on or over land, water, sand, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain, but does not include a vehicle registered by the state under N.D.C.C. chapter 39-04 or 39-24. 
(3)  "Operate" means to ride in or on and control the operation of an off-highway vehicle. 
(4)  "Operator" means an individual who operates or is in actual physical control of an off-highway vehicle. 
(5)  "Owner" means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to an off-highway vehicle and entitled to its use or possession. 
(6)  "Register" means the act of assigning a registration number to an off-highway vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § (3), 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 24-5-2. - Off-highway vehicle registration. 
(a)  Except as provided in this chapter, an individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle on city streets unless it has been registered by the state. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § (3), 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 24-5-3. - Use of streets by off-highway vehicles restricted. 
    No person shall operate an off-highway vehicle upon any road, street or highway in this city kept open for vehicular traffic, except: 
(1)  Those vehicles permitted under article 5. 
(2)  Any special event as authorized by the chief of police. 
(3)  In crossing a street as provided in N.D.C.C. § 39-29-10. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § (3), 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 24-5-4. - Operation of off-highway vehicles. 
(a)  Only class III off-highway vehicles with a minimum width of 50 inches meeting the requirements of this chapter may be operated on city streets. No other class of OHVs are allowed to operate upon any road, street or highway in this city kept open for vehicular traffic. 
(b)  An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle on the roadway, shoulder, or inside bank or slope of any road, street, or highway except as provided in this chapter. Except in emergencies, an individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle within the right-of-way of any controlled-access highway. An individual may operate a registered off-highway vehicle on a gravel, dirt, or loose surface roadway. An individual may operate a registered off-highway vehicle on a paved highway designated and posted at a speed not exceeding 55 miles (88.51 kilometers) per hour. A licensed driver over 16 years of age may operate a registered class III off-highway vehicle on a paved highway designated and posted at a speed not exceeding 65 miles (104.61 kilometers) per hour. An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle on a paved highway if the vehicle is unable to attain a speed, on a paved level surface, of at least 25 miles per hour. 
(c)  The operator of an off-highway vehicle may make a direct crossing of a street only if: 
(1)  The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90 degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing; 
(2)  The off-highway vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the highway; 
(3)  The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard. 
(d)  An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle in the following ways, which are declared to be unsafe and a public nuisance: 
(1)  In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of another or to cause injury or damage to another person or the property of another person. (B misdemeanor) 
(2)  While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance. (B misdemeanor) 
(3)  Without a manufacturer-installed or equivalent muffler in good working order and connected to the off-highway vehicle's exhaust system. 
(4)  On any private land where the private land is posted prohibiting trespassing. The name and address of the person posting the land and the date of posting must appear on each sign in legible characters. The posted signs must be readable from outside the land and be placed conspicuously at a distance of not more than 880 yards (804.68 meters) apart. Land entirely enclosed by a fence or other enclosure is sufficiently posted by posting of these signs at or on all gates through the fence or enclosure. (B misdemeanor) 
(e)  An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle without having in possession a valid driver's license. 
(f)  When an off-highway vehicle is operated within the right-of-way of any road, street, or highway, headlamps and tail lamps must always be on. 
(g)  An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle within the right-of-way of any highway while towing a trailer, unless the trailer being towed is connected to the off-highway vehicle by a secure hitch. 
(h)  An individual under the age of 18 years may not operate, ride, or otherwise be propelled on an off-highway vehicle unless the person wears a safety helmet meeting United States Department of Transportation standards. 
(i)  An operator of an off-highway vehicle may not carry a passenger while operating the vehicle unless the off-highway vehicle is equipped and recommended by the manufacturer to carry a passenger and the passenger is carried as recommended by the manufacturer. 
(j)  An individual may not operate and an owner may not allow the operation of an off highway vehicle in any city right-of-way without having in effect a valid insurance policy for the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § (3), 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 24-5-5. - Equipment. 
(a)  To operate a class III off-highway vehicle on city streets, the off-highway vehicle must be equipped with all of the following; 
  one mirror on the driver side and one mirror on the passenger side, 
  a horn, 
  a speedometer, 
  two tail/brake lights, 
  two headlights, 
  a motor of at least 550 cubic centimeters, 
  a factory installed roll cage, 
  turn signals on the front and rear of the vehicle, 
  factory installed suspension, 
  a metal license plate centered on the rear of the vehicle, with a license plate light. 
(b)  Both headlights and taillights must be on at all times while the vehicle is in operation. No auxiliary lights may be turned on while the vehicle is in operation. 
(c)  If the vehicle is being operated with tracks, they must be made of rubber or similar material. No metal can come in contact with the street surface while the vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § (3), 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 24-5-6. - Operation by persons under age 16. 
(a)  An individual must be age 16 or over and have in their possession a valid driver's license to operate an OHV in any city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § (3), 3-20-2018) 
ARTICLE 6. - SNOWMOBILES AND GOLF CARTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1283, § (2), adopted March 20, 2018, repealed the former Art. 6, §§ 24-6-1, 24-6-2. Section (3) of said ordinance enacted a new Art. 6 as set out herein. The former Art. 6 pertained to snowmobiles and derived from Code 1979, §§ 9-01-01, 9-07-02, 9-07-03; Code 1994, §§ 20-13-03, 20-13-04; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 733, § 1, 1988; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991. 
State Law reference- Snowmobiles, N.D.C.C. chs. 39-24, 39-24.1. 

Sec. 24-6-1. - Use of streets by snowmobiles restricted. 
    No person shall operate a snowmobile upon any road, street or highway in this city kept open for vehicular traffic, except: 
(1)  During a period of emergency when travel by other vehicles is not possible. 
(2)  For a special snowmobile event of limited duration when conducted on a pre-arranged schedule under permits from the board of city commissioners. 
(3)  In crossing a street as provided in N.D.C.C. § 39-24-09. 
(4)  On streets or roadways not maintained for winter vehicular travel. 
(5)  As needed by emergency services approved by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § (3), 3-20-2018) 
Sec. 24-6-2. - [Golf carts prohibited on city streets and rights-of-way.] 
    It is unlawful for an individual to operate, or for an owner to allow the operation of, a golf cart on city streets and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1283, § (3), 3-20-2018) 
ARTICLE 7. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, N.D.C.C. § 39-10-47 et seq. 

Sec. 24-7-1. - Officer authorized to remove illegally stopped vehicles. 
(a)  Officers of the police department may immediately remove or direct the removal of a vehicle to a garage or other place of safety when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  A vehicle is left unattended upon any street, highway, bridge, viaduct or causeway, or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  A report has been made that such vehicle has been stolen or taken without the consent of its owner. 
(3)  A vehicle upon a street or highway is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person in charge of such vehicle are by reason of physical injury or other incapacity unable to provide for its custody or removal. 
(4)  The person driving or in control of such vehicle is arrested for an alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay. 
(5)  A vehicle is parked so as to block any driveway, driveway apron or alley. 
(6)  A vehicle is parked on a posted snow emergency route during a snow emergency. 
(7)  A vehicle is parked on any street designated and posted as a tow-away zone. 
(8)  A vehicle is so parked as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or to efficient snow removal operations. 
(9)  A vehicle blocks or restricts access to any fire hydrant. 
(10)  Any wrecked, partially dismantled or junked vehicle is left or abandoned on a street, highway or municipal parking lot. 
(11)  A vehicle is abandoned on any street, highway, municipal or other public parking lot. 
(12)  A vehicle is parked upon a lawn or boulevard within the public right-of-way or upon a sidewalk, flood protective works, public ground or place. 
(b)  Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street as authorized in this section, the registered owner of the vehicle, if the owner can be identified and located through reasonable means, must be served as soon as practicable, personally or by leaving at his residence with a member of the household, 14 years of age or older, or by mailing, by first class mail, to his mailing address as shown by the records of the department, written notice that a vehicle registered to him has been impounded, together with the description of the vehicle, the reason for the impoundment and place found, and the place to which the vehicle has been removed. Such notice shall also state that, upon written demand made and filed in the municipal court within 48 hours, exclusive of weekends and holidays, of receipt of the notice, the owner of the impounded vehicle shall be entitled to a hearing before the municipal judge. Upon filing of a demand, a hearing shall be scheduled within ten days, exclusive of weekends and holidays, from filing of the demand. The municipal judge may order that all costs and fees be refunded upon finding that the vehicle was not lawfully impounded. 
(c)  Any vehicle removed pursuant to the provisions of this section must be held until the cost and expense of such removal and storage are paid unless the municipal judge finds, following a hearing, that the vehicle was not lawfully impounded. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-03; Code 1994, § 20-14-26; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-2. - Parking citations; presumption. 
(a)  Whenever any vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of any provision of this article, a police officer or other authorized police department employee shall obtain its license number and other information which may identify its owner or user and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a traffic citation on the form provided by the parking authority, which shall require the driver to answer to the charge or pay the required fee within the time period and in the manner established by the parking authority or chief of police and specified in the citation. 
(b)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this article concerning the parking or standing of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or standing in violation of any provision of this article, together with the proof that the defendant named in the complaint or citation was, at the time of the violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute prima facie proof that the defendant was the person who lawfully left or parked the vehicle at the place where the violation occurred. The registered owner, however, may be excused from a violation if the owner provides the citing authority with the name and address of the person operating the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(c)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this article concerning the parking or standing of a vehicle, proof that the vehicle involved has not been moved a distance of at least one block during the period of time established and posted in accordance with this article or in violation of consecutive parking restrictions, as the case may be, shall constitute prima facie proof that the vehicle has remained stationary for that period of time. 
(Code 1994, § 20-14-27) 
Sec. 24-7-3. - Failure to obey parking citation. 
    Any person who fails to answer to a parking citation or to pay the fee specified within the time period provided on the citation, not to exceed 30 days, is guilty of an infraction. Failure to answer to a parking citation within the time provided on the citation is an admission of the commission of the parking violation charged. 
(Code 1994, § 20-14-31; Ord. No. 1075, 3-26-2010) 
Sec. 24-7-4. - Interference with parking control markings. 
    Any person, other than a police officer or authorized police department employee, who willfully alters, removes or in any way interferes with chalk or other marks placed on any motor vehicle by a police officer or authorized police department employee, or who willfully alters, removes or destroys evidence or notice of a violation, is guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1994, § 20-14-29) 
Sec. 24-7-5. - Time limit parking zones. 
(a)  The city engineer is authorized, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to prohibit, regulate or limit stopping, standing or parking of vehicles at all times or during specified hours or for longer than a specified period of time. 
(b)  It is the duty of the city engineer to erect and maintain official traffic control devices prohibiting, regulating or limiting stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor vehicle in violation of any restrictions designated and posted pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-01; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-6. - Reserved parking areas; designation of public carrier stops and stands. 
(a)  The city engineer or authorized person may establish from time to time areas for loading and unloading, public carrier stops and stands, emergency parking, no parking, police and fire use on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine or as the governing body may specifically designate to be of greatest benefit and convenience to the public and to promote the best use of the streets for traffic to pedestrians and designate the same by appropriate signs. 
(b)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person may park, leave standing, either attended or unattended, any motor vehicle on street areas which are reserved for the aforementioned uses. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-01-01, 9-03-05; Code 1994, § 20-14-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-7. - Angle parking. 
    The city engineer, or other person authorized by the governing body, may mark or sign streets upon which angle parking will be permitted. Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person may park or stand a vehicle other than with the front of the vehicle at an angle to the curb or edge of the road, indicated by such signs or markings. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-03; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 1066, 12-15-2009) 
Sec. 24-7-8. - Parking prohibited at all times. 
    When signs are erected giving notice that parking is prohibited at all times, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor vehicle, either attended or unattended. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-07; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-9. - Stopping or parking; certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person may park a vehicle upon any roadway, public right-of-way, boulevard or public parking lot for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Greasing, oiling, servicing, repairing or commercially washing the vehicle, except when repairing such vehicle is necessitated by an emergency. 
(3)  Displaying from such vehicle any merchandise or items for sale. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-08; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-10. - Stopping or parking in congested or hazardous places; schools, community center and other public parking areas. 
(a)  The city engineer or other authorized person is authorized to determine and designate, by proper signs, places in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic, particularly those areas near and adjacent to schools, community center and other public facilities, where the pattern of parking may interfere with access by fire, police and other emergency vehicles. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this section, a person may not stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-09; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991; Ord. No. 905, § 1, 11-30-1999) 
Sec. 24-7-11. - Stopping or parking in alleys. 
    A person may not park or leave standing any vehicle within an alley, including alleys within commercial and industrial districts, except for the limited purpose of loading and unloading freight in compliance with the provisions of section 24-7-26. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-10; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-12. - Parking adjacent to schools and other facilities; permit parking. 
(a)  The city engineer or authorized person may erect signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school or other public property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  The public school district and park district may erect signs indicating no parking except by permit upon any lot owned by the school district or park district and the city may enforce such parking prohibitions, provided that the school district or park district reimburses the city for its costs. 
(c)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property or no parking, except by permit, upon any lot owned by the school district or park district as authorized in this article, a person or a person whose vehicle does not display a proper and current permit may not park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-11; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991; Ord. No. 905, § 2, 11-30-1999) 
Sec. 24-7-13. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city engineer or authorized person may erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, a person may not park a vehicle upon any street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-12; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-14. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
    The city engineer or authorized person may erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and, when such signs are in place, a person may not stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-13; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-15. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
    In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, a person may not stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city engineer is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-14; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-16. - Assessment of costs for designation of specific parking zones. 
    Upon the request of a property owner, and with the approval of the city engineer, the board of city commissioners may allow the designation of specific parking zones. If the designated parking zone is determined to benefit the property owner and not the general motoring public, the property owner must be assessed either a share of or the entire cost of any signs, markings or traffic control devices necessary to designate the requested parking zone. 
(Code 1994, § 20-14-15) 
Sec. 24-7-17. - Parking of certain vehicles and unattached trailers restricted. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public street in a residential district, mobile home park or trailer court in the city between sunset and sunrise any attended or unattended truck or other motor vehicle licensed for a gross weight in excess of 4,000 pounds. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public street in a residential district, mobile home park or trailer court in the city any semitrailer or full trailer unless attached to a tractor or tractor chassis and said parking shall be only for the limited purpose of loading and unloading merchandise or freight. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any street in the city, including any streets within mobile home parks or trailer courts, any vehicle which is unlicensed or for which the registration has expired. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any street in the city, including any streets within mobile home parks or trailer courts, any bus, except while actually engaged in the loading and unloading of passengers. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any trailer, including boat trailers, bumper-pull travel trailers, pull-type campers and fifth wheelers, on any street or alley within any residential district, mobile home park or trailer court in the city. 
(f)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any pickup camper, mini-home, house car or motor home which exceeds a width of eight feet or a length of 20 feet on any street or alley within any residential district, mobile home park or trailer court in the city. 
(g)  A person may park or leave standing any trailer or vehicle described in subsections (e) and (f) of this section on a street for the limited purpose of loading and unloading, provided that the period of loading and unloading does not exceed 12 hours. For the time from May 15th to September 15th a trailer or vehicle may be parked on a street for a period not to exceed 24 hours. 
(h)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall pay a fine of $10.00, and any police officer is authorized to impound and remove any vehicle in violation of this section in accordance with the provisions of section 24-7-2. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-23; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 753, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991; Ord. No. 1212, 7-21-2015; Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-7-18. - Restrictions on consecutive parking. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public street or highway, within any residential district, mobile home park or trailer court in this city, any vehicle or motorcycle for a period longer than 48 hours consecutively. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any public street or highway within any commercial or industrial district any vehicle or motorcycle for a period longer than 24 hours consecutively. 
(c)  Any vehicle or motorcycle left parked or standing on any public street or highway for a consecutive period longer than allowed in this section shall be considered abandoned, and any police officer is authorized to impound and remove any vehicle in violation of this section in accordance with the provisions of section 24-7-2. 
(d)  This section applies to all vehicles, including those upon which is displayed a mobility impaired identification certificate. 
(e)  No boat, motor home, bus, camper, fifth-wheel trailer or travel trailer may be parked on a public street between December 1 and March 31. The fine for violating this section is $15.00 per day. After 48 hours, the vehicle or equipment will be considered abandoned and may be towed at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1979, §§ 9-01-01, 9-01-03; Code 1994, § 20-14-24; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-7-19. - Parking in public lots by permit only. 
    When signs are erected giving notice that parking in a designated portion or all of a public lot is prohibited, except by permit only, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor vehicle in such designated area or lot not displaying a proper and current permit, either attended or unattended. 
(Code 1994, § 20-13-08.1) 
Sec. 24-7-20. - Designation of loading zones. 
    The city engineer may determine the location of passenger and freight loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this article are applicable. 
(Code 1979, § 9-03-01; Code 1994, § 20-14-16) 
Sec. 24-7-21. - Parking restricted in passenger loading zone. 
    A person may not stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed ten minutes or as otherwise indicated on such signs. 
(Code 1979, § 9-03-03; Code 1994, § 20-14-17) 
Sec. 24-7-22. - Parking restricted in freight loading zone. 
(a)  A person may not stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading or delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. The stop for loading and unloading materials may not exceed 30 minutes. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may stop temporarily at a freight loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone to load or unload materials. 
(Code 1979, § 9-03-04; Code 1994, § 20-14-18) 
Sec. 24-7-23. - Use of public carrier stops and stands restricted. 
    A person may not stop, stand or park a vehicle, other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a vehicle may temporarily stop for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1979, § 9-03-06; Code 1994, § 20-14-19) 
Sec. 24-7-24. - Blocking of streets by buses prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for the operator of any bus to operate a bus in such manner as to prevent the use of a street for purposes of travel. 
(Code 1979, § 9-04-05; Code 1994, § 20-14-20) 
Sec. 24-7-25. - Stopping, standing and parking of public carriers regulated. 
(a)  The operator of a bus may not stand or park such vehicle upon any street or at any place other than a bus stand so designated. 
(b)  The operator of a bus may not stop such vehicle upon any street or at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone so designated, except in case of an emergency. 
(c)  The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel of the vehicle not farther than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic. 
(d)  The operator of a taxicab may not stand or park a taxicab upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any such vehicle to stop within an intersection or on a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1979, § 9-04-06; Code 1994, § 20-14-21) 
Sec. 24-7-26. - Loading and unloading of freight and merchandise; double parking prohibited; time restrictions on backing of vehicles. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to double park on any highway, roadway, street or alley within the limits of the city. There shall not be any exceptions to this prohibition for the loading or discharging of passengers and/or the loading or unloading of freight or merchandise. 
(b)  A person may not stand or park any vehicle in any alley except while loading or unloading freight or merchandise. If any vehicle is left parked or standing in an alley during loading or unloading operations, it must be located so that it does not block the alley and must be located as close to the edge of the alley as possible so as to leave available at least 12 feet of the width thereof for free movement of vehicular traffic and in such position so as to not block the driveway entrance of any abutting property. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to drive any semitrailer or truck having more than two axles by backing the vehicle into a driveway unless a person, in addition to the driver, acts as flagman during all operations. The flagman shall station himself in a position so that he can warn both pedestrians and moving traffic so that the driver can back the vehicle in a safe manner. 
(d)  In the Central Business District, no vehicle may be backed into a driveway, parking lot or loading dock from a street or alley between the hours of 11:30 a.m. to 1:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day except Sundays and legal holidays. Any person violating this provision during such hours shall be assessed a fee as established by resolution. The Central Business District, for purposes of this section, is that area bounded by Eighth Avenue Northwest on the west, Mandan Avenue on the east, First Street on the north and the Burlington Northern Tracks on the south. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to block any sidewalk during the loading or unloading of freight or merchandise so as to preclude the safe pedestrian passage along the sidewalk. 
(Code 1994, § 20-14-22) 
Sec. 24-7-27. - Parking on driveway apron. 
    The driveway apron located within the public right-of-way is the legal access to the property for vehicles and may not be encroached on or blocked except by emergency vehicles or vehicles invited or authorized by the property owner or resident to park on the driveway apron or enter the property. Vehicles found to be in violation of this restriction are considered to be illegally parked and may be ticketed and towed at the discretion of the city. 
ARTICLE 8. - WEIGHT AND LOAD LIMITS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Size, width, height and load restrictions, N.D.C.C. ch. 39-12. 

Sec. 24-8-1. - Limiting use of commercial vehicles on certain roadways. 
    The city engineer or other authorized official shall designate and post those streets upon which commercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds, actual or registered gross weight, may not operate. 
(Code 1994, § 20-18-02) 
Sec. 24-8-2. - Load restrictions upon vehicles using certain roadways. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, a person may not operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the maximum indicated weight at any time upon any street or part of a street so designated, except as permitted by section 24-8-3. The board of city commissioners may designate those areas where weight limitations apply. 
(b)  Axle and tire weight limits are set forth in N.D.C.C.. 
(c)  Seasonal limits for designated streets are established by resolution of the board of city commissioners pursuant to the authorization in N.D.C.C. 
(d)  Restrictions on parking of commercial vehicles in residentially zoned areas are contained in chapter 105. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-18-03; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-8-3. - Exception for commercial vehicles. 
    A commercial vehicle may be operated on any street, notwithstanding the provisions of section 24-8-1, for the purpose of delivery or picking up materials or merchandise, and then only by traveling the shortest route to and from the vehicle's destination on a street where such vehicle would ordinarily be permitted. Such vehicles are not excepted from other weight or size restrictions imposed under this section or N.D.C.C. ch. 39-12. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-18-04; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-8-4. - Special permits for vehicles of excess size and weight. 
(a)  The city engineer or other authorized person may issue permits provided for in N.D.C.C. § 39-12-02. 
(b)  The charge for each permit is the minimum charge assessed by the state for a permit for movement of a vehicle of the same size and weight. This charge will be in addition to normal charges for any special services provided or any other costs incurred or damages resulting from movement of said vehicle. 
(c)  Permits issued by the state or other jurisdiction for movement of oversized or overweight vehicles as provided in N.D.C.C. § 39-12-02 may be recognized and accepted as valid permits for movement of a vehicle over a route partially within the city, subject to the approval of and to any additional restrictions or conditions deemed necessary by the city engineer. 
(Code 1994, § 20-18-06) 
ARTICLE 9. - PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 

Sec. 24-9-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term "parade" means any parade, march or procession upon any street. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-2. - Actions not considered a parade. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-3. - Parade permit required. 
    No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade without a parade permit issued by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-4. - Application for parade permit. 
(a)  A person desiring a parade permit shall file an application with the city on forms provided by the city. Such application shall be filed not less than seven days nor more than 60 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(b)  The application for a parade permit shall contain all information deemed necessary by the city in order to fully evaluate the request 
(c)  The city, where good cause is shown therefor, may consider any application which is filed less than seven days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-5. - Standards for issuance of parade permit. 
    The city shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, cause, goods or events and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-6. - Notice of denial of parade permit. 
    If the city disapproves the application for a parade permit, the city shall mail to the applicant, within three days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of such action. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-7. - Alternative parade permit. 
    The city, in denying an application for a parade permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of such action, file a written notice of acceptance with the city. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-8. - Contents of parade permit. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof. 
(7)  Such other information as the governing body shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-9. - Carrying parade permit. 
    The parade chairperson or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon their person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
Sec. 24-9-10. - Revocation of parade permit. 
    The city may, after a hearing affording due process, revoke a parade permit issued under this article upon application of the standards for issuance as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 9-01-01; Code 1994, § 20-09-02; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 1982; Ord. No. 789, § 1-3, 1991) 
ARTICLE 10. - VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES AND FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 

Sec. 24-10-1. - Vehicles transporting explosives and blasting agents; route for transportation. 
    All persons owning or operating trucks or other vehicles designed or used for the purpose of transporting explosives, blasting agents, hazardous chemicals, flammable liquids or other dangerous substances within the city shall travel only upon the streets and highways designated by the county emergency management agency; provided, however, that streets other than the designated streets may be used where such materials are being transported to or from a licensed dealer or operator and then, travel may only be on such streets constituting the shortest travel distance from the described route. Any person violating this section is guilty of an infraction, the minimum penalty for which is a fine of $250.00. 
(Code 1979, §§ 14-03-02, 14-03-03, 14-04-03; Code 1994, §§ 7-03-02, 7-04-03; Ord. No. 762, §§ 1, 3, 1989) 
Sec. 24-10-2. - Vehicles transporting flammable liquids-Safety regulations. 
    All persons owning or operating trucks or vehicles designed for the purpose of carrying or transporting flammable liquids within the city shall: 
(1)  Travel at a speed not to exceed 20 miles per hour; 
(2)  Electrically ground the vehicle by the use of a drag chain, which shall at all times be kept in good condition for grounding when moving or stationary; 
(3)  Display on each side and the rear of the exterior of such vehicle a sign made up of not less than three-inch letters of a color which shall stand out in sharp contrast to the background thereof, and which shall be visible at a distance of 50 feet and which shall contain the term "inflammables" or "gasoline," whichever shall correctly describe the cargo; 
(4)  When transporting flammable liquids within the city, not travel closer than 300 feet apart from any other vehicle carrying or transporting flammable liquids; 
(5)  Upon traveling down grade on any street or alley within the city limits, not coast with the gears of such vehicle in neutral; and 
(6)  Come to a complete stop before crossing any railroad tracks. 
(Code 1979, § 14-04-04; Code 1994, § 7-04-04) 
Sec. 24-10-3. - Same-Brakes. 
    No person shall operate on any street or alley within the city any motor vehicle engaged in the transportation of flammable liquids unless such vehicle, or at least one unit of any combination of such vehicles, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to bring such vehicle or combination of vehicles to a complete stop when operated upon dry asphalt, concrete or brick pavement surface where the grade does not exceed one percent at a speed set forth as follows: 
(1)  Ten miles per hour: 9.3 feet. 
(2)  Fifteen miles per hour: 10.8 feet. 
(3)  Twenty miles per hour: 37.0 feet. 
(Code 1979, § 14-04-05; Code 1994, § 7-04-05) 
Sec. 24-10-4. - Same-Warning signals. 
    All persons owning or operating trucks or other vehicles engaged in the transportation of flammable liquids within the city shall equip said vehicles with and carry at all times flares or other warning devices as required by state law for vehicles outside of municipal corporate limits. In the case that said vehicles, or any unit thereof, is disabled or parked in the streets of the city after sundown, warning signals of the kind indicated shall immediately be placed at a distance of approximately 100 feet ahead of and 100 feet to the rear of such disabled or parked vehicle and on the traffic side of the vehicle. The warning signals shall be displayed continuously during the time such vehicle shall remain disabled or parked on said street. 
(Code 1979, § 14-04-06; Code 1994, § 7-04-06) 
Sec. 24-10-5. - Same-Parking restrictions. 
    No person owning or operating any truck or other vehicles designed for the purpose of carrying or transporting flammable liquids shall park said vehicle within the city limits except on the premises of a bulk plant or storage area designed for flammable liquids, or, in the case of any vehicle transporting gasoline or gaseous products, for the purpose of actually loading or unloading the same. 
(Code 1979, § 14-04-07; Code 1994, § 7-04-07) 
ARTICLE 11. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-CRIMINAL OFFENSES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-11-1. - Violations of registration provisions. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-04-37. 
    39-04-37. Violations of registration provisions. It is unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts: 
1.  To operate, or for the owner thereof knowingly to permit anyone to operate, upon a highway any vehicle the registration of which has been canceled or revoked, or for which the registration fees required in this title have not been paid, or which does not have attached thereto and displayed thereon a number plate, plates, or validation tabs assigned thereto by the director for the current registration period, subject to the exemptions allowed in this title. 
2.  To display or cause or permit to be displayed, or to have in possession, any registration card, registration number plate, or validation tabs knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been canceled, revoked, suspended, or altered. 
3.  To lend any registration number plate, registration card, or validation tabs to any person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit the use of any registration number plate or registration card by any person not entitled thereto. 
4.  To fail or refuse to surrender to the department, upon demand, any registration card, registration number plate, or validation tab which has been suspended, canceled, or revoked as is provided in this chapter. 
5.  To use a false or fictitious name or address in any application for the registration of any vehicle, or for any renewal or duplicate thereof, or knowingly to make a false statement or knowingly to conceal a material fact or otherwise to commit a fraud in any application 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-11-2. - Penalty for driving while license suspended or revoked. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-06-42. As authorized by subsection 5 of N.D.C.C. § 39-06-42, the Municipal Judge for the City of Mandan may order destruction of vehicle number plates by members of the Mandan Police Department. 
    39-06-42. Penalty for driving while license suspended or revoked-Impoundment of vehicle number plates-Authority of cities. 
1.  Except as provided in section 39-06.1-11, an individual who operates a motor vehicle on a highway or on public or private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use in this state while an individual's operator's license is suspended or revoked in any jurisdiction is guilty of a class B misdemeanor for the first, second, or third offense within a five-year period. Any subsequent offense within the same five-year period is a class A misdemeanor. 
2.  If the suspension or revocation was imposed for violation of section 39-08-01 or equivalent ordinance or was governed by section 39-06-31 or chapter 39-20, the sentence must be at least four consecutive days' imprisonment and a fine as the court deems proper. The execution of sentence may not be suspended or the imposition of sentence deferred under subsection 3 or 4 of section 12.1-32-02. Forfeiture of bail is not permitted in lieu of the defendant's personal appearance in open court for arraignment on a charge under this subsection. 
3.  A court may dismiss a charge under this section upon motion by the defendant if the defendant's operator's license is reinstated within sixty days of the date of the offense and the defendant provides to the court satisfactory evidence of the reinstatement. 
4.  In addition to any other punishment imposed, the court may order the number plates of the motor vehicle owned and operated by the offender at the time of the offense to be destroyed by the sheriff. If a period of suspension has been extended under subsection 6 of section 39-06-17, the court may order the number plates to be destroyed under this subsection. The offender shall deliver the number plates to the court without delay at a time certain as ordered by the court following the conviction. The court shall deliver the number plates to the sheriff and notify the department of the order. An offender who does not provide the number plates to the court at the appropriate time is subject to revocation of probation. 
5.  A city may authorize, by ordinance, its municipal judge to order destruction of motor vehicle number plates by the office of the police officer that made the arrest in the manner provided in subsection 4. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1226, 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 24-11-3. - Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any other drugs or substances not to operate vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-01. 
    39-08-01. Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any other drugs or substances not to operate vehicle-Penalty. 
1.  A person may not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle upon a highway or upon public or private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use in this state if any of the following apply: 
a.  That person has an alcohol concentration of at least eight one-hundredths of one percent by weight at the time of the performance of a chemical test within two hours after the driving or being in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
b.  That person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
c.  That person is under the influence of any drug or substance or combination of drugs or substances to a degree which renders that person incapable of safely driving. 
d.  That person is under the combined influence of alcohol and any other drugs or substances to a degree which renders that person incapable of safely driving. 
e.  That individual refuses to submit to any of the following: 
(1)  A chemical test, or tests, of the individual's blood, breath, or urine to determine the alcohol concentration or presence of other drugs, or combination thereof, in the individual's blood, breath, or urine, at the direction of a law enforcement officer under section 39-06.2-10.2 if the individual is driving or is in actual physical control of a commercial motor vehicle; or 
(2)  A chemical test, or tests, of the individual's blood, breath, or urine to determine the alcohol concentration or presence of other drugs, or combination thereof, in the individual's blood, breath, or urine, at the direction of a law enforcement officer under section 39-20-01; or 
(3)  An onsite screening test, or tests, of the individual's breath for the purpose of estimating the alcohol concentration in the individual's breath upon the request of a law enforcement officer under section 39-20-14. 
The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has been legally entitled to use alcohol or other drugs or substances is not a defense against any charge for violating this section, unless a drug which predominately caused impairment was used only as directed or cautioned by a practitioner who legally prescribed or dispensed the drug to that person. 
2.  An individual who operates a motor vehicle on a highway or on public or private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use in this state who refuses to submit to a chemical test, or tests, required under section 39-06.2-10.2, 39-20-01, or 39-20-14, is guilty of an offense under this section. 
3.  An individual violating this section or equivalent ordinance is guilty of a class B misdemeanor for the first or second offense in a seven-year period, of a class A misdemeanor for a third offense in a seven-year period, of a class C felony for any fourth or subsequent offense regardless of the length of time since the previous offense. The minimum penalty for violating this section is as provided in subsection 5. The court shall take judicial notice of the fact that an offense would be a subsequent offense if indicated by the records of the director or may make a subsequent offense finding based on other evidence. 
4.  Upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense within seven years under this section or equivalent ordinance, the court may order the motor vehicle number plates of all of the motor vehicles owned and operated by the offender at the time of the offense to be destroyed by the office of the police officer that made the arrest. The offender shall deliver the number plates to the court without delay at a time certain as ordered by the court following the conviction. The court shall deliver the number plates to the office and notify the department of the order. An offender who does not provide the number plates to the court at the appropriate time is subject to revocation of probation. The court may make an exception to this subsection, on an individual basis, to avoid undue hardship to an individual who is completely dependent on the motor vehicle for the necessities of life, including a family member of the convicted individual and a coowner of the motor vehicle, or if the offender is participating in the twenty-four seven sobriety program. 
5.  A person convicted of violating this section, or an equivalent ordinance, must be sentenced in accordance with this subsection. For purposes of this subsection, unless the context otherwise requires, "drug court program" means a district court-supervised treatment program approved by the supreme court which combines judicial supervision with alcohol and drug testing and chemical addiction treatment in a licensed treatment program. The supreme court may adopt rules, including rules of procedure, for drug courts and the drug court program. 
a.  (1)  For a first offense, the sentence must include both a fine of at least five hundred dollars and an order for addiction evaluation by an appropriate licensed addiction treatment program. 
(2)  In addition, for a first offense when the convicted person has an alcohol concentration of at least sixteen one-hundredths of one percent by weight, the offense is an aggravated first offense and the sentence must include a fine of at least seven hundred fifty dollars and at least two days' imprisonment. 
b.  For a second offense within seven years, the sentence must include at least ten days' imprisonment, of which forty-eight hours must be served consecutively; a fine of one thousand five hundred dollars; an order for addiction evaluation by an appropriate licensed addiction treatment program; and at least twelve months' participation in the twenty-four seven sobriety program under chapter 54-12 as a mandatory condition of probation. 
c.  For a third offense within seven years, the sentence must include at least one hundred twenty days' imprisonment; a fine of at least two thousand dollars; an order for addiction evaluation by an appropriate licensed addiction treatment program; at least one year's supervised probation; and participation in the twenty-four seven sobriety program under chapter 54-12 as a mandatory condition of probation. 
d.  For a fourth or subsequent offense, the sentence must include at least one year and one day's imprisonment; a fine of at least two thousand dollars; an order for addiction evaluation by an appropriate licensed treatment program; at least two years' supervised probation; and participation in the twenty-four seven sobriety program under chapter 54-12 as a mandatory condition of probation. 
e.  The imposition of sentence under this section may not be deferred under subsection 4 of section 12.1-32-02 for an offense subject to this section. 
f.  If the offense is subject to subdivision a or b, a municipal court or district court may not suspend a sentence, but may convert each day of a term of imprisonment to ten hours of community service for an offense subject to paragraph 2 of subdivision a. If the offense is subject to subdivision c, the district court may suspend a sentence, except for sixty days' imprisonment, under subsection 3 of section 12.1-32-02 on the condition that the defendant first undergo and complete an evaluation for alcohol and substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation and upon completion of the twenty-four seven sobriety program. If the offense is subject to subdivision d, the district court may suspend a sentence, except for one year's imprisonment, under subsection 3 of section 12.1-32-02 on the condition that the defendant first undergo and complete an evaluation for alcohol and substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation. If the defendant is found to be in need of alcohol and substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation, the district court may order the defendant placed under the supervision and management of the department of corrections and rehabilitation and is subject to the conditions of probation under section 12.1-32-07. The district court may require the defendant to complete alcohol and substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation under the direction of the drug court program as a condition of probation in accordance with rules adopted by the supreme court. If the district court finds that a defendant has failed to undergo an evaluation or complete treatment or has violated any condition of probation, the district court shall revoke the defendant's probation and shall sentence the defendant in accordance with this subsection. 
g.  For purposes of this section, conviction of an offense under a law or ordinance of another state which is equivalent to this section must be considered a prior offense if such offense was committed within the time limitations specified in this section. 
h.  If the penalty mandated by this section includes imprisonment or placement upon conviction of a violation of this section or equivalent ordinance, and if an addiction evaluation has indicated that the defendant needs treatment, the court may order the defendant to undergo treatment at an appropriate licensed addiction treatment program under subdivision g of subsection 1 of section 12.1-32-02 and the time spent by the defendant in the treatment must be credited as a portion of a sentence of imprisonment or placement under this section. A court may not order the department of corrections and rehabilitation to be responsible for the costs of treatment in a private treatment facility. 
i.  If the court sentences an individual to the legal and physical custody of the department of corrections and rehabilitation, the department may place the individual in an alcohol treatment program designated by the department. Upon the individual's successful completion of the alcohol treatment program, the department shall release the individual from imprisonment to serve the remainder of the sentence of imprisonment on probation, which may include placement in another facility or treatment program. If an individual is placed in another facility or treatment program after release from imprisonment, the remainder of the individual's sentence of imprisonment must be considered time spent in custody. 
6.  As used in subdivisions b and c of subsection 5, the term "imprisonment" includes house arrest. As a condition of house arrest, a defendant may not consume alcoholic beverages. The house arrest must include a program of electronic home detention and the defendant shall participate in the twenty-four seven sobriety program. The defendant shall defray all costs associated with the electronic home detention. For an offense under subdivision b or c of subsection 5, no more than ninety percent of the sentence may be house arrest. 
7.  As used in this title, participation in the twenty-four seven sobriety program under chapter 54-12 means compliance with sections 54-12-27 through 54-12-31, and requires sobriety breath testing twice per day seven days per week or electronic alcohol monitoring, urine testing, or drug patch testing. The offender is responsible for all twenty-four seven sobriety program fees and the court may not waive the fees. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-11-4. - Reckless driving-Aggravated reckless driving. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-03. 
    39-08-03. Reckless driving-Aggravated reckless driving-Penalty. Any person is guilty of reckless driving if the person drives a vehicle: 
1.  Recklessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others; or 
2.  Without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or the property of another. 
    Except as otherwise herein provided, any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Any person who, by reason of reckless driving as herein defined, causes and inflicts injury upon the person of another, is guilty of aggravated reckless driving, and is guilty of a class A misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 12. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-12-1. - Display of number plates and tab. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-04-11. 
    39-04-11. Display of number plates and tabs. Except as otherwise specifically provided, a person may not operate or drive a vehicle on the public highways of this state unless the vehicle has a distinctive number assigned to it by the department, and two number plates, bearing the distinctive number conspicuously displayed, horizontally and in an upright position, one on the front and one on the rear of the vehicle, each securely fastened, except number plates assigned to a motorcycle, trailer, housetrailer must be attached to the rear thereof. When only one number plate is furnished for an apportioned vehicle licensed under the international registration plan as authorized in section 39-19-04, truck tractor, or semitrailer, the plate must be attached to the front of the apportioned vehicle or truck tractor and the rear of the semitrailer. The bottom of each number plate must be at a height of not less than twelve inches [30.48 centimeters] above the level surface upon which the vehicle stands. Each plate must be mounted in a manner that does not cover any words, letter, or number on the plate. As far as is reasonably possible, the plates must at all times be kept free and clear of mud, ice, or snow so as to be clearly visible and all number plates, markers, or evidence of registration or licensing except for the current year must be removed from the vehicle. All vehicle license plates issued by the department continue to be the property of the state of North Dakota for the period for which the plates are valid. An annual registration tab or sticker for the current registration year must be displayed on each number plate, in the area designated by the department for the tab or sticker, in those years for which tabs or stickers are issued in lieu of number plate. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-2. - License to be carried and exhibited on demand. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-06-16. 
    39-06-16. License to be carried and exhibited on demand. An individual licensed to operate a motor vehicle shall have the operator's license in the individual's immediate possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and shall physically surrender the operator's license, upon demand of any court, police officer, or a field deputy or inspector of the department. However, an individual charged with violating this section may not be convicted or assessed any court costs if the individual produces in court or in the office of the arresting officer a valid operator's license issued to that individual that is not under suspension, revocation, or cancellation at the time of the individual's arrest. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-3. - Permitting unauthorized minor to drive. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-06-44. 
    39-06-44. Permitting unauthorized minor to drive. An individual may not cause or knowingly permit the individual's minor child or ward to operate a motor vehicle upon any highway if the minor is not authorized under this chapter or in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-4. - Permitting unauthorized individual to drive. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-06-45. 
    39-06-45. Permitting unauthorized individual to drive. An individual may not authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the individual or under the individual's control to be operated upon any highway by any individual who is not authorized under this chapter or in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-5. - Garages to report, wrecker and towing services to report, immediate notice of accident, when driver unable to report. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-07-12, 39-07-13, 39-08-09 or 39-08-11. 
    39-07-12. Garages to report. The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a reportable accident as provided in section 39-08-09 or of being struck by any bullet shall report or cause a report to be made to a police officer within twenty-four hours after such motor vehicle is received, and before any repairs are made to such vehicle, giving the registration number, and the name and address of the owner, operator, or person in control of such vehicle with a description of the location and type of damage to the vehicle, or any missing parts, if the vehicle does not have a sticker on a window thereof issued by a police officer, sheriff, or highway patrolman, bearing information to show that the accident in which the vehicle was involved has been investigated. The police officer investigating any reportable accident shall attach a sticker to the window of any damaged vehicle showing that the accident in which such vehicle was involved has been investigated. If the vehicle does bear such a sticker, the garage or repair shop need not make the report this section requires and may begin repairs immediately. After repairs have been made and before the vehicle is released, the sticker provided herein must be removed. 
    39-07-13. Wrecker and towing services to report. The person in charge or the operator of any commercial towing or wrecker service which causes any motor vehicle to be transported to a private residence or business other than a garage or repair shop which shows evidence of having been involved in a reportable accident as provided in section 39-08-09 or of being struck by any bullet shall report or cause a report to be made to a police officer within twenty-four hours after such motor vehicle is transported. The report must give the registration number, and the name and address of the owner, operator, or person in control of such vehicle with a description of the location and type of damage to the vehicle, or any missing parts, along with the location such vehicle was transported to, if the vehicle does not have a sticker on a window thereof issued by a police officer, sheriff, or highway patrolman, bearing information to show that the accident in which the vehicle was involved has been investigated. If the vehicle does bear such a sticker, the towing or wrecker service need not make the report this section requires. 
    39-08-09. Immediate notice of accident-Penalty. 
1.  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person, or property damage to an apparent extent of at least one thousand dollars, shall immediately give notice of the accident to the local police department if the accident occurs within a municipality, otherwise to the office of the county sheriff or the state highway patrol. Any person who violates this section must be assessed a fine of fifty dollars. The name of the motor vehicle insurance policy carrier and the policy number of the driver, or if the driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the motor vehicle insurance policy carrier and the policy number of the owner of the vehicle, must be furnished to the law enforcement officer investigating the accident. If the driver does not have the required information concerning insurance to furnish to the investigating law enforcement officer, then within five days of the accident the driver shall supply that information to the driver's license division in the form the division requires. 
2.  The director may suspend the license or permit to drive and any nonresident operating privileges of any person failing to comply with the duties as provided in sections 39-08-06 through 39-08-09 until those duties have been fulfilled, and the director may extend the suspension not to exceed thirty days. 
3.  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident with an undomesticated animal resulting in property damage only to the driver's vehicle is exempt from the notice requirements of this section, regardless of the amount of damage to the driver's vehicle. 
    39-08-11. When driver unable to report. 
1.  An accident notice is not required from any person who is physically incapable of making the report during the period of such incapacity. 
2.  Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an immediate notice of an accident and there was another occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant shall make or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver. 
3.  Whenever the driver is physically incapable of giving notice of an accident and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved shall within five days after learning of the accident give such notice and insurance information not given by the drive. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-6. - Exhibition driving and drag racing. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-03.1. 
    39-08-03.1. Exhibition driving and drag racing-Definitions-Penalty. 
1.  No person may engage in exhibition driving of any vehicle on a highway, street, alley, sidewalk, or any public or private parking lot or area, nor may any person engage in a race, a speed competition, drag race or acceleration contest, test of physical endurance, or exhibition of speed or acceleration. Any person who violates this section by engaging in an act defined by subdivision b of subsection 2 must be assessed a fee of fifty dollars. Any person who violates this section by engaging in an act defined by subdivision a or c of subsection 2 must be assessed a fee of one hundred dollars. 
2.  As used in this section: 
a.  "Drag race" means the operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by side by accelerating rapidly in a competitive attempt to cause one vehicle to outdistance the other; or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course from the same point to the same point for the purpose of comparing the relative speed or powers of acceleration of such vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or time limit. 
b.  "Exhibition driving" means driving a vehicle in a manner which disturbs the peace by creating or causing unnecessary engine noise, tire squeal, skid, or slide upon acceleration or braking; or driving and executing or attempting one or a series of unnecessarily abrupt turns. 
c.  "Race" means the use of one or more vehicles in an attempt to outgain, outdistance, or to arrive at a given distance ahead of another vehicle or vehicles; or the use of one or more vehicles to willfully prevent another vehicle from passing the racing vehicle or vehicles, or to test the physical stamina or endurance of the persons driving the vehicles over a long-distance driving route. 
3.  Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting drag racing, exhibition driving, or similar events when carried out in an organized manner on a track or other privately owned area specifically set aside and used solely for such purposes by drivers of motor vehicles, including snowmobiles. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-7. - Open container law. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-18. 
    39-08-18. Open container law-Penalty. 
1.  A person may not drink or consume alcoholic beverages, as defined in section 5-01-01, in or on any motor vehicle when the vehicle is upon a public highway or in an area used principally for public parking. A person may not have in that person's possession on that person's person while in or on a private motor vehicle upon a public highway or in an area used principally for public parking, any bottle or receptacle containing alcoholic beverages which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed. It is unlawful for the owner of any private motor vehicle or the driver, if the owner be not then present in or on the motor vehicle, to keep or allow to be kept in a motor vehicle when such vehicle is upon the public highway or in an area used principally for public parking any bottle or receptacle containing such alcoholic beverages which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed except when such bottle or receptacle is kept in the trunk of the motor vehicle when such vehicle is equipped with a trunk, or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A utility compartment or glove compartment must be deemed to be within the area occupied by the driver and passengers. This subsection does not prohibit the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages in a house car if the consumption or possession occurs in the area of the house car used as sleeping or living quarters and that area is separated from the driving compartment by a solid partition, door, curtain, or some similar means of separation; however, consumption is not authorized while the house car is in motion. Any person violating this subsection must be assessed a fee of fifty dollars; however, the licensing authority may not record the violation against the person's driving record unless the person was the driver of the motor vehicle at the time that the violation occurred. 
2.  Subsection 1 does not apply to a public conveyance that has been commercially chartered for group use, any passenger for compensation in a for-hire motor vehicle, or a privately owned motor vehicle operated by a person in the course of that person's usual employment transporting passengers at the employer's direction. This subsection does not authorize possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage by the operator of any motor vehicle described in this subsection while upon a public highway or in an area used principally for public parking. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-8. - Driving without liability insurance prohibited. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-20. 
    39-08-20. Driving without liability insurance prohibited-Penalty. 
1.  A person may not drive, or the owner may not cause or knowingly permit to be driven, a motor vehicle in this state without a valid policy of liability insurance in effect in order to respond in damages for liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of that motor vehicle in the amount required by chapter 39-16.1. 
2.  Upon being stopped by a law enforcement officer for the purpose of enforcing or investigating the possible violation of an ordinance or state law, the person driving the motor vehicle shall provide to the officer upon request satisfactory evidence, including written or electronic proof of insurance, of the policy required under this section. If unable to comply with the request, that person may be charged with a violation of this section. If that person produces satisfactory evidence, including written or electronic proof of insurance, of a valid policy of liability insurance in effect at the time of the alleged violation of this section to the office of the court under which the matter will be heard, that person may not be convicted or assessed any administration fee for violation of subsection 1. 
3.  Notwithstanding section 26.1-30-18, a person may be convicted for failure to have a valid policy of liability insurance in effect under this section if the time of acquisition of the policy was after the time of the alleged incidence of driving without liability insurance. If the time of acquisition of the policy comes into question, the driver or owner has the burden of establishing the time of acquisition. If the driver is not an owner of the motor vehicle, the driver does not violate this section if the driver provides the court with evidence identifying the owner of the motor vehicle and describing circumstances under which the owner caused or permitted the driver to drive the motor vehicle. 
4.  Violation of subsection 1 is an infraction and the sentence imposed must include a fine of at least one hundred fifty dollars which may not be suspended. A person convicted for a second or subsequent violation of driving without liability insurance within a three-year period must be fined at least three hundred dollars which may not be suspended. For a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of subsection 1 or equivalent ordinance, the court shall order the motor vehicle number plates of the motor vehicle owned and operated by the person at the time of the violation to be impounded until that person provides proof of insurance and a twenty dollar fee to the court. The person shall deliver the number plates to the court without delay at a time certain as ordered by the court following the conviction. The court shall deliver the number plates to the office of the police officer that made the arrest and notify the department of the order. A person who does not provide the number plates to the court at the appropriate time is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
5.  Upon conviction for a violation of subsection 1 or equivalent ordinance, the person who has been convicted shall provide proof of motor vehicle liability insurance to the department in the form of a written or electronically transmitted certificate from an insurance carrier authorized to do business in this state. This proof must be provided for a period of three years and kept on file with the department. If the person fails to provide this information, the department shall suspend that person's driving privileges and may not issue or renew that person's operator's license unless that person provides proof of insurance. 
6.  A person who has been convicted for violation of subsection 1 or equivalent ordinance shall surrender that person's operator's license and purchase a duplicate operator's license with a notation requiring that person to keep proof of liability insurance on file with the department. The fee for this license is fifty dollars and the fee to remove this notation is fifty dollars. 
7.  When an insurance carrier has certified a motor vehicle liability policy, the insurance carrier shall notify the director no later than ten days after cancellation or termination of the certified insurance policy by filing a notice of cancellation or termination of the certified insurance policy; except that a policy subsequently procured and certified shall, on the effective date of its certification, terminate the insurance previously certified with respect to any motor vehicle designated in both certificates. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-9. - Use of a wireless communications device prohibited. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-23. 
    39-08-23. Use of a wireless communications device prohibited. 
1.  The operator of a motor vehicle that is part of traffic may not use a wireless communications device to compose, read, or send an electronic message. 
2.  Under this section: 
a.  "Electronic message" means a self-contained piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be transmitted between physical devices. The term includes e-mail, a text message, an instant message, a command or request to access a worldwide web page, or other data that uses a commonly recognized electronic communications protocol. The term does not include: 
(1)  Reading, selecting, or entering a telephone number, an extension number, or voice mail retrieval codes and commands into an electronic device for the purpose of initiating or receiving a telephone or cellular phone call or using voice commands to initiate or receive a telephone or cellular phone call; 
(2)  Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global positioning system device or other navigation system device; 
(3)  Using a device capable of performing multiple functions, such as fleet management systems, dispatching devices, smartphones, citizen band radios, music players, or similar devices, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited; 
(4)  Voice or other data transmitted as a result of making a telephone or cellular phone call; or 
(5)  Data transmitted automatically by a wireless communication device without direct initiation by an individual. 
b.  "Traffic" means operation of a motor vehicle while in motion or for the purposes of travel on any street or highway and includes a temporary stop or halt of motion, such as at an official traffic-control signal or sign. The term does not include a motor vehicle that is lawfully parked. 
3.  This section does not apply if a wireless communications device is used for obtaining emergency assistance to report a traffic accident, medical emergency, or serious traffic hazard or to prevent a crime about to be committed, in the reasonable belief that an individual's life or safety is in immediate danger, or in an authorized emergency vehicle while in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1a, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-12-10. - Care required in operating vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-09-01.1. 
    39-09-01.1. Care required in operating vehicle. Any person driving a vehicle upon a highway shall drive the vehicle in a careful and prudent manner, having due regard to the traffic, surface, and width of the highway and other conditions then existing, and shall give such warnings as are reasonably necessary for safe operation under the circumstances. No person may drive any vehicle upon a highway in a manner to endanger the life, limb, or property of any person. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1a, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 12-9. 
Sec. 24-12-11. - Failure to maintain control. 
    Citation issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-25. 
    § 39-08-25. Failure to maintain control. 
1.  An operator of a motor vehicle may not fail to maintain control of that motor vehicle. An individual is in violation of this section if that individual: 
a.  Commits an offense under this title and, at the time of the offense, the individual was engaged in the operation of a motor vehicle while distracted; or 
b.  Is determined to have been the operator of a motor vehicle that was involved in a reportable accident as defined in § 39-08-09 which resulted in property damage and, at the time the reportable accident occurred, the individual was engaged in the operation of a motor vehicle while districted. 
2.  An individual may be issued a citation or summons for any other traffic offense that was committed by the individual in relation to the individual's commission of the traffic offense of failure to maintain control of a motor vehicle. 
3.  As used in this section, "operation of a motor vehicle while distracted" means the operation of a motor vehicle by an individual who, while operating the vehicle, is engaged in an activity that: 
a.  Is not necessary to the operation of the vehicle; and 
b.  Actually impairs, or would reasonably be expected to impair, the ability of the individual to safely operate the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1302, 11-20-2018) 
ARTICLE 13. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-PEDESTRIANS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-13-1. - Pedestrian's right of way in crosswalk. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-28. 
    39-10-28. Pedestrian's right of way in crosswalk. 
1.  When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger. 
2.  No pedestrian may suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
3.  Subsection 1 does not apply under the conditions stated in subsection 2 of section 39-10-29. 
4.  Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the highway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear may not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-13-2. - Crossing at other than crosswalk. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-29. 
    39-10-29. Crossing at other than crosswalk. 
1.  Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
2.  Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
3.  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control devices are in operation, pedestrians may not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk. 
4.  No pedestrian may cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-13-3. - Pedestrian on roadway. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-33. 
    39-10-33. Pedestrian on roadway. 
1.  Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it is unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway. 
2.  Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway. 
3.  Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway. 
4.  Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-13-4. - Pedestrian's right of way on sidewalk. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-33.1. 
    39-10-33.1. Pedestrian's right of way on sidewalk. The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian on a sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-13-5. - Pedestrian to yield to authorized emergency vehicles. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-33.2. 
    39-10-33.2. Pedestrian to yield to authorized emergency vehicles. 
1.  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of an audible signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle and displaying a visible flashing, revolving, or rotating blue, white, or red light, every pedestrian shall yield the right of way to the authorized emergency vehicle. 
2.  This section does not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway nor from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-13-6. - Blind pedestrian right of way. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-33.3. 
    39-10-33.3. Blind pedestrian right of way. The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to an individual who is blind or visually impaired and carrying a clearly visible white cane or to an individual with a disability who is accompanied by an assistance dog. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-13-7. - Pedestrian under influence of alcohol or drugs. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-33.4. 
    39-10-33.4. Pedestrian under influence of alcohol or drugs. A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree which renders the pedestrian a hazard may not walk or be upon a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-13-8. - Pedestrian soliciting ride or business. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-34. 
    39-10-34. Pedestrian soliciting ride or business. 
1.  No person may stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride. 
2.  No person may stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle. 
3.  No person may stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or about to be parked on a street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-13-9. - Required position and method of turning. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-35. 
    39-10-35. Required position and method of turning. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn shall do so as follows: 
1.  Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn must be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
2.  Left turns. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left shall approach the turn in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle. Whenever practicable, the left turn must be made to the left of the center of the intersection and so as to leave the intersection or other location in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the same direction as such vehicle on the roadway being entered. 
3.  The director and local authorities in their respective jurisdictions may cause official traffic-control devices to be placed and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by turning vehicles, and when such devices are so placed, no driver of a vehicle may turn it other than as directed and required by such devices. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 14. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-14-1. - Accidents involving damage to vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-05. 
    39-08-05. Accidents involving damage to vehicle-Penalty. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene of such accident until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of section 39-08-06. Every such stop must be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary. Any person failing to stop or comply with said requirements under such circumstances is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-2. - Duty upon striking highway fixtures or other property. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-08. 
    39-08-08. Duty upon striking highway fixtures or other property. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to highway fixtures or other property shall take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such property of such fact and of the driver's name and address and of the registration number of the vehicle the driver is driving and shall upon request and if available exhibit the driver's operator's or chauffeur's license and shall make report of such accident when and as required in section 39-08-09. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-3. - Obedience to police officer or firefighter. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-02. 
    39-10-02. Obedience to police officer or firefighter. No person may willfully refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or firefighter invested by law with authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-4. - Obedience to any required traffic-Control devices. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-04. 
    39-10-04. Obedience to and required traffic-control devices. 
1.  The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter. 
2.  No provision of this chapter for which traffic-control devices are required may be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a state statute does not state that devices are required, such statute is effective even though no devices are erected or in place. 
3.  Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in positions approximately conforming to the requirements of this title, such devices must be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary is established by competent evidence. 
4.  Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this title and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices must be presumed to comply with the requirements of this title, unless the contrary is established by competent evidence. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1b, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-5. - Traffic-Control signal legend. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-05. 
    39-10-05. Traffic-control signal legend. Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time or in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow may be used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word or legend, and said lights must indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
1.  Green indications: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a circular green indication may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow indication, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
c.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided for in section 39-10-06, pedestrians facing any green indication, except when the sole green indication is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
2.  Steady yellow indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow indication is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic may not enter the intersection. 
b.  Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided for in section 39-10-06, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian may then start to cross the roadway. 
3.  Steady red indication: 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red indication alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown, except as provided for in subdivision c. 
b.  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow indication may not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make a movement permitted by another indication, must stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the intersection and must remain standing until an indication permitting the movement indicated by the red arrow is shown except as provided for in subdivision c. 
c.  Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red indication may cautiously enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street, after stopping as required by subdivisions a and b. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
d.  Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided for in section 39-10-06, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow indication alone may not enter the roadway. 
4.  In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section are applicable, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required must be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop must be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop must be made at the signal. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-6. - Flashing signals. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-07. 
    39-10-07. Flashing signals. 
1.  Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow light is used in a traffic signal or with a traffic sign, it requires obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
a.  Flashing red (stop indication). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it, and the right to proceed is subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
b.  Flashing yellow (caution indication). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such indication only with caution. 
c.  Flashing red arrow and flashing yellow arrow indications have the same meaning as the corresponding flashing circular indications, except that they apply only to drivers of vehicles intending to make the movement indicated by the arrow. 
2.  This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings is governed by the requirements set forth in section 39-10-41. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-7. - Interference with official traffic - control device or railroad sign or signal. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-07.3. 
    39-10-07.3. Interference with official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal. A person may not, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, remove, or interfere with the operation of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-8. - Drive on right side of roadway. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-08. 
    39-10-08. Drive on right side of roadway-Exceptions. 
1.  Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle must be driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows: 
a.  When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules governing such movement; 
b.  When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the right of way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an immediate hazard; 
c.  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon; or 
d.  Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic. 
2.  Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing must be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when preparing for a left turn in an intersection or into a private road or driveway. 
3.  Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle may be driven to the left of the centerline of the roadway, except when authorized by official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use such lanes, or except as permitted under subdivision b of subsection 1. However, this subsection may not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the centerline in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-9. - Overtaking a vehicle on the left. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-11. 
    39-10-11. Overtaking a vehicle on the left. The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and special rules hereinafter stated: 
1.  The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and may not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
2.  Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and may not increase the speed of that driver's vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-10. - When overtaking on the right is permitted. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-12. 
    39-10-12. When overtaking on the right is permitted. 
1.  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions: 
a.  When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn; or 
b.  Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled by the overtaking vehicle. 
2.  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such movement may not be made by driving off the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-11. - Limitations on overtaking on the left. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-13. 
    39-10-13. Limitations on overtaking on the left. No vehicle may be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within two hundred feet [60.96 meters] of any approaching vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-12. - Further limitations on driving on left of center of roadway. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-14. 
    39-10-14. Further limitations on driving on left of center of roadway. 
1.  No vehicle may be driven to the left side of the roadway under any of the following conditions: 
a.  When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
b.  When approaching within one hundred feet [30.48 meters] of or traversing any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
c.  When the view is obstructed upon approaching within one hundred feet [30.48 meters] of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel. 
2.  The foregoing limitations do not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor under the conditions described in section 39-10-08, nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-13. - No-passing zones. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-15. 
    39-10-15. No-passing zones. 
1.  The director and local authorities are hereby authorized to determine those portions of any highway under their respective jurisdiction where overtaking and passing or driving on the left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may by appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones and when such signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof. 
2.  Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set forth in subsection 1, no driver may at any time drive on the left side of the roadway within such no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement striping designed to mark such no-passing zone throughout its length. 
3.  This section does not apply under the conditions described in section 39-10-08 nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-14. - One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-16. 
    39-10-16. One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands. 
1.  The director and local authorities with respect to highways under their respective jurisdictions may designate any highway, roadway, part of a roadway, or specific lanes upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
2.  Upon a roadway so designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated at all or at such times as shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
3.  A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be driven only to the right of such island. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-15. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-17. 
    39-10-17. Driving on roadways laned for traffic. Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith apply: 
1.  A vehicle must be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a single lane and may not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
2.  Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-way traffic, a vehicle may not be driven in the center lane except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices. 
3.  Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specified traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
4.  Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-16. - Following too closely. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-18. 
    39-10-18. Following too closely. 
1.  The driver of a motor vehicle may not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway. 
2.  The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residence district and which is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger, except that this does not prevent a truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle from overtaking and passing any vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
3.  Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade whether or not towing other vehicles must be so operated as to allow sufficient space between each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision does not apply to funeral processions. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-17. - Driving on divided highway. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-19. 
    39-10-19. Driving on divided highway. Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, unless directed or permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No vehicle may be driven over, across, or within any such dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an opening in such physical barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection as established by public authority, unless such crossing is specifically prohibited and such prohibition is indicated by appropriate traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-18. - Restricted access. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-20. 
    39-10-20. Restricted access. No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-19. - Closing road because of hazardous condition. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-21.1. 
    39-10-21.1. Closing road because of hazardous conditions-Posting of official traffic-control devices-Entering closed road prohibited. 
1.  The highway patrol or local law enforcement authorities having jurisdiction over a road may close a road temporarily due to hazardous conditions for the protection and safety of the public. If such a closing is made, the authority ordering the closing shall make every reasonable attempt to notify the public and, when practical, may post appropriate official traffic-control devices to advise motorists of the closing. 
2.  An individual, while operating a motor vehicle, may not knowingly enter a road closed which is posted with an appropriate traffic-control device at the point of entry. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-20. - Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-22. 
    39-10-22. Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. 
1.  If a vehicle approaches or enters an intersection that does not have an official traffic-control device and another vehicle approaches or enters from a different highway at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right. If the intersection is T-shaped and does not have an official traffic-control device, the driver of the vehicle on the terminating street or highway shall yield to the vehicle on the continuing street or highway. 
2.  If a vehicle approaches an intersection that has traffic-control signals that usually exhibit different colored lights and the signals are not lit, the driver of the vehicle shall stop and yield as required under subsection 2 of section 39-10-24. 
3.  The right-of-way rule declared in this section is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-21. - Vehicle turning left. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-23. 
    39-10-23. Vehicle turning left. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right of way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-22. - Stop signs and yield signs. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-24. 
    39-10-24. Stop signs and yield signs. 
    1. Preferential right of way may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in section 39-07-03. 
    2. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. 
    3. The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. Provided, however, that if a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways after driving past a yield sign without stopping, such collision is deemed prima facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right of way. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-23. - Vehicle entering roadway. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-25. 
    39-10-25. Vehicle entering roadway. The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a roadway from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-24. - Vehicle to stop or yield the right of way for authorized emergency vehicle or vehicle used for maintaining the state highway system. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-26. 
    39-10-26. Vehicle to stop or yield the right of way for authorized emergency vehicle or vehicle used for maintaining the state highway system - Penalty. 
1.  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle displaying a visible flashing, revolving, or rotating blue, white, or red light, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right of way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in that position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
2.  If an authorized emergency vehicle is parked or stopped at the scene of an emergency and is displaying a flashing, revolving, or rotating blue, white, or red light, approaching traffic shall move to the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway and shall stop, but once having stopped, traffic may proceed past the scene at its own risk when the roadway is clear, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. If an authorized emergency vehicle is otherwise parked or stopped on the interstate system or on a multilane highway outside the limits of a city, and the authorized emergency vehicle is displaying a flashing, revolving, or rotating amber, blue, white, or red light, the driver of an approaching vehicle shall proceed with caution and yield the right of way by moving to a lane that is not adjacent to the authorized emergency vehicle if the move may be made with due regard to safety and traffic conditions or if not, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road conditions. 
3.  If a vehicle operated by or under the control of the director used for maintaining the state highway system is parked or stopped on the interstate system or on a multilane highway outside the limits of a city, and the vehicle is displaying a flashing, revolving, or rotating amber or white light, the driver of an approaching vehicle shall proceed with caution and yield the right of way by moving to a lane that is not adjacent to the vehicle if the move may be made with due regard to safety and traffic conditions or if not, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road conditions. 
4.  This section does not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle or a vehicle operated by or under the control of the director used for maintaining the state highway system from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
5.  a.  Any individual who violates subsection 2 and causes an accident with an authorized emergency vehicle while the authorized emergency vehicle is displaying a visible flashing, revolving, or rotating amber, blue, white, or red light is guilty of an infraction. 
b.  An individual who violates subsection 3 and causes an accident with a vehicle operated by or under the control of the director used for maintaining the state highway system while the vehicle is displaying a visible flashing, revolving, or rotating amber or white light is guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-25. - Highway construction and maintenance. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-26.1. 
    39-10-26.1. Highway construction and maintenance. 
1.  The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any authorized vehicle or pedestrian actually engaged in work upon a highway within any highway construction or maintenance area indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
2.  The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way to any authorized vehicle obviously and actually engaged in work upon a highway wherever such vehicle displays flashing lights meeting the requirements of section 39-21-28. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-26. - Limitations on turning around. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-36. 
    39-10-36. Limitations on turning around. 
1.  The driver of any vehicle may not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
2.  No vehicle may be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within five hundred feet [152.4 meters]. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-27. - Starting parked vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-37. 
    39-10-37. Starting parked vehicle. No person may start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-28. - Turning movements and required signals. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-38. 
    39-10-38. Turning movements and required signals. 
1.  No person may turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety without giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided. 
2.  A signal of intention to turn or move right or left when required must be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred feet [30.48 meters] traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
3.  No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
4.  The signals required on vehicles by subsection 2 of section 39-10-39 may not be flashed on one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-29. - Stop signs and yield signs. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-44. 
    39-10-44. Stop signs and yield signs. 
1.  Preferential right of way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs as authorized in section 39-07-03. 
2.  Every stop sign and every yield sign must be erected as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the nearest line of the intersecting roadway. 
3.  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
4.  The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-30. - Emerging from alley, driveway, private road, or building. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-45. 
    39-10-45. Emerging from alley, driveway, private road, or building. The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, private road, or building within a business or residence district shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across such alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-31. - Overtaking and passing school bus. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-46. 
    39-10-46. Overtaking and passing schoolbus. 
1.  The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking from either direction any schoolbus stopped on the highway shall stop the vehicle before reaching the schoolbus when there is in operation on the schoolbus the flashing red lights or the stop sign on the control arm specified in section 39-21-18, and the driver may not proceed until the schoolbus resumes motion, the driver is signaled by the schoolbus driver to proceed, or the flashing red lights and the stop sign on the control arm are no longer actuated. 
2.  Every schoolbus must bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible signs containing the word "SCHOOLBUS" in letters not less than eight inches [20.32 centimeters] in height. When a schoolbus is being operated upon a highway for purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from school or for a school-sanctioned activity, all markings thereon indicating "SCHOOLBUS" must be covered or concealed. 
3.  The operator of a schoolbus equipped with amber caution lights may activate those lights at a distance of not less than three hundred feet [91.44 meters] nor more than five hundred feet [152.4 meters] from the point where schoolchildren are to be received or discharged from the bus. 
4.  Every schoolbus must be equipped with a stop sign on a control arm and red visual signals meeting the requirements of section 39-21-18, which may only be actuated by the driver of the schoolbus whenever the vehicle is stopped on the highway to receive or discharge schoolchildren. 
5.  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a schoolbus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the schoolbus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
6.  Every schoolbus must bear on the rear of the bus a plainly visible sign containing the words "THIS SCHOOLBUS STOPS AT ALL RAILROAD CROSSINGS". 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-32. - Permitting use of vehicle to violate section 39-10-46 prohibited. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-46.1. 
    39-10-46.1. Permitting use of vehicle to violate section 39-10-46 prohibited-Presumption of permission-Defense-Dual prosecution prohibited. The registered owner of a motor vehicle may not permit that motor vehicle to be operated in violation of section 39-10-46. If a motor vehicle is seen violating section 39-10-46, it is a disputable presumption that the registered owner of the motor vehicle permitted that violation. It is a defense to a charge of violating this section that the registered owner of the vehicle was not operating the vehicle, if that registered owner identifies the person authorized by that owner to operate the motor vehicle at the time of the violation of section 39-10-46, or if that motor vehicle had been taken without the registered owner's permission. A person may not be charged both with violating this section and with violating section 39-10-46. Violation of this section is not a lesser included offense of violation of section 39-10-46. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-14-33. - Limitations on backing. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-52. 
    39-10-52. Limitations on backing. 
1.  The driver of a vehicle may not back the same unless such movement can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
2.  The driver of a vehicle may not back the same upon any shoulder or roadway of any controlled-access highway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-34. 
Sec. 24-14-34. - Driving upon sidewalk. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-52.1. 
    39-10-52.1. Driving upon sidewalk. No person may drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-35. 
Sec. 24-14-35. - Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-54. 
    39-10-54. Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. 
1.  No person may drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
2.  No passenger in a vehicle may ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-36. 
Sec. 24-14-36. - Opening and closing vehicle door. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-54.1. 
    39-10-54.1. Opening and closing vehicle door. No person may open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor may any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-37. 
Sec. 24-14-37. - Coasting prohibited. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-56. 
    39-10-56. Coasting prohibited. 
1.  The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade may not coast with the gears or transmission of such vehicle in neutral. 
2.  The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a downgrade may not coast with the clutch disengaged. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-38. 
Sec. 24-14-38. - Following emergency vehicle too closely prohibited. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-57. 
    39-10-57. Following emergency vehicle too closely prohibited-Stopping by emergency vehicle. The driver of a vehicle other than one on official business may not follow closer than five hundred feet [152.4 meters] behind an emergency vehicle displaying the appropriate light for that vehicle in an emergency. A driver of a vehicle other than one on official business may not stop the vehicle within two hundred feet [60.96 meters] of any emergency vehicle stopped in answer to a 911 emergency. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-39. 
Sec. 24-14-39. - Crossing fire hose. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-58. 
    39-10-58. Crossing firehose. No vehicle may be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department when laid down on any street, private road, or driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-40. 
Sec. 24-14-40. - Garbage, glass, rubbish, and injurious materials on highway prohibited. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-59. 
    39-10-59. Garbage, glass, rubbish, and injurious materials on highway prohibited. 
1.  An individual may not deposit upon any highway any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, rubbish, or any other litter. In addition, an individual may not deposit upon a highway any other substance likely to injure a person, animal, or vehicle. 
2.  An individual who deposits, or permits to be deposited, upon a highway a destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove or cause to be removed the material. 
3.  An individual removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the highway from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-41. 
Sec. 24-14-41. - Operation of motor vehicle, tractor, or other vehicle prohibited on flood protective works. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-65. 
    39-10-65. Operation of motor vehicle, tractor, or other vehicle prohibited on flood protective works--Exception-Penalty. 
1.  Unless authorized by the authority in charge thereof, no person shall operate a motor vehicle, tractor, or other vehicle upon or across any flood protective works, including any dike or flood protective works constructed by a state or federal agency, or by any municipality or local subdivision of the state. 
2.  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be liable to any person suffering injury as a result of the violation; and in addition, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-42. 
Sec. 24-14-42. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-68. 
    39-10-68. Stop when traffic obstructed. No driver may enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk or drive onto a railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection, crosswalk, or railroad grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-43. 
Sec. 24-14-43. - Funeral processions. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-72. 
    39-10-72. Funeral processions-Traffic regulations. 
1.  Notwithstanding any traffic-control device, a law enforcement officer leading a funeral procession may proceed through any intersection or make any turns or other movements necessary while leading the procession. The officer, without regard to any traffic-control device, may direct other drivers not in the funeral procession to stop, turn, proceed, or make other movements. When leading the funeral procession, the officer must be in a marked patrol vehicle and the vehicle's lighted headlamps, taillamps, and top-mounted and grill-mounted signal lamps must be displayed at all times during the procession. 
2.  Notwithstanding any traffic-control device or provision governing the right of way, whenever a law enforcement officer leading a funeral procession enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the funeral procession may follow through the intersection. Each vehicle in the procession, however, must exercise reasonable care toward any other vehicle or pedestrian on the roadway. 
3.  Notwithstanding any traffic-control device or provision governing rights of way and subject to the following conditions, vehicles in a funeral procession have the right of way. 
a.  All vehicles in a funeral procession must display lighted headlamps, taillamps, and flashing emergency lamps. 
b.  All vehicles in a funeral procession must follow the preceding vehicle in the procession as closely as is safe and practicable. 
c.  The driver of a vehicle in a funeral procession shall yield the right of way to an approaching emergency vehicle when directed to do so by a law enforcement officer or when the vehicle is giving an audible or visual signal. 
d.  A vehicle that becomes separated from the funeral procession and the law enforcement escort, so that the procession is no longer continuous, must proceed to its destination in a safe and prudent manner obeying all traffic signals and general rules of the road. 
4.  Other vehicles shall conform to the following rules: 
a.  The driver of a vehicle may not drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while those vehicles are in motion, except when authorized to do so by a law enforcement officer or when such vehicle is an emergency vehicle giving an audible or visible signal. 
b.  The driver of a vehicle not part of a funeral procession may not join a funeral procession for the purpose of securing the right of way granted under subsection 3. 
c.  The driver of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may not pass vehicles in such a procession on a two-lane highway or roadway. 
d.  The driver of a vehicle may pass a funeral procession on its left side on any multiple-lane highway whenever such passing can be done safely, unless the procession is in the farthest left lane, in which case passing is permissible on the right. 
e.  When a funeral procession is proceeding through a red signal as permitted by subsection 3, a vehicle that is not in the procession may not enter the intersection unless it can do so without crossing the path of the funeral procession. If the red signal changes to green while the funeral procession is still within the intersection, a vehicle facing a green signal may proceed, but the funeral procession has the right of way. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-44. 
Sec. 24-14-44. - Weight limitations for vehicles on highways other than the interstate system. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-12-05.3. 
    39-12-05.3. Weight limitations for vehicles on highways other than the interstate system. 
1.  A person may not operate on a highway that is not part of the interstate system any vehicle with a single axle that carries a gross weight in excess of twenty thousand pounds [9071.85 kilograms] or a wheel load over ten thousand pounds [4535.92 kilograms]. A wheel may not carry a gross weight over five hundred fifty pounds [249.48 kilograms] for each inch [2.54 centimeters] of tire width. Axles spaced forty inches [101.60 centimeters] apart or less are considered as one axle. On axles spaced over forty inches [101.60 centimeters] and under eight feet [2.44 meters] apart, the axle load may not exceed nineteen thousand pounds [8618.26 kilograms] per axle, with a maximum of thirty-four thousand pounds [15422.14 kilograms] gross weight on a tandem axle and a maximum of forty-eight thousand pounds [21772.32 kilograms] gross weight on any grouping of three or more axles. The wheel load, in any instance, may not exceed one-half the allowable axle load. Spacing between axles is measured from axle center to axle center. 
2.  Subject to the limitations imposed by subsection 1 on tires, wheel, and axle loads, a person may not operate on a highway that is not part of the interstate system any vehicle the gross weight of which exceeds that determined by the formula of: 
 W = 500 (LN + 12N + 36)  
N-1 
where W equals the maximum gross weight in pounds on any vehicle or combination of vehicles; L equals distance in feet between the two extreme axles of any vehicle or combination of vehicles; and N equals the number of axles of any vehicle or combination of vehicles under consideration. The gross weight on state highways may not exceed one hundred five thousand five hundred pounds [47854.00 kilograms] unless otherwise posted and on all other highways the gross weight may not exceed eighty thousand pounds [36287.39 kilograms] unless designated by local authorities for highways under their jurisdiction for gross weights not to exceed one hundred five thousand five hundred pounds [47854.00 kilograms]. Local authorities are encouraged to assess all roads under their jurisdiction and designate the roads for the appropriate weight limits allowed under this subsection. 
3.  The gross weight limitations in subsections 1 and 2 do not apply to equipment the director and the state highway patrol approve for exemption. The exemption may not exceed one hundred five thousand five hundred pounds [47854.00 kilograms]. For every vehicle approved for exemption the highway patrol shall issue a nontransferable permit valid for one year. The highway patrol may charge an administrative fee for the permit. 
4.  The director, and local authorities, as to the highways under their respective jurisdictions, may issue permits authorizing a specific motor vehicle to exceed the weight limitations stated in subsections 1 and 2 by ten percent. The permits may not provide for a gross weight in excess of one hundred five thousand five hundred pounds [47854.00 kilograms]. The permits must provide only for the movement of agricultural products from the field of harvest to the point of initial storage site, and for the collection and transport of solid wastes, during the period from July fifteenth to December first, and for the general movement of products during the period from December first to March seventh. The appropriate jurisdictional authority shall establish an appropriate fee for the permits and direct how they shall be issued. The highway patrol shall issue the permits authorized by the director. 
5.  The director, and local authorities, as to highways under their respective jurisdictions, may issue permits authorizing all vehicles carrying potatoes or sugar beets to exceed weight limitations stated in subsections 1 and 2 by ten percent during the period from July fifteenth to December first. The permits may not provide for a gross weight in excess of one hundred five thousand five hundred pounds [47854.00 kilograms]. The appropriate jurisdictional authority shall establish an appropriate fee for the permits and direct how they shall be issued. The highway patrol shall issue the permits authorized by the director. 
6.  The gross weight limitations in subsections 1 and 2 do not apply to movement of a self-propelled fertilizer spreader if the weight of a single axle does not exceed twenty-two thousand pounds [9973.03 kilograms] and does not exceed five hundred fifty pounds [249.48 kilograms] for each inch [2.54 centimeters] of tire width. The gross weight limitations in subsections 1 and 2 do not apply to movement of a self-propelled agricultural chemical applicator if the weight of a single axle does not exceed twenty-two thousand pounds [9973.03 kilograms] and does not exceed five hundred fifty pounds [249.48 kilograms] for each inch [2.54 centimeters] of tire width. The highway patrol shall issue a seasonal permit for the commercial movement of vehicles exempted by this subsection. The seasonal permit issued under this subsection or under subdivision d of subsection 1 of section 39-12-04 entitles an individual with the permit to operate a vehicle as allowed by either of these provisions. A seasonal permit issued under this subsection is subject to the requirements of subdivision d of subsection 1 of section 39-12-04. 
7.  The weight limitations in subsections 1 and 2 do not apply to equipment the director and the state highway patrol approve for exemption but the weight limitations in section 39-12-05 do apply to that equipment. For every vehicle approved for exemption, the highway patrol shall issue a nontransferable bridge length permit valid for a single trip or a calendar year. 
8.  The axle weight limitations in subsection 1 do not apply to movements of implements of husbandry or equipment with pneumatic tires used for construction which is used by an agricultural producer while using the equipment for the producer's agricultural, horticultural, or livestock operations if the maximum wheel load does not exceed five hundred fifty pounds [249.48 kilograms] for each inch [2.54 centimeters] of tire width and if the gross weight limitation in this section is not exceeded. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1d, 10-6-2015) 
ARTICLE 15. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND REQUIREMENTS[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-15-1. - Operators must be licensed. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-06-01. 
    39-06-01. Operators must be licensed-Additional licensing-Penalty. 
1.  An individual, unless exempted in this section, may not drive any motor vehicle on a highway or on public or private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use in this state unless the individual has a valid license as an operator under this chapter or a temporary operator's permit issued under chapter 39-20. An individual may not receive an operator's license unless and until that individual surrenders to the director all operator's licenses and permits issued to that individual by any jurisdiction. If a license issued by another jurisdiction is surrendered, the director shall notify the issuing jurisdiction of the surrender. An individual may not have more than one valid operator's license at any one time. 
2.  An individual licensed as an operator may exercise the privilege granted by the license on any highway in this state and may not be required to obtain any other license to exercise the privilege by any political subdivision having authority to adopt police regulations, except that municipalities may regulate occupations and may regulate the operation of taxicabs under subsection 27 of section 40-05-01. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-2. - Restricted licenses. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-06-17. 
    39-06-17. Restricted licenses-Penalty for violation. 
1.  Upon issuing an operator's license or a temporary restricted operator's license under section 39-06.1-11, the director may impose restrictions suitable to a licensee's driving ability with respect to the type of motor vehicle, special mechanical control devices required on a motor vehicle that the licensee may operate, or any other restrictions applicable to the licensee as the director may determine to be appropriate to assure the safe operation of a motor vehicle by the licensee. The director may either issue a special restricted class D license or may state the restrictions upon the usual license form. In the same manner, the director shall restrict licenses under section 39-16.1-09. 
2.  The director may issue a restricted class D license to operate the parent's, guardian's, grandparent's, sibling's, aunt's, or uncle's automobile to a minor, who is at least fifteen years of age, and otherwise qualified, upon the written recommendation of the parent or guardian. A minor may operate a motor vehicle that is not the parent's or guardian's to take the actual ability test. The parent, guardian, grandparent, sibling, aunt, or uncle at all times is responsible for any and all damages growing out of the negligent operation of a motor vehicle by a minor. A restricted class D license may not be issued to a minor unless the minor, accompanied by the parent or guardian, appears in person and satisfies the director that: 
a.  The minor is at least fifteen years of age; 
b.  The minor is qualified to operate an automobile safely; 
c.  It is necessary for the child to drive the parent's, guardian's, grandparent's, sibling's, aunt's, or uncle's automobile without being accompanied by an adult; 
d.  The minor has successfully completed an approved driver's education course that includes a course of classroom instruction and a course of behind-the-wheel instruction acceptable to the director or has successfully completed a course at an approved commercial driver training school; and 
e.  The minor has accumulated a minimum of fifty hours of supervised, behind-the-wheel driving experience in various driving conditions and situations that include night driving; driving on gravel, dirt, or aggregate surface road; driving in both rural and urban conditions; and winter driving conditions. 
3.  The provisions of subsection 2 do not authorize a minor to drive a commercial truck, motorbus, or taxicab except the holder of a restricted class D license may drive a farm motor vehicle having a gross weight of fifty thousand pounds [22679.62 kilograms] while used to transport agricultural products, farm machinery, or farm supplies to or from a farm when so operated within one hundred fifty miles [241.40 kilometers] of the driver's farm. 
4.  A minor with a restricted class D license issued under subsection 2 may operate the type or class of motor vehicle specified on the restricted license under the following conditions: 
a.  A restricted license holder must be in possession of the license while operating the motor vehicle. 
b.  An individual holding a restricted class D license driving a motor vehicle may not carry more passengers than the vehicle manufacturer's suggested passenger capacity. 
c.  An individual holding a restricted class D license driving a motor vehicle may not operate an electronic communication device to talk, compose, read, or send an electronic message while operating a motor vehicle that is in motion unless the sole purpose of operating the device is to obtain emergency assistance, to prevent a crime about to be committed, or in the reasonable belief that an individual's life or safety is in danger. 
d.  An individual holding a restricted class D license may not operate a motor vehicle between the later of sunset or nine p.m. and five a.m. unless a parent, legal guardian, or an individual eighteen years of age or older is in the front seat of the motor vehicle or the motor vehicle is being driven directly to or from work, an official school activity, or a religious activity. 
5.  Upon receiving satisfactory evidence of any violation of the restrictions of a license, the director may suspend or revoke the license but the licensee is entitled to a hearing as upon a suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
6.  It is a class B misdemeanor for an individual to operate a motor vehicle in any manner in violation of the restrictions imposed under this section except for the restrictions in subsection 4. 
7.  If a temporary restricted license is issued under section 39-06.1-11 and the underlying suspension was imposed for a violation of section 39-08-01 or equivalent ordinance, or is governed by chapter 39-20, punishment is as provided in subsection 2 of section 39-06-42. Upon receiving notice of the conviction the director shall revoke, without opportunity for hearing, the licensee's temporary restricted license and shall extend the underlying suspension for a like period of not more than one year. 
8.  If the conviction referred to in this section is reversed by an appellate court, the director shall restore the individual to the status held by the individual before the conviction, including restoration of driving privileges if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-3. - Unlawful use of license. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-06-40. 
    39-06-40. Unlawful use of license-Penalty. 
1.  It is a class B misdemeanor for an individual: 
a.  To display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in possession any canceled, revoked, fictitious, or fraudulently altered operator's license or nondriver photo identification card; 
b.  To lend that individual's operator's license or nondriver photo identification card to any other individual or knowingly permit the use of that individual's operator's license or nondriver photo identification card by another individual; 
c.  To display or represent as an individual's own any operator's license or nondriver photo identification card not issued to that individual; 
d.  To fail or refuse to surrender to the director upon demand any operator's license or nondriver photo identification card that has been suspended, revoked, or canceled; 
e.  To permit any unlawful use of an operator's license or nondriver photo identification card issued to that individual; or 
f.  To use a false or fictitious name in any application for an operator's license or nondriver photo identification card or to knowingly make a false statement or to conceal a material fact or otherwise commit a fraud in the application. 
2.  Within five days of receiving a record of conviction or other satisfactory evidence of the violation of this section, the director shall revoke the individual's operator's license or nondriver photo identification card. The director may set the period of revocation, not to exceed six months. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-4. - When lighted lamps are required. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-01. 
    39-21-01. When lighted lamps are required. Subject to the exceptions for parked vehicles, every vehicle upon a highway within this state must display lighted headlamps, taillamps, and illuminating devices as required in this chapter for different classes of vehicles as follows: 
1.  At any time from sunset to sunrise, and every farm tractor upon a highway within this state at any time from a half hour after sunset to a half hour before sunrise; 
2.  At any time when it is raining, snowing, sleeting, or hailing or during other adverse driving conditions and these conditions do not render a person or vehicle on the highway clearly discernible at a distance of one thousand feet [304.8 meters] ahead; or 
3.  At any other time when visibility is impaired by weather, smoke, fog, or other conditions, or when there is insufficient light to render a person or vehicle on the highway clearly discernible at a distance of one thousand feet [304.8 meters] ahead. Stoplights, turn signals, and other signaling devices must be lighted as prescribed for the use of these devices. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-5. - Visibility distance and mounted height of lamps. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-02. 
    39-21-02. Visibility distance and mounted height of lamps. 
1.  Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to distance from which certain lamps and devices must render objects visible or within which such lamps or devices must be visible, said provisions apply during the times stated in section 39-21-01 in respect to a vehicle without load when upon a straight, level, unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different time or condition is expressly stated. 
2.  Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the mounted height of lamps or devices it means from the center of such lamp or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a load. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1e, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-6. - Taillamps. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-04. 
    39-21-04. Taillamps. 
1.  Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer, and any other vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, must be equipped with at least one taillamp mounted on the rear, which, when lighted as hereinbefore required, must emit a red light plainly visible from a distance of one thousand feet [304.8 meters] to the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the taillamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the distance specified. Every such above-mentioned vehicle, other than a truck tractor, registered in this state and manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1964, must be equipped with at least two taillamps mounted on the rear, on the same level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, which, when lighted as herein required, comply with the provisions of this section. 
2.  Every taillamp upon every vehicle must be located at a height of not more than seventy-two inches [182.88 centimeters] nor less than fifteen inches [38.1 centimeters]. 
3.  Either a taillamp or a separate lamp must be so constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and render it clearly legible from a distance of fifty feet [15.24 meters] to the rear. Any taillamp or taillamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the rear registration plate, must be so wired as to be lighted whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1e, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-7. - Use of multiple-beam road-lighting equipment. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-21. 
    39-21-21. Use of multiple-beam road-lighting equipment. Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in section 39-21-01, the driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal persons and vehicles at a safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements and limitations: 
1.  Whenever a driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle within five hundred feet [152.4 meters], such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver. The lowermost distribution of light, or composite beam, specified in subsection 2 of section 39-21-20 must be deemed to avoid glare at all times, regardless of road contour and loading. 
2.  Whenever the driver of a vehicle follows another vehicle within three hundred feet [91.44 meters] to the rear, the driver shall use a distribution of light permissible under this chapter other than the uppermost distribution of light specified in subsection 1 of section 39-21-20. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1e, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-8. - Special restrictions on lamps. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-26. 
    39-21-26. Special restrictions on lamps. 
1.  Any lighted lamp or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other than headlamps, spot lamps, auxiliary lamps, flashing turn signals, emergency vehicle warning lamps and schoolbus warning lamps, which projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than three hundred candlepower must be so directed that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than seventy-five feet [22.86 meters] from the vehicle. 
2.  No person may drive or move any vehicle or equipment upon any highway with any lamp or device thereon displaying a red or green light visible from directly in front of the center thereof. This section does not apply to any vehicle upon which a red light visible from the front is expressly authorized or required by this chapter. 
3.  Flashing lights are prohibited except on an authorized emergency vehicle, schoolbus, snow-removal equipment or on any vehicle as a means of indicating a right or left turn, or the presence of a vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, overtaking, or passing. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1e, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-9. - Brake equipment required. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-32. 
    39-21-32. Brake equipment required. 
1.  Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a highway must be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such vehicle, including two separate means of applying the brakes, each of which means must be effective to apply the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are connected in any way, they must be so constructed that failure of any one part of the operating mechanism does not leave the motor vehicle without brakes on at least two wheels. 
2.  Every farm tractor, motorcycle, and motor-driven cycle, when operated upon a highway, must be equipped with at least one brake, which may be operated by hand or foot. 
3.  Every trailer or semitrailer when operated upon a highway at a speed in excess of twenty-five miles [40.23 kilometers] per hour must be equipped with safety chains or brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to hold such vehicle and so designed as to be applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle from its cab, and said brakes must be so designed and connected that in case of an accidental breakaway of the towed vehicle the brakes are automatically applied. 
4.  One of the means of brake operation must be parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material. The parking brakes must be capable of being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation system or other power-assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking brakes must be so designed that when once applied they remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind. The same brakedrums, brakeshoes and lining assemblies, brakeshoe anchors, and mechanical brakeshoe actuation mechanism normally associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the parking brakes. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1e, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-10. - Lamp or flag on projecting load. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-13. 
    39-21-13. Lamp or flag on projecting load. Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet [121.92 centimeters] or more beyond the bed or body of the vehicle there must be displayed at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in section 39-21-01, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least six hundred feet [182.88 meters] to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this section must be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there must be displayed at the extreme rear end of a load a red flag or cloth not less than twelve inches [30.48 centimeters] square and so hung that the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the rear. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1e, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-15-5. 
Sec. 24-15-11. - Muffler-Prevention of noise and smoke. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-37. 
    39-21-37. Muffler-Prevention of noise and smoke. 
1.  Every motor vehicle must at all times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person may use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a highway. 
2.  The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle must be so equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or smoke. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1e, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-15-6. 
Sec. 24-15-12. - Mirror. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-38. 
    39-21-38. Mirror. On and after January 1, 1964, every motor vehicle, operated singly or when towing any other vehicle, must be equipped with a mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least two hundred feet [60.96 meters] to the rear of such motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1f, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-13. - Windshield-Must be unobstructed and equipped with wipers-Tinted windows. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-39. 
    39-21-39. Windshield-Must be unobstructed and equipped with wipers-Tinted windows. 
1.  A motor vehicle must be equipped with a windshield. An individual may not drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, or side or rear windows which obstructs the driver's clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway. 
2.  The windshield on a motor vehicle must be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield, which must be constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle. 
3.  The windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle must be maintained in good working order. 
4.  An individual may not operate a motor vehicle with any object, material, or tinting displayed, affixed, or applied on the front windshield or any window unless the object, material, or tinting in conjunction with the windshield upon which it is displayed, affixed, or applied has a light transmittance of at least seventy percent or the object, material, or tinting in conjunction with a window other than the windshield upon which it is displayed, affixed, or applied has a light transmittance of at least fifty percent. This subsection does not apply to windows behind the operator if the motor vehicle is equipped with outside mirrors on both sides that meet the requirements of section 39-21-38. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1f, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-15-7. 
Sec. 24-15-14. - Restrictions as to tire equipment. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-40. 
    39-21-40. Restrictions as to tire equipment. 
1.  Every solid rubber tire on a vehicle must have rubber on its entire traction surface at least one inch [2.54 centimeters] thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery. 
2.  No person may operate or move on any highway any motor vehicle, trailer, or semitrailer having any metal tire in contact with the roadway. 
3.  No tire on a vehicle moved on a highway may have on its periphery any block, stud, flange, cleat, or spike or any other protuberance of any material other than rubber which projects beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, except that it is permissible to use farm machinery with tires having protuberances which will not injure the highway, and except also that it is permissible to use tire chains of reasonable proportions. It is also permissible to use, from October fifteenth to April fifteenth, pneumatic tires which have metal studs which do not project more than one-sixteenth of an inch [1.59 millimeters] beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire, except that it is permissible to use such tires on schoolbuses at any time during the year. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1g, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-15. - Child restraint devices. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-41.2. 
    39-21-41.2. Child restraint devices-Evidence. 
1.  If a child, under seven years of age, is present in any motor vehicle, that motor vehicle must be equipped with at least one child restraint system for each such child. However, a child under the age of seven who is at least fifty-seven inches [1.45 meters] tall and who weighs at least eighty pounds [36.28 kilograms] is not required to use a child restraint system. The child restraint system must meet the standards adopted by the United States Department of Transportation for those systems [49 CFR 571.213]. While the motor vehicle is in motion, each such child must be properly secured in the child restraint system in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. A child weighing more than forty pounds [18.14 kilograms] may be restrained by a lap belt if the vehicle is not equipped with lap and shoulder belts or if all lap and shoulder belts are in use by other occupants. While the motor vehicle is moving, each child of seven through seventeen years of age who is in the motor vehicle must be in an approved child restraint system in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions or correctly buckled in a seatbelt. Use of child restraint systems and seatbelts is not required in motor vehicles that were not equipped with seatbelts when manufactured. If a child is being transported in an emergency situation, this section does not apply. 
2.  Violation of this section is not, in itself, evidence of negligence. The fact of a violation of this section is not admissible in any proceeding other than one charging the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1g, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-15-8. 
Sec. 24-15-16. - Use of safety belts required in certain motor vehicles-Enforcement-Evidence. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-41.4. 
    39-21-41.4. Use of safety belts required in certain motor vehicles-Enforcement-Evidence. Subject to the limitations of this section and section 39-21-41.5, a driver may not operate upon a highway a motor vehicle designed for carrying fewer than eleven passengers, which was originally manufactured with safety belts unless each front seat occupant is wearing a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. This section does not apply to a child in a child restraint or seatbelt in accordance with section 39-21-41.2; to drivers of implements of husbandry; to operators of farm vehicles as defined in subsection 5 of section 39-04-19; to rural mail carriers while on duty delivering mail; to an occupant with a medical or physically disabling condition that prevents appropriate restraint in a safety belt, if a qualified physician states in a signed writing the nature of the condition and the reason restraint is inappropriate; or when all front seat safety belts are in use by other occupants. A physician who, in good faith, provides a statement that restraint would be inappropriate is not subject to civil liability. A violation for not wearing a safety belt under this section is not, in itself, evidence of negligence. The fact of a violation of this section is not admissible in any proceeding other than one charging the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1g, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-15-9. 
Sec. 24-15-17. - Modification of motor vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-45.1. 
    39-21-45.1. Modification of motor vehicle. 
1.  An individual who operates a registered motor vehicle on a highway may not modify that vehicle unless the modification meets the following requirements: 
a.  Any modifying equipment must meet any other requirement applicable to a vehicle under chapter 39-21. 
b.  If tires placed on a motor vehicle have a diameter greater than that of the tires on the motor vehicle as manufactured, those tires must be branded with a United States Department of Transportation tire identification number. 
c.  The maximum body height permitted for a motor vehicle is forty-two inches [106.68 centimeters]. Measurement of body height is made from a level ground surface to the floor of the cargo area. 
2.  An individual may not operate a registered motor vehicle on a highway unless the motor vehicle is equipped with front and rear bumpers. The height of the bumper must not exceed twenty-seven inches [68.58 centimeters] and this measurement is made from a level ground surface to the highest point on the bottom of the bumper. A horizontal drop bumper may be used to comply with this subsection and must be at least three inches [7.62 centimeters] in vertical width; extend the entire horizontal body width; and be horizontal, load bearing, and attached to the vehicle frame to effectively transfer impact when engaged. 
3.  Vehicles owned by law enforcement agencies, the military, firefighting agencies, and ambulances may be modified without regard to this section. 
4.  The director may adopt rules to implement this section. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1h, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-18. - Scope and effect of equipment requirements-Penalty. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-46. 
    39-21-46. Scope and effect of equipment requirements-Penalty. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which the actor knows does not contain those parts or is not at all times equipped with lamps and other equipment in proper condition and adjustment as required in this chapter, or which the actor knows is equipped in any manner in violation of this chapter, or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required under this chapter for which a fee or penalty for its violation is not otherwise provided. 
2.  A person who drives or moves, or any owner who causes or knowingly permits to be driven or moved upon a highway, any vehicle or combination of vehicles which that person knows is in such unsafe condition as to endanger a person is guilty of an infraction. 
3.  The superintendent of the state highway patrol shall, under chapter 28-32, adopt necessary rules concerning the safe operation of motor vehicles and when and how motor carrier audits or inspections will be conducted. The rules must duplicate or be consistent with current motor carrier safety regulations of the United States Department of Transportation. The superintendent of the state highway patrol may adopt the motor carrier safety regulations by reference, and any adoption must be construed to incorporate amendments as may be made from time to time. A violation of rules adopted under this subsection is a noncriminal violation. A person who fails or refuses to comply with these rules must be assessed a fee in the amount set forth in section 39-06.1-06 for each violation. 
4.  Nothing contained in this chapter may be construed to prohibit the use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
5.  The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment on vehicles do not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers, or farm tractors except as specifically made applicable. 
6.  The provisions of this chapter with respect to equipment required on vehicles do not apply to motorcycles or motor-driven cycles, except as specifically made applicable. 
7.  The provisions of this chapter and regulations of the department do not apply to vehicles moved solely by human power, except as specifically made applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1h, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-15-19. - Slow-moving vehicles required to display identification emblem-Penalty. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-50. 
    39-21-50. Slow-moving vehicles required to display identification emblem-Penalty. All implements of husbandry, as defined in section 39-01-01, and machinery, including all road construction machinery, designed for operation at a speed of twenty-five miles [40.23 kilometers] an hour or less, must display either a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem or a rotating or flashing amber light, as authorized for class B emergency vehicles, whenever traveling along the roadway on any county, state, federal highway, or city street in the state of North Dakota. The emblem or light must be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not less than five hundred feet [152.4 meters] to the rear. The director shall adopt standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the slow-moving vehicle emblem and light. The standards and specifications for slow-moving vehicle emblems referred to in this section must correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American society of agricultural engineers. No vehicle, other than those specified in this section, must display a slow-moving vehicle emblem, and its use on any type of stationary object is prohibited. Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this section must be assessed a fee of twenty dollars for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1h, 10-6-2015) 
ARTICLE 16. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-SPEED[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-16-1. - Basic rule. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-09-01. 
    39-09-01. Basic rule-Penalty for violation. No person may drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions. Any person who drives a vehicle upon a highway or private or public property open to the public for the operation of motor vehicles without heed to the requirements or restrictions of this section has committed careless driving and must be assessed a fee of thirty dollars. Any person who, by reason of careless driving as herein defined, causes and inflicts injury upon the person of an operator of snow removal equipment engaged in snow removal operations or causes damage in excess of one thousand dollars to snow removal equipment engaged in snow removal is guilty of an infraction. As used in this section, "snow removal equipment" means a vehicle that is operated by a person employed by or on behalf of an authority in charge of the maintenance of the highway to perform winter maintenance snow and ice removal, including plowing, hauling away, salting, and sanding. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-16-2. - Speed limitation. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-09-02. 
    39-09-02. Speed limitations. 
1.  Subject to the provisions of section 39-09-01 and except in those instances when a lower speed is specified in this chapter, it presumably is lawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive the same at a speed not exceeding: 
a.  Twenty miles [32.19 kilometers] an hour when approaching within fifty feet [15.24meters] of a grade crossing of any steam, electric, or street railway when the driver's view is obstructed. A driver's view is deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last two hundred feet [60.96 meters] of the driver's approach to such crossing, the driver does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such railway crossing and of any traffic on such railway for a distance of four hundred feet [121.92 meters] in each direction from such crossing. 
b.  Twenty miles [32.19 kilometers] an hour when passing a school during school recess or while children are going to or leaving school during opening or closing hours, unless a lower speed is designated or posted by local authorities. 
c.  Twenty miles [32.19 kilometers] an hour when approaching within fifty feet [15.24 meters] and in traversing an intersection of highways when the driver's view is obstructed. A driver's view is deemed to be obstructed when at any time during the last fifty feet [15.24 meters] of the driver's approach to such intersection, the driver does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of such intersection and of the traffic upon all of the highways entering such intersection for a distance of two hundred feet [60.96 meters] from such intersection. 
d.  Twenty miles [32.19 kilometers] an hour when the driver's view of the highway ahead is obstructed within a distance of one hundred feet [30.48 meters]. 
e.  Twenty-five miles [40.23 kilometers] an hour on any highway in a business district or in a residence district or in a public park, unless a different speed is designated and posted by local authorities. 
f.  Fifty-five miles [88.51 kilometers] an hour on gravel, dirt, or loose surface highways, and on paved two-lane county and township highways if there is no speed limit posted, unless otherwise permitted, restricted, or required by conditions. 
g.  Sixty-five miles [104.61 kilometers] an hour on paved two-lane highways if posted for that speed, unless otherwise permitted, restricted, or required by conditions. 
h.  Seventy miles [112.65 kilometers] an hour on paved and divided multilane highways, unless otherwise permitted, restricted, or required by conditions. 
i.  Seventy-five miles [120.70 kilometers] an hour on access-controlled, paved and divided, multilane interstate highways, unless otherwise permitted, restricted, or required by conditions. 
2.  The director may designate and post special areas of state highways where lower speed limits apply. Differing limits may be established for different times of the day within highway construction zones which are effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable speed limit signs. 
3.  Except as provided by law, it is unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon a highway at a speed that is unsafe or at a speed exceeding the speed limit prescribed by law or established pursuant to law. 
4.  In charging a violation of the provisions of this section, the complaint must specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven and the speed which this section prescribes is prima facie lawful at the time and place of the alleged offense. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-16-3. - When local authorities may or shall alter maximum speed. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-09-03. 
    39-09-03. When local authorities may or shall alter maximum speed-Limits-Signs posted. 
1.  Whenever local authorities in their respective jurisdictions, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, determine that the maximum speed permitted under this title is greater or less than is reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon a highway or part of a highway, the local authority may determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit thereon which: 
a.  Decreases the limit at intersections; 
b.  Increases the limit within an urban district but not to more than fifty-five miles [88.51 kilometers] per hour; or 
c.  Decreases the limit outside an urban district. 
2.  Local authorities in their respective jurisdictions shall determine by an engineering and traffic investigation the proper maximum speed for arterial streets and shall declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit thereon which may be greater or less than the maximum speed permitted under this chapter for an urban district. 
3.  Any altered limit established as hereinabove authorized shall be effective at all times or during hours of darkness or at other times as may be determined when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon such street or highway. 
4.  Any alteration of maximum limits on state highways or extensions thereof in a municipality by local authorities may not be effective until such alteration has been approved by the director. 
5.  Not more than six such alterations as hereinabove authorized may be made per mile [1.61 kilometers] along a street or highway, except in the case of reduced limits at intersections, and the difference between adjacent limits may not be more than ten miles [16.09 kilometers] per hour. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-16-4. - Minimum speed limits. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-09-09. 
    39-09-09. Minimum speed limits. 
1.  An individual may not drive a motor vehicle at a reduced speed so as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
2.  If the director and the superintendent of the highway patrol, acting jointly, or a local authority within the authority's jurisdiction, determines on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any highway or part of a highway impede the safe, normal, and reasonable movement of traffic, the director and superintendent or the local authority may determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which an individual may not drive a vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law, and that limit is effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable signs. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 17. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-PARKING[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-17-1. - Parking privileges for mobility impaired. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-01-15. 
(1)  Certificate or license plate not prominently displayed. 
(2)  Mobility impaired parking. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-17-2. - Unattended motor vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-51. 
    39-10-51. Unattended motor vehicle. No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle may permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, effectively setting the brake thereon, and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1219, § 1c, 10-6-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly § 24-14-33. 
Sec. 24-17-3. - Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-49. 
    39-10-49. Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places. No person may stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
1.  On a sidewalk. 
2.  In front of a public or private driveway. 
3.  Within an intersection. 
4.  Within ten feet [3.05 meters] of a fire hydrant. 
5.  On a crosswalk. 
6.  Within ten feet [3.05 meters] of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
7.  Within fifteen feet [4.57 meters] upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
8.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within fifteen feet [4.57 meters] of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the department or local authority indicates a different length by signs or markings. 
9.  Within fifteen feet [4.57 meters] of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
10.  Within twenty feet [6.10 meters] of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five feet [22.86 meters] of said entrance when properly signposted. 
11.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic. 
12.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street. 
13.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
14.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
    No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under the person's control into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1i, 10-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-17-4. - Additional parking regulations. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-50. 
    39-10-50. Additional parking regulations. 
1.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway must be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within twelve inches [30.48 centimeters] of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder. 
2.  Except where otherwise provided by local ordinance, every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway must be so stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within twelve inches [30.48 centimeters] of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within twelve inches [30.48 centimeters] of the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder. 
3.  Local authorities may by ordinance permit angle parking on any roadway, except that angle parking is not permitted on any federal-aid or state highway without first obtaining the written authorization of the director. 
4.  The department with respect to highways under its jurisdiction may place official traffic-control devices prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway where in its opinion such stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the highway or where the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. No person may stop, stand, or park any vehicle in violation of the restrictions indicated by such devices. 
5.  The department, with respect to streets, roadways, and parking areas of any state charitable or penal institution and on the state capitol grounds, may authorize the purchase and placement by the supervisory agency of official traffic-control devices prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles. The placement of signs pursuant to this section must be done when, in the department's opinion, the stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous or would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic, especially the free flow of traffic required for proper fire protection. No person may stop, stand, or park any vehicle in violation of the restriction indicated by any official traffic-control device. Any registered owner must be presumed to have been the operator of a vehicle that is parked in violation of any official traffic-control device prohibiting or restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway, state charitable or penal institution property, or on the state capitol grounds. This presumption may be rebutted by a showing of clear and convincing evidence to the contrary. However, no traffic citation may be issued for a violation of this subsection occurring on the state capitol grounds during a legislative session, except that a written warning must be placed on any vehicle for such a violation. 
(Ord. No. 1219, § 1i, 10-6-2015) 
ARTICLE 18. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-RAILROADS[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-18-1. - Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-41. 
    39-10-41. Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. 
1.  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty feet [15.24 meters] but not less than fifteen feet [4.57 meters] from the nearest rail of such railroad, and may not proceed until the driver can do so safely. The foregoing requirements apply when: 
a.  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
b.  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
c.  A railroad train approaching within approximately one thousand three hundred twenty feet [402.34 meters] of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; or 
d.  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
2.  No person may drive any vehicle through, around, or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. No person may drive any vehicle past any human flagman at a railroad crossing until the flagman signals that the way is clear to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-18-2. - All vehicles must stop at certain railroad grade crossings. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-42. 
    39-10-42. All vehicles must stop at certain railroad grade crossings. The department of transportation and local authorities, with respect to highways under their respective jurisdiction, are hereby authorized to designate particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When such stop signs are erected, the driver of any vehicle shall stop within fifty feet [15.24 meters] but not less than fifteen feet [4.57 meters] from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-18-3. - Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10-43. 
    39-10-43. Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings. 
1.  The driver of a bus carrying passengers, or of any schoolbus, or of any vehicle carrying any chlorine, empty or loaded cargo tank vehicles used to transport dangerous articles or any liquid having a flashpoint below two hundred degrees Fahrenheit [93.33 degrees Celsius], cargo tank vehicles transporting a commodity having a temperature above its flashpoint at the time of loading, certain cargo tank vehicles transporting commodities under special permits issued by the hazardous materials regulations board, and every motor vehicle which must have the following placards: "explosives", "poison", "flammable oxidizers", "compressed gas", "corrosives", "flammable gas", "radioactive", or "dangerous", before crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle within fifty feet [15.24 meters] but not less than fifteen feet [4.57 meters] from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach of a train and may not proceed until the driver can do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is safe to do so, the driver of any said vehicle shall cross only in such gear of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for manually changing gears while traversing such crossing and the driver may not manually shift gears while crossing the track or tracks. 
2.  No stop need be made at any such crossing at which traffic is controlled by a police officer. For the purposes of this section, a United States marshal must be considered a police officer. 
3.  No stop need be made at a crossing that the director has designated as an out-of-service crossing and which is clearly marked by signs bearing the words "Tracks out of service" or "Exempt" in conspicuous places on each side of the crossing. 
4.  The designation must be limited to use at crossings where track has been abandoned or its use discontinued. 
5.  The director shall notify the road authority and any railway company of a crossing under the jurisdiction of that railway company which the director has designated as an out-of-service crossing under this section and the road authority shall erect signs bearing the words "Tracks out of service" or "Exempt" in conspicuous places on each side of the crossing. 
6.  All signs must conform to the manual on uniform traffic-control devices as provided under section 39-13-06. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 19. - N.D.C.C. CROSS-REFERENCE-BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES AND OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLES[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Note- The N.D.C.C. text has been repeated here for reference. The text was copied on or about June 15, 2015, unless there is a note listing a later date for a specific section. The text contained on the N.D.C.C. web site is the official version and should be consulted to verify accuracy of the text reproduced here. 

Sec. 24-19-1. - Clinging to vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.1-04. 
    39-10.1-04. Clinging to vehicle. No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle may attach the same or the person's self to any vehicle upon a roadway, except a sled being pulled by a snowmobile. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-19-2. - Riding on motorcycle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.2-02. 
    39-10.2-02. Riding on motorcycle. 
1.  A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator may not carry any other person nor may any other person ride on a motorcycle unless such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator. 
2.  A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle. 
3.  No person may operate a motorcycle while carrying any package, bundle, or other article which prevents the person from keeping both hands on the handlebars. 
4.  No operator may carry any person, nor may any person ride in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of the motorcycle or the view of the operator. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-19-3. - Operating motorcycles on roadways laned for traffic. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.2-03. 
    39-10.2-03. Operating motorcycles on roadways laned for traffic. 
1.  All motorcycles are entitled to full use of a lane and no motor vehicle may be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorcycle of the full use of a lane. This subsection does not apply to the operation of motorcycles two abreast in a single lane as authorized in subsection 4. 
2.  The operator of a motorcycle may not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
3.  No person may operate a motorcycle between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
4.  Motorcycles may not be operated more than two abreast in a single lane. 
5.  Subsections 2 and 3 do not apply to police officers in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-19-4. - Clinging to other vehicle. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.2-04. 
    39-10.2-04. Clinging to other vehicle. No person riding upon a motorcycle may attach the person's self or the motorcycle to any other vehicle on a roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-19-5. - Footrests. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.2-05. 
    39-10.2-05. Footrests. Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed cab, must be equipped with footrests for such passenger. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-19-6. - Equipment for motorcycle riders. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.2-06. 
    39-10.2-06. Equipment for motorcycle riders. 
1.  No person under the age of eighteen years may operate or ride upon a motorcycle unless a safety helmet meeting United States Department of Transportation standards is being worn on the head of the operator and rider, except when participating in a lawful parade. If the operator of a motorcycle is required to wear a safety helmet, any passenger must also wear a safety helmet regardless of the age of the passenger. 
2.  This section does not apply to persons riding within an enclosed cab or on a golf cart. 
3.  No person may operate a motorcycle if a person under the age of eighteen years is a passenger upon that motorcycle and is not wearing a safety helmet as provided in subsection 1. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-19-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1283, § (2), adopted March 20, 2018, repealed § 24-19-7, which pertained to snowmobile registration-Title certificate-General requirements and derived from Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), adopted August 4, 2015. The user's attention is directed to § 24-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 24-19-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1283, § (2), adopted March 20, 2018, repealed § 24-19-8, which pertained to rules for operation of snowmobiles and derived from Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), adopted August 4, 2015. The user's attention is directed to § 24-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 24-19-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1283, § (2), adopted March 20, 2018, repealed § 24-19-9, which pertained to operation by individuals-Minimum age and derived from Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), adopted August 4, 2015. The user's attention is directed to § 24-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 24-19-10. - Penalties. 
    Citations issued into municipal court under this section are for a violation of N.D.C.C. § 39-24-11. 
    39-24-11. Penalties. Any person who violates subsection 12 of section 39-24-09 must be assessed a fee of one hundred dollars. Any person who violates subdivision b or g of subsection 5 of section 39-24-09 is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Any person who violates subdivision c of subsection 5 of section 39-24-09 is guilty of an infraction or a class B misdemeanor as determined by section 39-24.1-07. Any person who violates subsection 11 of section 39-24-09 is guilty of a class B misdemeanor and must be assessed a fine of at least one hundred dollars. Any person who violates any other provision of section 39-24-09 must be assessed a fee of twenty dollars. Any person, unless specifically exempted, who fails to register or fails to display a decal as required by sections 39-24-02 and 39-24-04 must be assessed a fee of fifty dollars. If the person provides proof of registration after the violation, the fee may be reduced by one-half. Any person who violates any other provision of this chapter for which a specific penalty is not provided must be assessed a fee of ten dollars. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 24-19-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1283, § (2), adopted March 20, 2018, repealed § 24-19-11, which pertained to off-highway vehicle registration and derived from Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), adopted August 4, 2015. The user's attention is directed to § 24-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 24-19-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1283, § (2), adopted March 20, 2018, repealed § 24-19-12, which pertained to operation of off-highway vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), adopted August 4, 2015. The user's attention is directed to § 24-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 24-19-13. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1283, § (2), adopted March 20, 2018, repealed § 24-19-13, which pertained to operation by persons under age sixteen and derived from Ord. No. 1219, § 1j, adopted Oct. 6, 2015. The user's attention is directed to § 24-5-1 et seq. 
Chapter 26 - MUNICIPAL CODE ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE 1. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 26-1-1. - Authority and powers, right of entry. 
(a)  Authority and powers . The code enforcement officer or designee shall have the authority and powers necessary to gain compliance with this Code. These powers include issuing violation notices and citations, inspecting public and private property and using whatever administrative and judicial remedies are available under this Code or state and federal law. 
(b)  Right of entry . The code enforcement officer or designee is authorized to enter any building or premises for the purpose of making an inspection or to enforce any ordinance, subject to constitutional limitations and the procedures described in section 2-2-1 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-1-2. - Areas of responsibility. 
    The code enforcement program is responsible for the enforcement of those requirements of this Code deemed appropriate by the city administrator and city commission in order to ensure the protection of the public's health, safety, welfare and quality of life. The code enforcement officer shall work with department directors to develop an enforcement procedure in the following areas of responsibility: 
(1)  Municipal nuisance, 
(2)  Building and property maintenance, 
(3)  Zoning and land use, 
(4)  Public places and rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-1-3. - Duties. 
(a)  Investigation and action . 
(1)  The code enforcement officer or designee shall investigate complaints received by the city concerning potential violations on public or private property. If a violation is found, the code enforcement officer or designee shall notify the violator and grant reasonable time to correct the violation. 
(2)  The code enforcement officer or designee shall monitor activity within the city and, if a possible violation is identified, verify the validity of the violation. Once the violation has been verified, the code enforcement officer or designee shall take appropriate action to correct the violation. 
(3)  Depending on the nature of the violation, the code enforcement officer or designee shall issue a notice of violation and demand for corrective action for a non-criminal violation or issue a citation into municipal court for a criminal violation of city code. The code enforcement officer or designee may also seek a civil penalty or other judicial relief to recoup city costs for mitigation of the violation or to obtain a court order to force the property owner to mitigate the violation. 
(4)  Should a violation present an immediate threat to public health or safety or when there is a declared emergency, the code enforcement officer or designee may take immediate action to mitigate any threat to public health or safety caused by the violation. 
(b)  Notification . Notification of violation shall be delivered in person or by regular mail, unless otherwise stated in this code or state or federal law, rule or regulation. The letter shall indicate: 
(1)  Location of the violation, 
(2)  Nature of the violation, 
(3)  Reference to applicable code, 
(4)  Time in which to correct the violation, 
(5)  How to request a reasonable extension of time to correct the violation, 
(6)  Potential penalties for noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
ARTICLE 2. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 26-2-1. - Options. 
(a)  Selection . The code enforcement officer or designee may enforce this code through administrative, criminal or civil processes. The code enforcement officer shall use discretion in determining the appropriate course of enforcement and shall, whenever possible, attempt to obtain compliance through personal contact and explanation of the issue before resorting to issuance of a formal notice of violation. 
(b)  Administrative. The code enforcement officer or designee is authorized to enforce provisions of this Code by initiating administrative proceedings to correct a violation. 
(1)  The code enforcement officer or designee may issue a notice of violation and order the correction of the violation by a specified date. The person to whom the notice of violation is being directed may be contacted by any means available including personal contact, email, social media account, telephone, posting a notice on the property or mailing a notice utilizing the United States Postal Service. The date specified for correction of the violation shall be reasonable based on the nature and severity of the violation. Violations that present an imminent threat to public health or safety may be ordered to be corrected within as short a period as several hours. Violations that do not present an imminent threat to public health or safety shall be given at least five days to be corrected. A notice to the effect that daily penalties of up to $500.00 per day may be assessed if compliance is not accomplished within the time specified and that any penalty can be assessed against the property if unpaid. 
(2)  Except for violations that present an imminent threat to public health or safety, the person receiving the notice of violation may contact the code enforcement officer or designee and request an extension of time to mitigate the violation or file a written appeal challenging the order citing the specific grounds for reversal or modification of the order. A request for a time extension or an appeal must be filed with the code enforcement officer or other designated city representative before the date of compliance specified in the notice of violation. In the absence of a timely appeal, the findings of the code enforcement officer or designee contained in the notice of violation shall be deemed true and final. 
(3)  When a request for more time to comply is received, the code enforcement officer or designee may either grant or deny the request for an extension of time. Should the request for an extension of time be denied, the person who received the notice of violation may appeal to the appeals board within 15 days of the denial of a request for time extension. 
(4)  If the violation is not corrected within the specified time, the code enforcement officer or designee shall issue a second notice of violation and specify that after the period allowed for compliance that a penalty of up to $500.00 a day will be imposed for each day any violation is permitted to exist beyond the time for compliance. The code enforcement officer or designee may extend the time of compliance stated in the first notice of violation or state that daily penalties will commence on the date of issuance of the second notice of violation. The code enforcement officer shall also record a notice with the Morton County Recorder's Office of a pending action against the property. 
(5)  Failure of the person issued a notice of violation to comply within the time specified may result in the city, at its option, taking action to mitigate the violation or referring the matter to municipal court. 
(6)  If the city elects to take direct action to correct the violation the person will be billed for the actual costs incurred by the city plus administrative overhead and a penalty amount equal to the per day penalty assessment. Any bill remaining unpaid shall be assessed against the property in the manner used by the city for other unpaid bills. 
(c)  Criminal. 
(1)  City options. Depending on the seriousness of the violation, the city may seek corrective action and penalties in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Term of violation. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate violation that may be cited and prosecuted as a separate action before the court. 
(3)  Prosecution of criminal violation. At the request of the code enforcement officer or designee, the city prosecutor or designee shall bring action in any court of competent jurisdiction to charge the violator and mitigate the violation. 
(d)  Civil . In addition to the authority to commence administrative proceedings for the purpose of imposing civil penalties, a judicial action seeking a civil penalty may be commenced by the city attorney, who may also seek any other relief available to the city. Any judicial action for a civil penalty may seek an award for attorney's fees, costs, expenses and disbursements. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-2-2. - Court action. 
(a)  Taking any action to mitigate the violation using city resources or city contractors shall not preclude the city from taking any other action concurrently. 
(b)  When a judgment is obtained by the city in an action for civil penalties, in addition to the appropriate methods of enforcement of the judgment established in the North Dakota Century Code and North Dakota Rules of Civil Procedure, such judgment for penalties shall be assessed and collected in the same manner as other unpaid bills or assessments. 
(c)  The city attorney may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with this Code or to restrain by injunction the violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
ARTICLE 3. - MODIFICATIONS TO NOTICE OF VIOLATION 

Sec. 26-3-1. - Time extension. 
(a)  The person receiving a notice of violation may request and the code enforcement officer or designee may grant a time extension for compliance during the period of compliance specified in the first notice of violation. 
(b)  Once the deadline for compliance stated in the first notice of violation or any extension granted by the code enforcement officer or designee has passed, no additional time extension may be granted unless authorized by the board of appeals after hearing an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-3-2. - Appeal. 
(a)  Stay of enforcement . Unless there is an imminent threat to public health or safety, receipt of an appeal shall stay any enforcement action by the city. 
(b)  Action by code enforcement officer. Upon receipt of an appeal, the code enforcement officer or designee shall forward the appeal to the chairman of the board of appeals. 
(c)  Action by the board of appeals. Upon receiving an appeal from the code enforcement officer or designee, the board of appeals shall schedule a hearing on the appeal. The hearing shall be held and a decision rendered no later than 30 days after receipt of the appeal by the board of appeals. Scheduling of the hearing shall be coordinated with the person filing the appeal. If the board of appeals fails to act within 30 days, the appeal shall be forwarded to the board of city commissioners for action. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-3-3. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  Composition . The board of appeals shall consist of three or five members appointed for three year terms with the initial appointments staggered so individual member's terms expire in different years. The city administrator shall recommend appointments to the board of appeals. The board of city commissioners shall appoint the members of the board of appeals. Members of the board of appeals shall be selected from people who submit applications to be appointed to the board of appeals. Members of the board of appeals must be city residents and may be a member of another appointed board, committee or commission within city government. Members of the board of appeals may not be elected officials or city employees. 
(b)  Powers and duties. 
(1)  The board of appeals shall address all questions of interpretation and enforcement of city code arising from a notice of violation issued by the code enforcement officer or designee. 
(2)  The board of appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs. 
(3)  Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman or acting chairman. 
(4)  Meetings shall be open public meetings. 
(5)  Minutes shall be kept that record all actions taken by the board of appeals. The minutes shall document how each board member voted on any action taken. The minutes shall be open to public inspection. 
(6)  The board of appeals, at its discretion and based on the nature of the violation, may individually notify neighboring property owners or others of the appeal hearing. 
(7)  The board of appeals, at its discretion, may call expert witnesses to address technical issues regarding the notice of violation being appealed. 
(8)  The board of appeals, at its discretion, may allow neighbors or other residents of the city to speak at the hearing. 
(9)  The person filing the appeal may have legal and technical representation at the hearing. Those persons shall be allowed to speak at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 26-3-4. - Appeal board decisions reviewable. 
    A decision of the board of appeals may be appealed to the board of city commissioners by either the aggrieved applicant or by any officer, department, or board of the city. The appeal must be filed with the city administrator within 15 days after notice of the decision of the board of appeals. The board of city commissioners shall fix a time, within 30 days, for the hearing of the appeal and shall give due notice of the hearing to the parties. The board of city commissioners shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney at the hearing of the board of city commissioners on the appeal. The board of city commissioners may reverse the decision of the board of appeals, in whole or in part, or modify the order, decision, or determination appealed. 
(Ord. No. 1248, § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Subpart B - LAND DEVELOPMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapter 101 - ADMINISTRATION AND PLANNING 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 101-1-1. - Legislative intent. 
    It is the intent of the board to promote the health, safety and general welfare by guiding the development of the city by means of a comprehensive land use plan which is, in part, carried out by the provisions of this subpart. It is the intent of this subpart to provide regulations, standards and guides for the city's development, in accordance with a comprehensive plan, which will: 
(1)  Lessen congestion in the streets; 
(2)  Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
(3)  Promote the health and general welfare; 
(4)  Prevent the overcrowding of land; 
(5)  Provide for adequate light and air; 
(6)  Avoid undue concentration of population; and 
(7)  Facilitate adequate provision for transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other requirements. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0201; Code 1994, § 21-02-01; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014) 
State Law reference- Purposes of zoning ordinances, N.D.C.C. § 40-47-03. 
Sec. 101-1-2. - Application. 
    The zoning ordinances and subdivision regulations of the city shall apply to all territory within the corporate boundary limits of the city and all territory within the extraterritorial jurisdiction boundaries as set and determined by ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1994, § 21-02-02; Ord. No. 494, § 2, 1975; Ord. No. 902, § 2, 10-21-2003; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014) 
Sec. 101-1-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subpart, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory building means a subordinate structure which is customarily incidental to that of a principal building on the same lot. 
    Accessory dwelling unit means a place for occupancy by one family that is subordinate to the primary dwelling unit on the lot. 
    Accessory use means a subordinate use which is customarily incidental to that of a primary use on the same lot. 
    Adult care facility means a business providing daily care lasting less than 24 hours for persons who are frail or physically, cognitively or functionally impaired that is located in a hospital, 24-hour care center or nursing home as an accessory use or is a standalone activity not affiliated with any other medical provider or service. 
    Adult establishment definitions. See section 12-2-1. 
    Alley means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of a property. 
    Animal hospital or clinic means a facility for the care and well-being of animals under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian; including, but not limited to, medical services, grooming, confinement or kenneling for medical purposes but excluding incinerating or cremating of animals or animal parts upon the premises. 
    Arterial street means a road intended to move large volumes of through traffic and provide access to collector and neighborhood streets. 
    Auditor's lot means any tract of land platted or replatted in accordance with the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 57-02-39 or as may be otherwise authorized by law. 
    Auditor's plat . See Auditor's lot . 
    Auto repair means any activity that requires removal, replacement, repair or installation of parts and tires. 
    Auto service means any activity that provides direct service to motor vehicles, including adding fuel, replacement of fluids and filters and vehicle washing or detailing, but not repair or replacement of parts or tires. 
    Auto wrecking. See Junkyard . 
    Basement means that portion of a building below the first floor joists, the floor of which is more than one-half clear ceiling height below the adjacent ground. 
    Bed and breakfast facility means an owner-occupied single-family dwelling providing not more than seven temporary lodging units with a current license issued pursuant to the provisions of N.D.C.C. ch. 23-09.1 and providing one off-street vehicle parking space for each such lodging unit and two off-street parking spaces for the owner/operator with only one sign not exceeding four square feet in size. 
    Billboard . See Outdoor advertising sign . 
    Block means the property abutting one side of the street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, or between the nearest such street and a railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream, or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development. 
    Building means a structure having a roof supported by walls or columns for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or possessions. 
    Building, accessory . See Accessory building . 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured between the level of the highest point at the roof beams of flat roofs or roofs inclining not more than one inch to the foot or to the mean height level of the top of the main plate or highest ridge for other roofs and the highest of the following: 
(1)  The street curb level; 
(2)  The established or mean street grade in case the curb has not been constructed; or 
(3)  The average finished ground level adjoining the building if it sets back from the street line. 
    Building inspector means the building official or an authorized representative. 
    Building line means a line established, in general, parallel to the front street line, between which line and the front street line no part of a building shall project, except as otherwise provided by ordinance. 
    Building official means the person responsible for the management and administration of the building department, the issuance of permits for the construction of buildings and other structures and the inspection of buildings and other structures to confirm that they are being built in conformance with all siting and construction requirements specified by ordinances adopted by the city. 
    Building, principal . See Principal building . 
    Capital improvements program means a proposed schedule of future projects for the purchase, construction or replacement of the physical assets of the community requiring the expenditure of public funds over and above recurring annual operating expenses. 
    Central sewer system means a private or public liquid waste collection, conveyance and treatment facility serving a community or a portion of a community. 
    Central water system means a private or public facility for the collection, treatment, storage and distribution of potable water serving a community or a portion of a community. 
    Child care center means a private group care facility housing more than 12 children that is permitted through the North Dakota Department of Social Services. 
    Collector street means a road intended to move traffic from local streets to arterials and provide circulation within a development. 
    Commercial district. See Chapter 105, Article 3. 
    Commercial recreation group. See section 105-1-4. 
    Commission means the planning and zoning commission. 
    Community services means uses of a public, nonprofit or charitable nature generally providing a local service to people of the community. 
    Comprehensive plan means the official long range guide for the economic, physical and social development of the city in conformance with the requirements of North Dakota Century Code 40-48-08. 
    Convenience store means a facility that provides quick purchase retail and food items and may offer vehicle fueling or alcohol sales with the appropriate city and regulatory agency approvals. 
    Corner lot means a lot at the junction of, and abutting on, two or more intersecting streets when the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees and including any lot adjoining a curved street at a point where the street boundary described an arc subtended by an angle of 135 degrees or less. 
    Correctional facility means any city or county jail or detention center, regional corrections center, juvenile detention center, pre-release center, transition center, half-way house or other publicly or privately established compound or building for the detention, confinement, or rehabilitation of persons in accordance with law. 
    Crematorium means the establishment for final disposition of deceased remains, either human or pet, by thermal, mechanical, or other dissolution process that reduces remains to bone fragments. 
    Crematorium equipment means the primary piece of capital performing the task of reducing remains to bone fragments. 
    Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having a turnaround at the other end. 
    Daycare means providing less than 24-hour per day accommodations for up to 12 children in a dwelling unit. 
    Dead-end street means a road or portion thereof with only one vehicular traffic outlet. 
    Dog daycare means a facility for the daytime care and feeding of dogs. 
    Drive-in or drive-through means a configuration of a business that allows people to access services of the business without leaving their vehicle. 
    Duplex. See two-family dwelling. 
    Dwelling means a building or portion thereof arranged or designed to provide living facilities for one or more families and does not include commercial facilities providing transient or short term accommodations. 
    Dwelling, group . See Group dwelling . 
    Dwelling, multifamily . See Multifamily dwelling . 
    Dwelling, single-family . See Single-family dwelling . 
    Dwelling, two-family . See Two-family dwelling . 
    Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof providing complete housekeeping facilities for one family. 
    Easement means a legally defined portion of private property within which the owner has granted the use by another for a specified purpose. 
    Education group. See section 105-1-4. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction means the area outside the corporate boundaries of the city where the city is authorized by the North Dakota Century Code to regulate development. 
    Family means one or more persons, either related by blood, marriage, adoption or foster care of children, up to four unrelated individuals or a number of developmentally disabled individuals as specified in N.D.C.C. 25-16-14 that occupy a dwelling unit and live as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. 
    Filling station means a building or lot having pumps and storage tanks where fuels, oils or accessories for motor vehicles are dispensed, sold or offered for sale at retail with only incidental repair services and no storage or parking space is offered for rent. 
    Final plat means a drawing with appropriate verbiage showing the division of land into lots, blocks, rights-of-way and easements that meets the requirements of this code for the subdivision of land and meets the requirements for recording with the county recorder. 
    Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation. The term includes any blank cartridge, toy pistol, toy cannon, toy cane, or toy gun in which an explosive other than a toy paper cap is used; balloon that requires fire underneath to propel the balloon; firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket, Roman candle, daygo bomb, sparkler, or other item of like construction; item containing any explosive or flammable compound; or any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance. This section does not apply to any toy paper cap containing not more than twenty-five hundredths of a grain [16.20 milligrams] of explosive composition per cap. 
    Fireworks stand means the retail sales of fireworks. The following standards shall apply to all fireworks stands: 
(1)  Occurring outside corporate limits; and 
(2)  Being wholly contained within a trailer, tent, building or other structure, whether permanent or temporary; and 
(3)  Holding a fireworks sales permit as issued by the City of Mandan; and 
(4)  Holding a state retailer license; and 
(5)  Having a minimum of 1,600 sq. ft. area dedicated for customer parking. Additional parking may be required at the discretion of the city building official; and 
(6)  Having a minimum 500 ft. setback from all flammable and hazardous material storage areas and structures (e.g. filling stations). 
    Floodplain and related definitions. See section 105-4-4. 
    Floor area means the gross square footage of all floors of all buildings on a lot calculated from the exterior face of all outer walls or the centerline of a common wall between buildings. 
    Floor area-Habitable means the gross square footage of all floors of all buildings on a lot calculated from the exterior face of all outer walls or the centerline of a common wall between buildings with the following not included in the calculation: 
(1)  Attic space providing structural head room of less than seven feet, six inches; 
(2)  Mechanical equipment rooms; 
(3)  Unheated storage rooms in a basement or garage; 
(4)  Uncovered steps; 
(5)  Terraces, breezeways and open porches; and 
(6)  Automobile parking space in a cellar, basement or private garage. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the floor area of a building on a lot divided by the area of that lot. 
    Funeral home or mortuary means a facility for the care and custody for the pre-disposition of deceased human remains, including the sale of services and merchandise for burial, cremation, and other related items, including offices, viewing rooms, chapels, and reception halls for serving the deceased and their families. 
    Gross residential density means the number of families residing on, or dwelling units developed on, land within a subdivision divided by the total area of the subdivision expressed in dwelling units per gross acre. 
    Group dwelling. See section 105-1-4. 
    Health group. See section 105-1-4. 
    Hotel means a building in which lodging, with or without meals, is provided and offered to the public for compensation, and which is open to transient guests. 
    Industrial district. See Chapter 105, Article 3. 
    Industrial group A. See section 105-1-4. 
    Industrial group B. See section 105-1-4. 
    Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot. 
    Junkyard means the use of any portion of a property, whether inside or outside a structure, for the storage or keeping of metals, rags, paper, other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house-wrecking debris, structural steel and other materials and equipment or the dismantling or demolition of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery or parts thereof. 
    Kennel means a commercial facility for the indoor boarding of pets. 
    Local street means a road intended to provide access to other streets from individual properties and to provide right-of-way above and beneath it for utilities. 
    Lot means a tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for development. 
    Lot, auditor's . See Auditor's lot . 
    Lot, corner . See Corner lot . 
    Lot depth means the average distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, interior . See Interior lot . 
    Lot line, rear . See Rear lot line . 
    Lot width means the average width of a lot measured at right angles to its depth. 
    Lot, zoning. See Zoning lot . 
    Major street. See Arterial street . 
    Major subdivision means any subdivision or re-subdivision of land not classified as a minor subdivision. 
    Manufactured home means a factory-built structure which is to be used as a place for human habitation and which bears a factory-attached and undisturbed label certifying that it was built in compliance with the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (24 CFR 3280), as amended. 
    Manufactured home lot means a parcel of land for the placement of a single manufactured home. 
    Manufactured home park means a plot or parcel of land, under single ownership, which has been improved for purposes of locating manufactured homes as dwellings. 
    Manufactured home site means a parcel of land within a manufactured home park designed and improved for the accommodation of not more than one manufactured home as a single-family residence. 
    Manufactured home stand means that part of a manufactured home site which has been reserved and improved for the placement of a manufactured home, appurtenant structures or additions to a manufactured home. 
    Manufactured home subdivision means a parcel of land, subdivided into lots, in which the majority of the lots may be individually owned and utilized as a site for placement of a single-family manufactured home and its facilities. 
    MARC means the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. 
    Master plan . See Comprehensive plan . 
    Master subdivision plan means a document indicating the general street layout, land use density, existing public improvements, proposed public and private improvements, including parks, open space, drainage areas, streets, utilities and other such data that is submitted to the commission prior to or simultaneously with a preliminary plat. 
    Mayor means the president of the board, as defined in the North Dakota Century Code. 
    Medical marijuana dispensary means a specialty drugstore holding a state permit to dispense medical marijuana. In addition, the following setbacks apply to the property boundary of the dispensary: 
a.  1,000 ft. of a property line of a pre-existing public or private school. 
b.  1,000 ft. of a property line of a pre-existing childcare center. 
c.  500 ft. of a pre-existing residential zoning district with the exception of the DC Downtown Core District. 
    Medical marijuana growing facility means growing of medical marijuana in a closed building with a state permit and meeting all state regulations. In addition, the following setbacks apply to the property boundary of the facility: 
a.  1,000 ft. of a property line of a pre-existing public or private school. 
b.  1,000 ft. of a property line of a pre-existing childcare center. 
c.  500 ft. of a pre-existing residential zoning district. 
    Minor street. See Local street . 
    Minor subdivision means the division of a parcel of land, or the adjustment of property lines or easements within a parcel of land that meets certain restrictions. 
    Mobile home means a transportable, factory-built structure, designed to be used as a residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (24 CFR 3280). 
    Modular home means a dwelling meeting all building code requirements for a site-built structure that is constructed off site in sections, assembled on site and affixed to the property with a solid perimeter foundation. 
    Mortuary. See Funeral home . 
    Multifamily dwelling means a building or portion thereof containing two or more dwelling units located on a single lot or parcel of land. 
    Net residential density means the number of families residing on, or dwelling units developed on, land within a subdivision computed by counting the number of residential lots and dividing by the total acreage of only the lots expressed as dwelling units per net acre. 
    Nonaccess reservation means a line on a final plat prohibiting direct vehicular access from the platted area to an adjoining street or public right-of-way. 
    Nonconforming use means an activity conducted in a building or structure, or on a tract of land, which does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Nondependent unit means a manufactured home, travel trailer or self-propelled motor home with bath or shower and toilet facilities. 
    Official master plan means a document adopted by ordinance approved by the city commission that establishes the location and width of streets, ways, plazas, open spaces, and public easements, and the location of parks and playgrounds, and the establishment of public rights in lands shown thereon in conformance with the requirements of North Dakota Century Code 40-48-02. 
    Office group. See section 105-1-4. 
    Owner means a person or other entity having legal title to, or sufficient proprietary interest in, the land sought to be subdivided under this subpart. 
    Parking garage or parking ramp means a structure for the parking of vehicles. 
    Passenger terminal means a building or other structure designed for the gathering of individuals waiting for the arrival of a bus passenger train or airplane. 
    Pet means one of the following taxonomically identified animals: 
(1)  Mammalian Genus species; 
a.  Canis familiaris, the domestic dog, and 
b.  Fells catus, the domestic cat; 
(2)  Mammalian Families; 
a.  Leporidae, rabbits, 
b.  Muridae, gerbils, hamsters, mice and rats, and 
c.  Mustelidae, ferret; 
(3)  Avian Orders; 
a.  Psittaciformes, parrots, parakeets, lories, budgerigars, and cockatiels, 
b.  Passeriformes, canaries and finches, and 
c.  Columbiformes, pigeons and doves; 
(4)  Reptilian Groups; 
a.  Squamata, lizards and snakes; and 
b.  Testudine, turtles. 
    Pet grooming means a facility for the cosmetic care and maintenance, with no overnight boarding, of pets. 
    Pet hospital or clinic means a facility devoted to the medical care and associated services for the limited number of animals defined as pets. 
    Plat, auditor's . See Auditor's lot . 
    Plat, final . See Final plat . 
    Plat, preliminary . See Preliminary plat . 
    Portable building means any structure that is either mounted on wheels or transportable on a flatbed trailer that is designed and constructed to provide for living or sleeping quarters for one or more persons or for the conduct of a business, profession, trade, or occupation. 
    Portable storage container means any of the following that are not considered accessory buildings: shipping containers; cargo containers; cargo-trailer containers; metal freight containers; semi-trailers; buses and vans. 
    Preliminary plat means the concept drawing indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision. 
    President of the board means the mayor, as used in this Code and defined in the North Dakota Century Code. 
    Principal building means a structure in which is conducted the primary activity of the lot on which it is situated. 
    Private garage means an accessory building or part of a principal building used for the storage of motor vehicles, trailers or miscellaneous tools, equipment and household goods as an accessory use. 
    Public improvement means any portion of a water system, drainage system, sanitary sewer system, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, multi-use path, tree, berm, boulevard, lawn, parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the city or another public entity will ultimately assume ownership or responsibility for operation and maintenance. 
    Public recreation group. See section 105-1-4. 
    Public thoroughfare means any public right-of-way or easement, including highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway, street, road, lane, walk, alley, viaduct, subway, tunnel and bridge, which affords access to abutting property. 
    Rear lot line means the lot line generally opposite to the front lot line. 
    Rear yard means an open area extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear lot line and the rear building setback line. 
    Record lot means any land designated as a separate and distinct parcel on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed filed in the office of the county recorder. 
    Refrigerated cold storage locker means a facility for the warehousing of perishable food. 
    Registered land surveyor means a person properly licensed and registered in the state to prepare drawings of property for recording. 
    Residential density-Gross. See Gross residential density . 
    Residential density-Net. See Net residential density . 
    Residential district. See Chapter 105, Article 3. 
    Resubdivision means a change in the sealed and signed drawing of an approved and recorded subdivision plat. 
    Retail group A. See section 105-1-4. 
    Retail group B. See section 105-1-4. 
    Road means a pathway for vehicles to travel from place to place and includes street, highway, avenue, boulevard, parkway, lane, alley, viaduct, subway, tunnel, bridge, public easement and right-of-way. 
    Road right-of-way width means the distance between property lines, measured at right angles, to the centerline of the street. 
    Rooming house means a dwelling in which more than two rooms are let for hire or more than four persons are given lodging for compensation. 
    Safety services means uses that provide public safety and emergency response services, including fire stations, police stations and emergency medical and ambulance stations. 
    Sale or lease means any immediate or future transfer of ownership or possessory interest in land, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, devise, intestate succession, or other written instrument. 
    Self-propelled motor home means a vehicle, including recreational vehicles and buses, licensed by a state as a motor vehicle, containing living facilities designed for temporary dwelling. 
    Service group A. See section 105-1-4. 
    Service group B. See section 105-1-4. 
    Side yard means an open space extending from the front setback line to the rear setback line between the side lot line and the side yard setback line. 
    Sign means any device for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge or insignia of any government or governmental agency or of any civic, charitable, religious, patriotic or fraternal or similar organization. The definitions for various types of signs are in section 105-1-15. 
    Single-family dwelling means a freestanding building containing one dwelling unit. 
    Sketch plan means a rough design of a proposed development used when meeting with staff prior to the formal submission of a preliminary plat. 
    Storage building and warehouse means a facility for the storage of cars, boats, household items, furniture, and other nonperishable items in a warehouse-style building. 
    Storage unit means a locker or garage-style space that is rented for the storage of personal possessions that is typically contained in a structure having multiple units of varying size that may or may not be climate controlled. 
    Story means that portion of a building, excluding a basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Street. See Road . 
    Street, arterial . See Arterial street . 
    Street, collector . See Collector street . 
    Street, dead-end. See Dead-end street . 
    Street grading plan means a scale-accurate drawing or set of drawings depicting street grade elevations at various points within the private and public rights-of-way, according to standards established by the city engineer's office. 
    Street, local . See Local street . 
    Street, major. See Arterial street. 
    Street, minor. See Local street. 
    Street naming plan means the criteria for naming streets within the city developed and administered by the county's E911. 
    Street right-of-way width means the distance between property lines measured at right angles to the centerline of the street. 
    Structural alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders or any structural change in the roof. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or is attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, advertising signs, billboards, and poster panels, but not including fences or boundary or retaining walls. 
    Subdivider means any person or group of persons, including anyone acting as an authorized agent for a landowner, who, directly or indirectly, causes land to be subdivided. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development, and any plat or plan which includes the creation of any part of one or more streets, public easements, or other rights-of-way, whether public or private, for access to or from such lots, and the creation of new or enlarged parks, playgrounds, plazas or open spaces. 
    Subdivision grading plan means a scale-accurate drawing or set of drawings depicting elevations at various points throughout the subdivision as required by standards established by the city engineer. 
    Subdivision, major . See Major subdivision . 
    Subdivision, minor . See Minor subdivision . 
    Telecommunication facility means any installation composed of wires, cables, pieces of equipment, pieces of machinery, structures and/or supporting elements necessary to produce non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation and operating as a discrete unit to produce a signal or message. 
    Tourist home means a dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in less than ten rooms are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation. 
    Travel trailer means a wheeled, portable structure, not more than eight feet in body width, designed to be towed by a vehicle and used as a temporary dwelling. 
    Travel trailer park means a plat or parcel of land, under single ownership, which has been improved for the purposes of locating travel trailers. 
    Travel trailer site means a parcel of land within a travel trailer park designed and improved for the accommodation of not more than one travel trailer. 
    Treatment facility means any use established under N.D.C.C. chs. 10-19.1 or 10-33 which: 
(1)  Is licensed under N.D.C.C. chs. 23-16 or 23-17 that provides public or private emergency evaluation or treatment, outpatient care and inpatient care to persons suffering from a mental disorder or chemical dependency, operated by the department of human services or under contract with said department; 
(2)  Is licensed by the department of human services under N.D.C.C. ch. 25-03.2; or 
(3)  Provides care, custody, treatment, day activity, work activity, extended employment services and other treatment or services to developmentally disabled persons or persons suffering from any mental or physical disability. 
    Twin home means two single-family dwellings in a zero side yard setback configuration resulting in a structure containing two dwelling units bisected by the side property line. 
    Two-family dwelling means a freestanding building containing two dwelling units, sometimes called a twin home or duplex. 
    Use means: 
(1)  Any purpose for which buildings, other structures or land may be arranged, designed, intended, maintained or occupied; 
(2)  Any occupation, business, activity or operation carried on, or intended to be carried on, in a building, other structure or on land; or 
(3)  A name of a building, other structure or tract of land which indicates the purpose for which it is arranged, designed, intended, maintained or occupied. 
    Use group means two or more activities similar in physical characteristics, traffic generation, location, utility services or municipal service requirements. 
    Uses permitted means activities permitted by this subpart's regulations. 
    Utility service group. See section 105-1-4. 
    Vehicle or equipment repair means any activity that requires removal, replacement, repair or installation of parts and tires. 
    Wholesale group. See section 105-1-4. 
    Yard means an open space on a lot which lies between a building and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as may be specifically provided in this subpart. 
    Zero setback dwelling unit means a structure or portion of a structure containing one dwelling unit that is built up to the lot line. 
    Zoning lot means a parcel of land meeting the minimum dimensions and other requirements for a lot as specified in each zoning district. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-0202, 14-0404; Code 1994, § 21-02-03; Ord. No. 777, § 1, 1991; Ord. No. 657, § 1, 1982; Res. of 12-29-1981, § II; Ord. No. 636, § 1, 1981; Ord. No. 868, § 1, 1-6-1998; Ord. No. 881, § 1, 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 892, § 1, 5-4-1999; Ord. No. 923, § 1, 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 1223, § 1, 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 1242, § 1, 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 1266, § 2, 7-10-2018; Ord. No. 1291, § 1, 3-5-2019; Ord. No. 1301, § 1, 3-5-2019; Ord. No. 1299, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 101-1-4. - General provisions. 
    In interpreting and applying this subpart, the requirements contained in this subpart are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purpose of the subpart. This subpart shall not be deemed to interfere with, abrogate, annul or otherwise affect in any manner whatsoever any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties so long as those agreements are not contrary to any laws or ordinances of the United States, the state, and the city; provided, however, that where this subpart imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises, or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this subpart shall prevail. Except as provided in this subpart, the following general regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Permitted uses. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or structure be used, designed or arranged for use for any purpose or in any manner not included among the uses listed in this section as permitted in the district in which such building, structure or land is located. 
(2)  Zoning lot. Every building hereafter erected shall be located on a zoning lot, and, except as provided in this subpart, there shall be no more than one principal building on one lot. 
(3)  Height. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit in this subpart designated for the district in which such building or structure is located. 
(4)  Area and yard. 
a.  No building or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the yard, lot, area and building location regulations in this subpart designated for the district in which such building or open space is located. 
b.  No yard or other open space provided about any building, for the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations, shall be considered as a yard or open space for any other building, and no yard or other open space on one lot shall be considered as a yard or open space for a building on any other lot. 
c.  All yards required by these regulations shall be open and unobstructed to the sky, except as provided in this subpart. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0206; Code 1994, § 21-03-04) 
ARTICLE 2. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Planning commission, N.D.C.C. § 40-48-1 et seq. 

Sec. 101-2-1. - Creation. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of N.D.C.C. §§ 40-47-06 and 40-48-03, there was created a body known as the planning and zoning commission, which has been and is actively serving the community. It is intended that this body will continue as the planning and zoning commission, referred to as "the commission," with the duties and functions recited in this article, pursuant to the powers authorized by state law. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0101; Code 1994, § 21-01-01; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014) 
Sec. 101-2-2. - Membership. 
    The Commission shall be composed of up to ten members appointed by the president of the board of city commissioners and approved by the board. The president of the board of city commissioners shall appoint one member recommended by the Mandan Park District and one member recommended by the Mandan Public School District. The president of the board of city commissioners shall be an ex-officio voting member of the commission but may not serve as president of the commission. Two members residing outside the corporate limits of Mandan within the extraterritorial area of the city's zoning authority will be appointed by the Morton County Board of Commissioners, if available and willing to serve. The city engineer and city attorney are ex-officio non-voting members of the commission. Each member will execute the oath of office requisite to such appointment. The president of the board of city commissioners shall endeavor to select individuals that represent other boards, interest groups, professional associations and civic organizations, as well as unaffiliated city residents willing to serve, when recommending appointments. Once there are at least seven members of the commission, either current members or newly appointed, the president of the board of city commissioners may appoint a member of the board to serve as a voting member of the commission. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-0102, 14-0103; Code 1994, § 21-01-02; Ord. No. 494, § 3, 1975; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 1971; Ord. No. 920, § 1, 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 1193, § 1, 11-18-2014) 
State Law reference- Planning commission membership, N.D.C.C. § 40-48-03. 
Sec. 101-2-3. - Term of office; unexcused absences cause for removal. 
(a)  Term of office . 
(1)  Members appointed by the city or the county who are not elected officials will hold office for five years or until a replacement is appointed with terms beginning on January 1. 
(2)  Members appointed by the city or county who are elected officials shall serve until their elected term expires. 
(b)  Ex-officio members . Terms of the ex-officio members will correspond to their respective tenures of office. 
(c)  Unexcused absences . Any member of the commission who has three unexcused absences within a twelve month period shall be deemed to have resigned. Unexcused absence shall be any absence not related to illness, out of town trips, or business related scheduling conflicts. A replacement shall be appointed to serve the remainder of the term. 
(Code 1994, § 21-01-03; Ord. No. 406, § 2, 1971; Ord. No. 920, § 2(4), 4-3-2001; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 1193, § 1, 11-18-2014) 
State Law reference- Terms of office, N.D.C.C. § 40-48-03. 
Sec. 101-2-4. - Vacancies. 
    Vacancies in the terms of members residing within the city limits will be filled by appointment of the mayor with approval of the board, and the member appointed to fill a vacancy will serve the balance of the unexpired term. Vacancies in the terms of the extraterritorial members will be filled by the county for the balance of the unexpired term. 
(Code 1994, § 21-01-04; Ord. No. 494, § 3, 1975; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions N.D.C.C. § 40-48-04. 
Sec. 101-2-5. - Officers; duties; election of officers. 
(a)  Officers. The officers of the commission will be a president, vice-president and secretary, who will be elected for one-year terms by the members of the commission. 
(b)  Duties. The duties of the officers of the commission will be as follows: 
(1)  President. The president will preside over and conduct the meeting, prepare agendas, appoint acting officers in the absence of officers and ensure that all actions of the commission are properly taken. The president may call special meetings, appoint committees from among commission members and will verify in writing on the plat the approval by the commission of subdivision plats. 
(2)  Vice-president. The vice-president, in the absence or in case of conflict of interest of the president, will exercise all powers and duties of the president. 
(3)  Secretary. The secretary will take the minutes, maintain correspondence, notify the public of all meetings and hearings as required by law, keep all records of the commission and sign materials relating to the comprehensive plan attesting to action taken by the commission. The secretary may verify in writing on the plat approval by the commission of any subdivision plat. The secretary may be a commission member, a city employee or a contract employee of the commission. 
(c)  Election of officers. At the first meeting in August, the commission will elect its officers for the coming year. 
(Code 1994, § 21-01-05; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 1223, § 2, 11-3-2015) 
State Law reference- Planning commission officers, N.D.C.C. § 40-48-06. 
Sec. 101-2-6. - Meetings. 
(a)  Time and location. All commission meetings will be held at the Ed "Bosh" Froehlich Meeting Room in city hall unless another venue is chosen for a specific meeting in advance by the commission. The commission will meet on the fourth Monday of each month at 5:15 p.m., unless a different time is approved in advance by the commission for a specific meeting. If a scheduled meeting falls on a designated city holiday, the date and time for the monthly meeting will be determined by the commission. 
(b)  Special meetings. The president of the commission may call special meetings at times and locations specified in a written notice transmitted to each commission member no later than three days prior to the special meeting date. 
(c)  Quorum. A quorum will consist of seven members. No action will be taken in the absence of a quorum. 
(d)  Conduct of meetings. All meetings will be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. However, if any rule is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or the North Dakota Century Code, this chapter or the North Dakota Century Code shall prevail over Robert's Rules of Order. 
(e)  Agenda. Items will be considered in the order they appear on the agenda, which, for regular meetings, will be delivered electronically to members and applicants no later than five days prior to the meeting and three days prior to special meetings. Printed versions of the agenda package will be provided on request. The president of the commission may adjust the order of the published agenda for good cause at any point during the meeting. 
(f)  Records. Records of the commission's resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations will be kept by the commission as part of its public record. 
(g)  Notice. A notice of each commission meeting and accompanying agenda shall be posted on the official bulletin board in City Hall and the full agenda package posted on the city web site at least three days before a regular meeting or at least 24 hours before a special meeting. 
(h)  Notification list. Anyone wishing to receive an electronic version of the meeting notice, the agenda and/or the agenda package may make a request to the engineering and planning department to be included on the notification list. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0104; Code 1994, § 21-01-06; Ord. No. 526, § 1, 1976; Ord. No. 930, § 1, 9-18-2001; Ord. No. 1062, § 1, 10-6-2009; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014) 
State Law reference- Planning commission meetings, N.D.C.C. § 40-48-06. 
Sec. 101-2-7. - Compensation and reimbursement. 
    Commission members will serve without compensation. When prior authorization is given by the commission and approved by the board, members may be reimbursed for meals and traveling expenses incident to attendance at meetings, conferences or hearings in accordance with the rates of reimbursement as provided by law. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0104; Code 1994, § 21-01-07; Ord. No. 526, § 1, 1976; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014) 
Sec. 101-2-8. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Hearing and reports. The commission shall make a preliminary report on all proposed zoning changes and hold public hearings thereon before submitting its final report to the board. The board shall not hold its public hearing or take action until it has received the final report of the commission. 
(b)  Extraterritorial authority. The commission shall have extended territorial authority to all unincorporated areas located within two miles of the corporate limits of the city, in every direction as authorized by state law, and shall enforce such regulations in the extraterritorial area in the manner authorized by state law or any agreement made between the city and the county. 
(c)  Comprehensive plan. The commission shall have the power to make and adopt a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city and of any land outside its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bears a relation to the planning of the city. The commission may amend, extend or add to the comprehensive plan. 
(d)  Surveys and studies. In the preparation of the comprehensive plan, the commission shall make careful and extensive surveys and studies of the present conditions and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to neighboring territory. The commission shall consider studies and plans prepared by the Metropolitan Planning Organization, Mandan Park District, Mandan Public School District, Morton County, Morton County Housing Authority or other groups involved in growth and economic development of the region when preparing the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  Review and either approve or disapprove. The commission shall review and approve or disapprove the location, character and extent of any proposed street, square, park, or other public way, ground or open space, or public building or structure. 
(f)  Specific improvements. The commission shall from time to time recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for specific improvements and for the financing thereof. 
(g)  Consult and advise. The commission shall consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and with citizens relative to the carrying out of the comprehensive plan. 
(h)  Publish and distribute. In order to promote public interest in and understanding of the comprehensive plan, the commission may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any part or report, and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. 
(i)  Gifts. The commission members may not accept and use gifts or donations for the exercise of the commission's functions. Any gifts or donations received shall be forwarded to the city administrator for proper disposition as prescribed by this Code or state law. 
(j)  Examinations and surveys. In the performance of their functions, the commission members, officers and employees may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys thereof and place and maintain necessary monuments or marks thereon without causing damage to the property. Every person performing these tasks shall carry proper identification and a letter of introduction stating the purpose of the visit. A person performing such duties shall not enter a building or structure unless granted permission in writing by the owner or occupant of the building or structure. 
(k)  Other powers. The commission may exercise such other powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions and carry out the provisions of state law and city ordinance. 
(l)  Length of approval or recommendation . Planning and zoning commission approvals or recommendations are valid for six months. Should the applicant or the city commission fail to act on the approval or recommendation within six months, the action of the planning and zoning commission will lapse and a new application must be submitted and all applicable fees paid. 
(Code 1994, § 21-01-08; Ord. No. 902, § 3, 10-21-2003; Ord. No. 1183, 5-20-2014; Ord. No. 1223, § 3, 11-3-2015) 
ARTICLE 3. - MASTER PLANS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Master plan, N.D.C.C. § 40-48-08 et seq. 

Sec. 101-3-1. - Established; maps incorporated. 
    All street, road, land use, zoning, sanitary sewer, potable water and drainage plans as might from time to time be adopted by the city pursuant to N.D.C.C. and filed with the recorder shall be in full force and effect from and after their final passage and adoption. All street and highway plans set forth on maps, together with all notations, information and data contained thereon, which have been adopted by the city, are part of any master plan and are incorporated in this article and made a part of this subpart. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-0301, 14-0302; Code 1994, § 21-08-01) 
Sec. 101-3-2. - Territorial jurisdiction. 
    The territorial jurisdiction of the city for the subdivision of land and the application of any master plan shall be the entire area within the corporate and extraterritorial limits of the city and the adjacent territory beyond the corporate and extraterritorial limits which the board has determined bears a relation to the planning of the city and is designated on the master plan. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0303; Code 1994, § 21-08-02) 
Sec. 101-3-3. - Recording of amendments and supplements. 
    The city planner shall record, in the office of the recorder in the county, a full, true and correct copy, duly attested, of any master plan and all amendments thereto, including all amendments and supplements of maps of the street and highway plan, which may hereafter be duly adopted. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0307; Code 1994, § 21-08-06) 
Chapter 103 - CEMETERIES 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 103-1-1. - Exclusive public burying ground. 
    All cemeteries now or which may hereafter be acquired by the city, wherever located, and all cemeteries now within the limits of the city, whether owned by the city or not, are declared to be public burying grounds, and no person, corporation, society or congregation shall establish or locate any other cemetery within the limits of the city unless the necessity or desirability for the establishment of such cemetery has been affirmatively determined by the board of health and the city commission has approved the location of such proposed cemetery. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-03; Code 1994, § 9-08-03) 
Sec. 103-1-2. - Burial restrictions. 
    No interment of any deceased person shall be made in any other place than within the cemeteries devoted to that purpose, nor shall such space or lot be used for any purpose other than a place for burial of the dead. All interments in lots shall be determined by the owner thereof or the next of kin or executor of the estate if the record owner is deceased. The interment of anything other than human bodies shall not be permitted therein. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-04; Code 1994, § 9-08-04) 
Sec. 103-1-3. - Cemetery hours. 
    Cemeteries shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to sunset every day. It is unlawful for any person to enter therein except during scheduled hours. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-11; Code 1994, § 9-08-11) 
Sec. 103-1-4. - Monuments and markers-Specifications. 
    All cemetery monuments and markers shall conform to specifications established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-12; Code 1994, § 9-08-12) 
ARTICLE 2. - MANDAN UNION CEMETERY 

Sec. 103-2-1. - Location. 
    All of the real property described as the southwest quarter of Section 23 in Township 139 North, of Range 81 West of the fifth principal meridian, in Morton County, North Dakota, heretofore conveyed to the city shall be used for the purpose of a cemetery to be known as the Mandan Union Cemetery and shall be owned and controlled by the city, subject to the reservations contained in the deed to said property. The board of city commissioners may purchase such additional real property for use as cemetery as may from time to time be deemed advisable, and all such property shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-01; Code 1994, § 9-08-01) 
Sec. 103-2-2. - Rules and regulations; authority. 
    The board of city commissioners may adopt such rules, regulations and conditions in connection with the operation of the Mandan Union Cemetery as from time to time is deemed advisable. Such rules and regulations shall be on file and available in the office of the city administrator. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-02; Code 1994, § 9-08-02) 
Sec. 103-2-3. - Lot divisions. 
    The premises established in this article shall be divided into lots, half-lots, quarter-lots, and single grave rights. A lot shall consist of 12 grave rights, a half-lot consists of six grave rights and a quarter-lot consists of three grave rights. The cemetery sexton may reserve single grave spaces as needed for division into two cremation spaces. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-05; Code 1994, § 9-08-05) 
Sec. 103-2-4. - Fees for lots and grave digging. 
    A schedule of fees for purchasing grave rights and digging a grave shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-06; Code 1994, § 9-08-06) 
Sec. 103-2-5. - Issuance and conditions of burial license. 
    Purchasers of a burial license for grave rights, or fraction of a lot, in the Mandan Union Cemetery shall acquire only the license to make interment in the space for a grave so purchased. This privilege of burial shall not be transferable or assignable by act of law or otherwise without the consent, in writing, of the board of city commissioners. In that no deed or conveyance of any title or interest in said land shall be executed, the whole title thereto and the legal possession thereof shall remain in the city. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-05-07, 4-05-08; Code 1994, §§ 9-08-07, 9-08-08) 
Sec. 103-2-6. - Cemetery funds; care and investment. 
(a)  All money received for the sale of burial licenses to lots and graves, and all money received for digging graves and other services about the cemetery, shall be paid to the city finance director who shall give proper receipts therefor. All money received for the performance of any service or from contributions or bequests shall be placed in a cemetery fund, which shall be used for the payment of all improvement, care and maintenance of said cemetery, and for no other purpose. The city finance director shall keep an account of all receipts and disbursements of money belonging to the cemetery fund and shall pay out money of said fund only with the approval of the board of city commissioners. 
(b)  All moneys over and above $1,000.00 received in the fund may, at the discretion of the board of city commissioners, be invested and reinvested in general obligations of the United States government and of the state and general and contingent obligations of municipal corporations in time deposits in a state or national bank, excluding all else. Interest may, if necessary, be used for maintenance of the Mandan Union Cemetery. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-09; Code 1994, § 9-08-09) 
Sec. 103-2-7. - Burial permit required. 
    A burial permit shall be submitted to the city and verified by the cemetery sexton. After interment, the burial permit shall be forwarded to the county for recoding. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-10; Code 1994, § 9-08-10) 
Sec. 103-2-8. - Burial vaults required for full body burials. 
    The city shall prevent any burial in the Mandan Union Cemetery unless the coffin containing the decedent shall be enclosed in a vault of sufficient strength to withstand, without collapsing, the weight of the compacted fill to be placed above such coffin. 
(Code 1979, § 4-05-14; Code 1994, § 9-08-14) 
Chapter 105 - DISTRICT REGULATIONS (ZONING)[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-47. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 105-1-1. - Existing uses. 
    Any lawful use of land or building existing at the date of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, and located in a district in which it would not be permitted as a new use under the regulations of this chapter, is declared to be a nonconforming use, and not in violation of this chapter at the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; provided, however, a nonconforming use shall be subject to, and the owner shall comply with, the following regulations: 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. After the adoption of this chapter the owner of a nonconforming use shall be notified by the building inspector of the provisions of this chapter. Within 30 days after the receipt of said notice, the owner shall apply for and be issued a certificate of occupancy for the nonconforming use. The applications for such certificate shall designate the location, nature and extent of the nonconforming use and such other details as may be necessary for the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the owner of a nonconforming use fails to apply for a certificate of occupancy within 30 days after receipt of the foregoing notice, the use ceases to be nonconforming and is declared to be in violation of this chapter. The building inspector and city attorney shall take appropriate action to enjoin such violation. If the building inspector shall find upon reviewing the application for a certificate of occupancy that the existing use is illegal or in violation of other ordinances or laws, or if he finds that the building for which the certificate is requested has been constructed or altered for the existing use of any other use without full compliance with the building code or zoning ordinance in effect at the time of construction or alterations, he shall not issue the certificate of occupancy, but shall declare such use to be in violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Extension of nonconforming use. The nonconforming use of a building may be extended throughout any part of a building clearly designed for such use, but not so used at the date of the adoption of this chapter. No nonconforming use may be extended to occupy neither any land outside the building nor any additional building not used for such nonconforming use at the date of adoption of this chapter. The nonconforming use of land shall not be extended to any additional land not so used at the date of the adoption of this chapter. 
(3)  Additions, repairs and alterations of nonconforming use. No building used for a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered, unless the use is changed to one which complies with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, repairs and maintenance work may be carried out each year in an amount to not exceed 25 percent of assessed value of the building for that year, but such repairs and maintenance work shall not increase the cubical content of the building nor the floor area devoted to the nonconforming use, nor shall it increase the number of dwelling units provided in a building. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening nor repair of a building which may be necessary to restore the building to a safe condition or to improve the sanitary condition of the building, provided that such strengthening and repair may not be used to restore a building contrary to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the issuance of a building permit to structurally alter a building, provided that the nonconforming use is reduced and such alteration does not increase the cubical content of such a building. 
(4)  Destruction of nonconforming use. If any building in which there is a nonconforming use is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind, war, or other catastrophe, in an amount equal to or greater than 50 percent of its assessed valuation, it shall not be again used nor reconstructed to be used for any use except one complying with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
(5)  Moving nonconforming use building. Any building in which there is a nonconforming use shall not be moved unless it is moved to a district in which the use for which the building was designed is permitted by this chapter, and the building complies with the requirements of the building code of the city for such type use. If any building in which there is a nonconforming use is moved any distance whatsoever, the building shall thereafter be used only in compliance with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
(6)  Change of nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may be continued in accordance with the provisions of this section but it shall not be changed to any other use except that one which would be permitted as a new use in the district in which the building is located. 
(7)  Discontinuance of nonconforming use. 
a.  If, for any reason, a nonconforming use of land ceases for a continuous period of more than 30 days, the land shall thereafter not be used except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which the land is located. 
b.  If, for any reason, a nonconforming use of a building ceases for a continuous period of more than six months, the building shall thereafter not be used except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter for the district in which the building is located. 
(8)  Continuance of nonconforming use. Any legal nonconforming use, except those listed in subsection (9) of this section, may be continued. The certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector for a nonconforming use shall state that the use may be continued indefinitely or, for those uses listed in subsection (9) of this section, that the use must be discontinued. All periods of time shown in subsection (9) of this section shall begin 31 days after receipt by the owner of notice of the provisions of this chapter. Upon application to the board of adjustment, the board may, in certain cases, extend the date of the certificate of occupancy for one period of time not to exceed the limit indicated in subsection (9) of this section. 
(9)  Period of continuance for nonconforming uses. Certain nonconforming uses, indicated in the following table, shall be discontinued at the expiration of the periods of time shown, or at the expiration of one extension period, as provided in subsection (8) of this section: 
Period of Nonconforming Use Limit of 
Continuance Extension Loam stripping 30 days 10 days Garbage, trash dump 30 days 10 days Livestock, feeding 90 days 90 days Junk, auto wrecking yard 180 days 30 days Sand, gravel extraction 1 year 60 days Other open uses of land 1 year 60 days Billboard 180 days 30 days  
(Code 1957, § 14-0211; Code 1994, § 21-03-09) 
Sec. 105-1-2. - Supplementary provisions. 
    The regulations specified in this chapter shall be subject to the following supplementary provisions and interpretations. 
(1)  Structures excluded from height limits. A building height limit set forth in this chapter shall not apply to belfries, chimneys, domes, flagpoles, flues, monuments, cupolas, broadcast and communication towers, spires, tanks, water towers or similar structures, or to bulkheads, elevators, water tanks or similar roof structures and mechanical appurtenances. No such structure located on a roof shall have a total area greater than 25 percent of the roof area of the building; nor shall such structure be used for any residential purpose or any commercial or industrial purpose other than a use incidental to the main use of the building. No such structure shall be located closer to the lot line than a distance greater than 110 percent of the height of the structure above ground level. 
(2)  Projections into yards. 
a.  Steps, stairways, terraces and un-roofed porches or decks may extend into any minimum front or rear yard up to six feet and into any minimum side yard up to four feet, provided, however, that the floor thereof is no higher than that of the entrance to the building. 
b.  Chimneys may extend into any minimum yard up to two feet. 
c.  Business signs may be located in the front yard setback. If located within a sight triangle they must meet the dimensional requirements specified in section 105-1-15(j)(3). 
d.  No such feature shall be located closer than three feet to a lot line. 
(3)  Existing front yard depth. When the majority of lots in a block has, prior to the enactment of this chapter, been lawfully occupied with buildings having a greater front yard depth than required by these regulations, no building hereafter erected or altered shall have less front yard depth than the average depth of said existing front yards. This regulation shall apply also to the side yard, adjacent to a street, of a corner lot, but shall not be construed as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot to less than 24 feet. No portion of any alley shall be considered a part of any yard. 
(4)  Fences and walls. Fences and walls may be placed in any yard setback area provided that the height of fences and walls adjacent to a street, alley or driveway shall be lowered to three feet within a sight triangle as specified in section 105-1-15(j)(3). 
(5)  Accessory buildings. 
a.  Location. 
1.  In multi-family, commercial, industrial and agricultural districts, location of accessory buildings shall conform to the requirements for principal buildings. 
2.  In R7, R3.2, RH and RMH residential districts, accessory buildings shall be located in the rear yard and shall be not less than three feet from a rear or side lot line or less than five feet from an alley line. In the case of a corner lot, accessory buildings, other than a detached garage, shall be located along the rear half of the adjoining residential lot's side lot line. A detached garage on a corner lot must be set back 25 feet from the side street property line or a distance equal to the setback of the principal building on the adjoining residential lot, whichever distance is greater. 
3.  Accessory buildings containing a garage door that faces an alley must be set back at least ten feet from the alley in order to accommodate the turning radius of a vehicle. When the property has no existing parking spaces other than the area for the proposed accessory building or has more than one dwelling unit, the minimum setback for an accessory building containing a garage door facing the alley must be 22 feet in order to allow space for parking of a vehicle in front of the garage door. 
b.  Use. Other than where zoning allows more than one dwelling unit on a lot or where a dwelling unit is permitted on a commercial or industrial zoned property, no accessory building may be used for dwelling purposes. 
c.  Structures included. Any structure, whether open or closed in, that is not part of a principal building. A garage having any part of its wall in common with a dwelling or being attached to a dwelling by a breezeway or roofed passageway up to six feet long shall be considered a part of a principal buildings [building]. 
d.  Number. For residential lots up to 10,000 square feet, two accessory buildings are allowed. For residential lots greater than 10,000 square feet up to 20,000 square feet, three accessory buildings are allowed. For residential lots exceeding 20,000 square feet, four accessory buildings are allowed. 
e.  Surface. Except for storage sheds not exceeding 120 square feet, no accessory building shall have an outer surface of corrugated or sheet metal. 
f.  Timing. Construction of the principal structure must have commenced before construction of an accessory structure may proceed. 
g.  Size. For R7, R3.2, RH and RMH districts, the total square footage of all accessory buildings may not exceed ten percent of the lot area and the maximum size of any accessory building shall be no greater than 75 percent the size of the primary structure on the lot. For RM, CA and CB districts, the total square footage of all accessory buildings may not exceed 20 percent of the lot area. 
h.  Structure coverage. The total area of all structures on the lot may not exceed the maximum structure coverage established for the zone in which the lot is located. 
i.  Height. The maximum height of an accessory building is 16 feet to the midspan of the roof system or 25 feet to the peak of the roof, whichever is less. The maximum wall height is ten feet. 
j.  Water and sewer. Any accessory building that is connected to water and sewer must have a frost protected foundation. 
k.  Pole structures. Pole structures are not permitted in R7, R3.2, RH, RM, RMH, CA and CB districts. 
l.  Portable storage containers. Portable storage containers may not be used as an accessory building on a residentially zoned property. Portable storage containers are to be counted when computing allowable lot coverage. 
(6)  Through lots. Any building constructed on an interior lot having frontage on two streets shall be located so as to comply with the regulations governing front yards on both streets. 
(7)  Mixed uses. Any building containing two or more dwelling units and space designed or used for commercial or industrial purposes shall comply with all requirements for multifamily dwellings in the district in which it is located; provided, also, that no such building designed or used for mixed residential and other uses shall be permitted in any district in which multifamily dwelling is not permitted. 
(8)  General regulations for manufactured and modular homes. Manufactured and modular homes that are placed on individually owned lots must meet the following standards. 
a.  The home shall have no less than 1,000 square feet of floor area except where the zone in which it is to be located has a greater minimum square footage requirement. 
b.  The home shall have no less than a 24-foot exterior width. 
c.  The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2.5 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run. 
d.  The home shall have a non-reflective roofing material. 
e.  All transporting apparatus including wheels, axles, transporting lights or towing hitch must be removed. 
f.  The home shall be located and installed or built according to the same standards for foundation system, permanent utility connections and setback which would apply to a site-built, single-family dwelling on the same lot. 
g.  The design, location and appearance of the home must be in harmony with existing adjacent properties, structures and locations. 
h.  Any such home which, according to its title document, was manufactured prior to the year during which it is to be sited upon its permanent foundation shall be subject to the provisions of chapter 111, article 10 moving of vehicles. 
i.  Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to supersede any valid restrictive covenants of record. 
(9)  Use of tents. Tents are not permitted, except in a developed camp ground, manufactured home or travel trailer park or in the back yard of a developed residential lot with a permanent residential structure. 
(10)  Use of RV as residence. Other than in a developed mobile home or RV park, an RV or similar movable dwelling unit may not be used as a permanent dwelling unit on a lot. Temporary use for a limited time by a family member or visitor who does not pay rent is permitted. Temporary use while building a permanent structure on the property is regulated elsewhere in this Code. 
(11)  Vegetation within sight triangle. 
a.  No new vegetation may be planted within a sight triangle for a street or alley unless it can be maintained such that it meets the requirements contained in section 105-1-15(j)(3). 
b.  If possible, existing vegetation located within a sight triangle for a street or alley shall be maintained such that it meets the requirements contained in section 105-1-15(j)(3). 
c.  Existing vegetation that cannot be maintained such that it meets the requirements of section 105-1-15(j)(3) need not be removed unless it creates an obvious danger to the ability of drivers and pedestrians to see past it on arterial or collector streets. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0207; Code 1994, § 21-03-05; Ord. No. 868, § 2, 1-6-1998; Ord. No. 1223, § 4, 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 1241, § 1, 12-13-2016) 
Sec. 105-1-3. - Incidental uses. 
    The uses of land and buildings permitted in the several districts established by this chapter are designed by listing the principal uses permitted. In addition to such principal uses, it is the intent of this chapter and this section to permit, in each district, those uses customarily incidental to any principal use permitted in the district. Such permitted incidental uses are specifically listed as follows, and any listed use is permitted on the same lot with the principal use to which it is incidental: 
(1)  Accessory uses. 
a.  Dwellings. 
1.  Private garage used for the storage of non-commercial vehicles, commercial vehicles with a rated capacity less than 2.5 tons and personal property. 
2.  One commercial vehicle having a rated capacity of 2.5 tons or less stored in the open on the lot. 
3.  Private greenhouse or vegetable, fruit or flower garden from which no products are sold or offered for sale. 
4.  Children's playhouse and playground equipment. 
5.  Shed or other accessory building for storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance or home occupation. 
6.  Pets as defined in chapter 101 of this Code. 
7.  Private swimming pool and bath house. 
8.  Statuary, trellises, barbecue stoves, fireplaces or similar features. 
b.  Church. 
1.  Parish house, together with any use accessory to a dwelling as listed in subsection (1)a. of this section. 
2.  Religious education building. 
3.  Bulletin board not to exceed 20 square feet in area. 
c.  Health group. 
1.  Accessory buildings containing residence accommodations for staff. 
2.  Accessory buildings providing utility and maintenance services for the primary use. 
(2)  Home occupation. 
a.  Limitations. There is permitted, in a dwelling, an occupation incidental to the principal use as a dwelling, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  No person other than a member of the immediate family occupying the dwelling is employed. 
2.  Storage of business inventory but no stock in trade is displayed or sold upon the premises. 
3.  No alteration of the principal building that changes the character thereof as a dwelling. 
4.  No illuminated sign is used, and no sign other than one giving the name and occupation, and not more than one square foot in area, is displayed. 
5.  No more area than 25 percent of the ground floor area of the primary building, whether located in the primary building or an accessory building, is devoted to the home occupation. 
b.  Customary home occupations. The following are declared to be customary home occupations. 
1.  Dressmaker, seamstress or tailor. 
2.  Music teacher or dance instructor. 
3.  Artist, sculptor or author. 
4.  Home office. 
5.  Dog daycare limited to a maximum of four dogs in the dwelling at any one time, including dogs owned by the residents of the dwelling. 
6.  Overnight boarding of one dog or one cat in addition to any animals owned by the residents of the dwelling. 
7.  Consulting and event planning services. 
8.  The letting for hire of not more than two rooms for residential purposes to not more than four persons. 
9.  Pet grooming of no more than two animals at one time. 
10.  Daycare up to 12 children. 
(3)  Accessory dwelling unit. An accessory dwelling unit is a structure or part of a structure containing facilities for housing one family of up to four persons that is completely separate from the primary single family dwelling unit, has kitchen and bathroom facilities, is located either in the principal building or in an accessory building, has a separate entrance from the outside of the structure in which it is located and which meets the requirements listed below. 
a.  The use must be a listed permitted, secondary or conditional use within the district in which it is located. 
b.  No more than one accessory dwelling unit may be permitted on a lot or parcel. 
c.  The primary or accessory dwelling unit must be occupied by the owner of the parcel as a legal residence for more than six months of any given year. The owner may be a benefited person in a private trust. 
d.  One off-street parking space shall be provided for an accessory dwelling unit in addition to any parking required for the primary dwelling unit. 
e.  The floor area of an accessory dwelling unit located in the primary structure may not exceed 40 percent of the habitable floor area of the structure and may not be greater than 800 square feet or less than 300 square feet. 
f.  The floor area of an accessory dwelling unit located within an accessory structure may not be greater than 800 square feet or less than 300 square feet. 
g.  Manufactured homes are not permitted for use as an accessory structure housing an accessory dwelling unit. 
h.  A new accessory dwelling unit may be added by: 
1.  Conversion of a portion of an existing primary or accessory structure into a separate accessory dwelling unit; 
2.  Expansion of an existing structure that is in compliance with all setback, lot coverage and height requirements of the underlying zoning district; 
3.  Construction of a new structure containing a single family dwelling unit and an accessory dwelling unit; or 
4.  Construction of a new accessory structure containing a dwelling unit on a lot with an existing primary structure containing a dwelling unit. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0208; Code 1994, § 21-03-06; Ord. No. 777, § 2, 1991; Ord. No. 889, § 1(2(b)), 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 1223, § 5, 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 1242, § 3, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-1-4. - Use groups. 
(a)  Decision matrix. In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, certain uses having similar characteristics are classified together as use groups. In any district in which a use group is permitted, it is the intent of this chapter to permit any particular member of that use group to locate within that district. The uses listed are examples of uses that fit the category. Not every possible use is listed. Should an application for a use that, in the opinion of the city planner, is not listed within a use group, the city planner shall evaluate the proposed use applying the criteria and following the procedure listed below. 
(1)  Criteria. 
a.  The actual or projected characteristics of the specific use in relationship to the stated characteristics of the various use groups. 
b.  The amount of site area, floor space and equipment required for the use. 
c.  The frequency and type of sales activity generated by the use. 
d.  The nature of the customer interaction generated by the use, i.e. on site, remote access, daily or infrequent. 
e.  The number of employees required per shift for the use. 
f.  The hours of operation. 
g.  The building site arrangement and access requirements for the use. 
h.  The types of vehicles or equipment used in association with the use. 
i.  The number of vehicle trips generated by the use per day of the week over the course of a week, month and year. 
j.  The means by which the use advertises itself. 
k.  Whether the use is likely to be located independent of other uses on the site or established in a shared use environment. 
(2)  Procedure. The city planner shall issue a written opinion as to the use's appropriate designation. The city planner's decision shall be given to the applicant and posted on the city web site. The decision may be appealed to the Commission, either by the applicant or an adjoining property owner, within 15 days of posting of the decision. If the city planner determines that the proposed use does not fit within any use group or zoning district, a request shall be forwarded to the Commission for review and recommendation as to the disposition of the request for approval of the specific use. 
(b)  Group dwelling. A group dwelling is a building used for residential purposes. 
(1)  Distinguishing characteristics of a group dwelling include: 
a.  The occupants are normally unrelated; 
b.  Separated cooking facilities are not provided for individuals or groups of individuals; 
c.  Persons residing in the building are domiciled more or less permanently, in contrast to the transient characteristic of occupants of hotels, treatment facilities or bed and breakfast facilities; and 
d.  Correctional facilities are not included. 
(2)  The following uses are examples of a group dwelling: 
a.  Boardinghouse or rooming house; 
b.  Convent or monastery; 
c.  Fraternity or sorority house; and 
d.  Group home licensed by the department of human services. 
(c)  Retail group A. A use in retail group A is one in which the principal activity is the retail sale of fresh, freshly prepared or packaged food products, merchandise and associated services conducted primarily within an enclosed building. 
(1)  Distinguishing characteristics of uses in retail group A include: 
a.  Use is dependent to some extent on the proximity of other retail and service establishments; 
b.  Merchandise is not of such nature as to require transport to the customer's premises in any vehicle larger than a pickup or small delivery truck; and 
c.  No incidental manufacturing or processing is carried on in such a manner as to produce offensive noise, dust, odor, glare, heat or vibration perceptible or measurable from outside the building in which the use is located. 
(2)  The following are examples of retail group A uses: 
a.  Antiques, collectibles or recycled items; 
b.  Appliances and electronics rental and sales; 
c.  Art, hobby or craft supplies; 
d.  Camera sales and service, photo supplies or photographic studio; 
e.  Jewelry, clock and watch sales, cleaning and repair; 
f.  Books and other printed materials, except those regulated under article 2, chapter 12 and article 5, chapter 105 of this Code; 
g.  Recorded video or music for rental or sale, except those regulated under article 2, chapter 12 and article 5, chapter 105 of this Code; 
h.  Musical instrument rental, sale and repair; 
i.  Butcher shop, retail sales bakery, delicatessen, fast food, full service restaurant, coffee shop or other eat-in or take-out food preparation establishment; 
j.  Ice cream, soda fountain or candy; 
k.  Department store, variety store or specialty merchandise including sporting goods or exercise equipment; 
l.  Drugstore; 
m.  Flowers, gifts or greeting cards; 
n.  Furniture and accessories including bedding, home furnishings and office equipment; 
o.  Office supplies including copying or shipping services; 
p.  Groceries and household items; 
q.  Hardware, tools, equipment, supplies and accessories; 
r.  Auto parts, supplies, accessories and outdoor activity supplies with no servicing or repair of vehicles; 
s.  Package liquor; 
t.  Pets and pet supplies with associated grooming and dog daycare services; 
u.  Medical marijuana dispensary; and 
v.  Fireworks stand. 
(d)  Retail group B. A use in retail group B is one in which the principal activity is the sale of merchandise, vehicles or equipment. 
(1)  Retail group B is differentiated from retail group A as follows: 
a.  Merchandise is generally larger; 
b.  Land area required is generally larger; 
c.  Merchandise is of such a nature as to require 50 percent or more of the space within the building for storage of the merchandise. 
d.  Merchandise is of such a nature as to be stored or customarily displayed outside a fully enclosed structure; and 
e.  The success of the activity is not dependent upon the proximity of uses in retail group A or other uses in retail group B. 
(2)  The following are examples of retail group B uses: 
a.  Auto, truck, motor cycle, off-road, boat, construction equipment and farm implement sales, service, leasing and rental; 
b.  Lumber yard and related merchandise, tools and equipment sales, including incidental mill work; 
c.  Feed, grain and farm supply sales; and 
d.  Trailer, RV and manufactured home sales and service. 
(e)  Service group A. A use in service group A is one in which the principal activity is providing a service with accompanying sale of merchandise, parts or supplies. 
(1)  Distinguishing characteristics of uses in service group A include: 
a.  Dependent to some extent on the proximity of other retail and service establishments; and 
b.  Operations are carried on in such a manner as to produce no offensive noise, dust, odor, glare, heat or vibration perceptible or measurable from outside the building in which the use is located. 
(2)  The following are examples of service group A uses: 
a.  Barber or beauty shop; 
b.  In shop repair of carry in items; 
c.  Dressmaker, milliner or tailor; 
d.  Dry cleaning, laundry or laundromat; 
e.  Furniture repair or upholstering; 
f.  Pet hospital or clinic; 
g.  Pet grooming and dog daycare; 
h.  Shoe and other leather goods repair; 
i.  Private club, lodge hall, union headquarters; and 
k.  Undertaking establishment, mortuary or funeral home. 
(f)  Service group B. A use in service group B is one in which the principal activity is providing a service with accompanying sale of merchandise, parts or supplies. 
(1)  Service Group B uses are differentiated from service group A uses as follows: 
a.  Its success is not dependent upon the proximity of other retail or service uses; 
b.  Repair or service operations are such as to produce some offensive noise, dust, odor, glare, heat or vibration perceptible or measurable from outside the building in which the use is located; and 
c.  The use may be conducted around the clock. 
(2)  The following are examples of service group B uses: 
a.  Carwash, either automatic or self-service; 
b.  Auto, truck or equipment repair; 
c.  Kennel; 
d.  Animal hospital or clinic; 
e.  Off premise advertising sign; 
f.  Taxicab or bus company office with overnight vehicle parking; 
g.  Commercial garage or parking lot; 
h.  Self-storage units; and 
i.  Mobile cleaning, repair and restoration services. 
(g)  Office group. A use in the office group is one in which the principal activity is the conduct of a commercial, governmental, financial, professional or management function. 
(1)  The use is generally conducted in a lobby and office type setting mostly during normal weekday business hours with customer traffic throughout the day. 
(2)  The following are examples of office group uses: 
a.  Bank, credit union or financial services company; 
b.  Commercial school including business, secretarial, dancing, music, physical culture, technical or trade; 
c.  Governmental services; 
d.  Insurance or real estate; 
e.  Private company; 
f.  Professional services; 
g.  TV or radio station broadcast studio; and 
h.  Utility company. 
(h)  Commercial recreation group. A use in the commercial recreation group is one in which the principal activity is the furnishing of recreation for a profit. 
(1)  Distinguishing characteristics of uses in the commercial recreation group include: 
a.  Alcoholic beverages may be offered for sale for consumption on the premises; and 
b.  The activity is not operated by a governmental agency. 
(2)  The following are examples of commercial recreation group uses: 
a.  Bowling alley; 
b.  Dance hall; 
c.  Pool hall, video game room or billiard parlor; 
d.  Roller or ice-skating rink; 
e.  Sports arena; 
f.  Tavern, saloon, bar; and 
g.  Theater. 
(i)  Wholesale group. A use in the wholesale group is one in which the principal activity is the sale of merchandise to individuals and corporations for resale to the public. 
(1)  Distinguishing characteristics of uses in the wholesale group include: 
a.  The merchandise offered for sale is stored wholly within a completely enclosed building that may be fully climate controlled for the products being stored; 
b.  No unusual fire or safety hazard is caused by the storage of the product or merchandise; 
c.  No live animals are housed in the facility; and 
d.  No junked, wrecked automobiles, secondhand equipment, other salvaged material or dead animals are stored on the premises. 
(2)  The following are examples of wholesale group uses: 
a.  Newspaper or magazine distribution; 
b.  Food, beverage, alcohol and grocery; 
c.  Drugs; 
d.  Office products and supplies; 
e.  Cleaning products and supplies; 
f.  Electrical equipment and parts; 
g.  Furniture, appliances and home furnishings; 
h.  Paper or plastic products; 
i.  Pumps, pipe and associated parts; and 
j.  Vehicle parts and tires. 
(j)  Health group. A use in the health-medical group is one in which the principal activity is related to the care and medical treatment of human beings. 
(1)  Facilities include anything up to and including a full service hospital with all support functions including emergency medical transportation. 
(2)  The following are examples of health group uses: 
a.  Hospital for human beings licensed under N.D.C.C. ch. 23-16; 
b.  Medical clinic or urgent care facility; 
c.  Nursing home licensed by the department of health under N.D.C.C. ch. 23-16; 
d.  Basic care facility licensed by the department of health under N.D.C.C. ch. 23-09.3. 
e.  Assisted living facility registered with the department of human services; 
f.  Sanitarium or similar treatment facility licensed by the department of human services. 
(k)  Education group. A use in the education group is one in which the principal activity is the education of children or adults. Sports activities linked to an educational entity are included. 
(1)  The activity can be directed at any age group and be operated by a public, private or religious group. 
(2)  The following are examples of education group uses: 
a.  Pre-school; 
b.  College or junior college; 
c.  Grade school; 
d.  High school or middle school; 
e.  Kindergarten; 
f.  Private or parochial schools offering a curriculum substantially equivalent to that offered by public schools; 
g.  Student or faculty dormitory; 
h.  Stadium, gymnasium or field house; 
i.  Utility or maintenance service building; 
j.  Administrative building; and 
k.  Athletic field. 
(l)  Public recreation group. A use in the public recreation group is one in which the principal activity is public recreation and which is carried on by a governmental agency. 
(1)  The activity may be similar to a use in the commercial recreation group. Alcoholic beverages may be offered for sale for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  The following are public recreation group uses: 
a.  Community center or sports complex; 
b.  Golf courses; 
c.  Museum; 
d.  Park; 
e.  Playground; and 
f.  Swimming pool. 
(m)  General farming group. A use in the general farming group is one which is customarily carried on in nonurban areas. It is the intent of this chapter to permit as an integral part of any particular use in the general farming group all customary accessory buildings for breeding and rearing poultry and livestock and for the storage of feed and farm crops. On any parcel of land lying within the territorial jurisdiction of the city for zoning regulations the conduct of any dairy, fur farming or farrowing operation, poultry hatchery, poultry farming or feeding or a riding stable shall not be conducted within 2,640 feet of any residential district or CA or CB commercial district, and the raising and feeding of any livestock and horses within 2,640 feet of any residential district or a CA or CB commercial district shall be limited to one animal per eight acres of land. 
(1)  Uses in the general farming group include: 
a.  Dairy farming; 
b.  Fur farming; 
c.  Commercial greenhouse; 
d.  Livestock raising or feeding; 
e.  Farrowing operation; 
f.  Poultry hatchery; 
g.  Poultry farming or feeding; and 
h.  Riding stable. 
(n)  Truck farming group. A use in the truck farming group is an agricultural use normally found in suburban or rural areas. 
(1)  Uses in the truck farming group include: 
a.  Field crop farming; 
b.  Commercial flower growing; 
c.  Fruit growing; 
d.  Tree, shrub or plant nursery; 
e.  Truck gardening; 
f.  The rearing and feeding of poultry, provided that on any parcel of land lying within the territorial jurisdiction of the city for zoning regulations the raising and feeding of poultry shall not be conducted within 660 feet of any residential district or a CA or CB commercial district. 
(o)  Industrial group A. A use in industrial group A is one involving manufacturing or the storage and sale of heavy building materials or equipment. 
(1)  Uses must conform to the following requirements: 
a.  There is no unusual fire, explosion or safety hazard; 
b.  There is no production of noise at any boundary of this district in which such use is located in excess of the average intensity of street and traffic noise at that point; 
c.  There is no emission of smoke in excess of any density described as No. 1 as measured by a standard Ringlemann Chart as prepared by the United States Bureau of Mines; provided, however, that smoke of a density not in excess of No. 2 on a Ringlemann Chart will be permitted for a period not in excess of four minutes in any 30-minute period; 
d.  There is no emission of dust, dirt, or toxic or offensive odors or gas; and 
e.  There is no production of heat or glare perceptible from any lot line of the premises on which the use is located. 
(2)  Uses in industrial group A include: 
a.  Manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment, or assembly of the following materials and products, but excluding the use in any operation of a punch press over 20 tons rated capacity, a drop hammer, or an automatic screw machine, 
1.  Bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, dairy products, drugs, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, and food products, except fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar, yeast and the rendering or refining of fats and oils, 
2.  Products from the previously prepared materials: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, precious metals or stones, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, shell, textiles, wood, excluding planing mills, and yarns, 
3.  Pottery and other ceramic products, using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas, 
4.  Electric and neon signs, outdoor advertising signs, commercial advertising structures and light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves and similar products, 
5.  Musical instruments, toys, novelties and rubber and metal stamps, 
6.  Blacksmith shop and machine shop, 
7.  Laundry, cleaning and dyeing works and carpet and rug cleaning, 
8.  Ice manufacturing plant and soft-drink bottling plant, and 
9.  Assembly of electric appliances, electronic instruments and devices, including the manufacture of small parts; 
b.  Experimental laboratories; 
c.  The following uses, when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, or within an area enclosed on all sides with a solid wall, compact hedge or uniformly painted board fence, not less than six feet in height, 
1.  Building material sales yard, including the sale of rock, sand, gravel and the like as an incidental part of the principal use, but excluding concrete mixing, 
2.  Contractor's equipment storage yard or plant or rental of equipment commonly used by contractors, 
3.  Feed and fuel yard, 
4.  Public utility service yard or electrical receiving or transforming station, and 
5.  Pipe yard or storage, sale or rental of oil and gas well-drilling equipment. 
(p)  Industrial group B. A use in industrial group B is one involving manufacturing or the storage, sale of products and material and in which the operations create a greater degree of hazard or more annoyance than the operations of uses in industrial group A. 
(1)  Uses in industrial group B must conform to the following requirements: 
a.  The design and the operation of the building, and design and use of the premises, fully comply with all special requirements established by this article; 
b.  There is no emission of smoke in excess of a density described as No. 2 as measured by a standard Ringlemann Chart as prepared by the United States Bureau of Mines; provided, however, that smoke of a density not in excess of No. 3 on a Ringlemann Chart will be permitted for a period not in excess of four minutes in any 30-minute period; 
c.  There is no emission of toxic gases or fumes; and 
d.  There is no production of heat or glare perceptible from any lot line of the premises on which the use is located. 
(2)  Uses in industrial group B include: 
a.  Any use listed in industrial group A and involving the use of punch press over 20 tons rated capacity, a drop hammer, or an automatic screw machine, provided that all other requirements for industrial group B uses are complied with; 
b.  Any other use listed under industrial group A which cannot comply with the requirements of an industrial group A use, provided that all requirements for an industrial group B use are complied with; and 
c.  Manufacture, compounding, processing, refining and treatment of the following material and products, 
1.  Acetylene, 
2.  Alcohol, 
3.  Asphalt, 
4.  Brick, tile or terracotta, 
5.  Concrete products or mixing, 
6.  Electric steam power plant, 
7.  Lampblack, 
8.  Oilcloth or linoleum, 
9.  Paint, shellac, turpentine, lacquer or varnish, 
10.  Paper or pulp, 
11.  Petroleum products, 
12.  Plastics, 
13.  Beer, whiskey or alcoholic beverages, 
14.  Stove or shoe polish, and 
15.  Tar or tar products; 
d.  Junkyard, provided that all operations are conducted wholly within an enclosed building or within an area enclosed on all sides with a solid wall, compact evergreen hedge or uniformly painted fence, not less than six feet in height; provided, further, that there shall be no burning of wrecked automobiles or other products except within a furnace or incinerator approved by the city engineer of the city; 
e.  Any of the following uses, provided that it shall be located not closer than 500 feet from any zone in which it is prohibited, 
1.  Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacturing, 
2.  Distillation of bones, 
3.  Drop-forge industry, manufacturing of forging with power hammer, 
4.  Fat rendering, except as an incidental use, 
5.  Fertilizer manufacturing, 
6.  Garbage, offal, or dead animal reduction, 
7.  Gas manufacture, 
8.  Petroleum refining, 
9.  Smelting of tin, copper, zinc or iron ores, 
10.  Soap manufacture, 
11.  Stockyards or feeding pens, 
12.  Slaughter and packing of animals and meat products, and 
13.  Tannery or curing or storage of raw hides; 
f.  Bulk storage of petroleum and petroleum products. 
(q)  Utility service group. A use in the utility service group is a facility or structure necessary for the safe or efficient operation of a telecommunications, gas, water, electric, refuse, storm sewer or sanitary sewage system that serves more than an individual property or a subdivision. Facilities that provide service to individual properties or a subdivision are not part of the utility service group, are considered permitted uses and do not require any conditional use review by the planning and zoning commission or the city commission. 
(1)  The distinguishing characteristics of utility service group uses are: 
a.  The utility which the structure or use serves is one available to the general public; 
b.  The design and location of the premises and structure is in full compliance with all requirements of state and federal regulations governing the operation of the utility; 
c.  The design and location of the premise and structure is reasonably necessary to provide service for a reasonable period of time with projected growth considered; 
d.  Except for electrical distribution installations, when a side of the lot on which the use is located adjoins a lot in a residential district or adjoins a residentially developed lot in a multi-use district there shall be planted and maintained a landscaped strip no less than five feet in width on that side of the lot; 
e.  Proper fencing with lot entrances shall be erected at least six feet high and maintained around all installations and structures in which there is any safety hazard whatsoever for children, provided that all structures shall be so located that such safety fence shall be so placed as not to encroach on any front yard required in the district in which the use is located; and 
f.  For the proper operation of the utility, it is necessary that the proposed use be located on, or within a short distance of, the site on which it is proposed to be located. 
(2)  The following are examples of utility service group uses: 
a.  Telecommunication transmission tower; 
b.  Electric transformer station; 
c.  Regional electric transmission line; 
d.  Sewage pumping station; 
e.  Water pumping station; 
f.  Water reservoir; 
g.  Gas pressure regulator station; 
h.  Solid waste recycling center; 
i.  Stormwater detention facility; and 
j.  Stormwater pumping station. 
(r)  Religion group. A use in the religion group is an activity in support of the practice or teaching of a religion. Listed below are examples of what is and isn't part of this group. 
(1)  Conduct of worship services. 
(2)  Teaching of a religion or a religious practice. 
(3)  Social events associated with the practice or teaching of a religion. 
(4)  General education restricted to members of the religious group offering the educational services. 
(5)  General education not restricted to people who are members of the religious group offering the educational services is an activity that is part of the education group and must be a permitted use within the zone in which the building is located. 
(6)  Feeding or shelter offered to members of the religious group offering the services. 
(7)  Feeding or shelter offered on an ongoing basis to anyone in the community are not religion group activities and if offered in a religion group building must be either allowed as a permitted use within the zoning district in which the building is located or approved as a conditional use within the zoning district in which the building is located. Use of a religion group building during a natural disaster or community emergency is not restricted. 
(8)  The sale of new or used items to the general public by a religious group or persons affiliated with a religious group on an ongoing basis is a commercial activity and if offered in a religion group building must be a permitted commercial use within the zoning district in which the building is located. Occasional rummage sales are permitted. 
(9)  Occasional use of religion group buildings by other groups for personal, social or community events is a permitted use. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0209; Code 1994, § 21-03-07; Ord. No. 722, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 888, § 1(4), 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 892, § 2(4(c)), 5-4-1999; Ord. No. 923, § 2, 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 1223, § 6, 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 1242, § 4, 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 1266, § 3, 7-10-2018; Ord. No. 1291, § 2, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 105-1-5. - Special uses. 
(a)  Purpose. In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, the board of city commissioners finds it necessary to require that certain uses, because of unusual size, safety hazards, infrequent occurrence, effect on surrounding area or other reasons, be reviewed by the planning and zoning commission prior to the board voting on whether or not to approve the use at a specific site. 
(b)  Application submittal. An application for a special use shall be submitted to the city planner. Whenever possible, applications should be submitted electronically. 
(c)  General provisions. The uses listed in this section are conditional uses that require increased investigation before considering approval. 
(1)  The planning and zoning commission must conduct a public hearing on such application, notice of the time and place of which hearing has been given in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(2)  Notices must be mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundary of the proposed project. 
(3)  In order to give a favorable recommendation, the planning and zoning commission must consider the following: 
a.  The proposed use is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this chapter; 
b.  The proposed use is not in conflict with the adopted comprehensive plan of the city; 
c.  The proposed use will not adversely affect the health and safety of the public and the workers and residents in the area; 
d.  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent properties or of the surrounding neighborhood; and 
e.  The proposed use meets all appropriate regulations for the district in which it will be located. 
(4)  The planning and zoning commission may require the submission of additional plans, special studies or reports during review of the application. 
(5)  The planning and zoning commission may recommend special requirements for the proposed use. The reasons for the special requirements must be documented. 
(6)  Once the planning and zoning commission has acted, the city commission must hold a public hearing and then act to ratify the recommendation of the planning commission, modify the recommendation of the planning commission or reject the application. 
(d)  Airports and heliports. An airport may be permitted as a special use in an A agricultural district in the extraterritorial zone and a heliport may be permitted as a special use associated with a medical facility within the zoning jurisdiction of the city, provided that: 
(1)  The area is sufficient to meet the federal requirements for the class of airport or heliport proposed; 
(2)  There are no existing flight obstructions, such as towers, chimneys, or other tall structures, or natural obstructions outside the boundaries of the proposed airport or heliport which would fall within the approach zone to any of the proposed runways or landing strips of the airport or heliport; 
(3)  There is sufficient distance between the end of each useable landing strip and the airport boundary to satisfy the requirements of the federal aviation administration or any other appropriate authority. In cases where air rights or easements have been acquired from the owners of abutting properties, in which approach zones may fall, satisfactory evidence thereof shall be submitted with the application; 
(4)  Any building, hangar or other structure shall be at least 100 feet from any street or property boundary; 
(5)  Adequate space for off-street parking has been provided. A traffic study must be submitted to document the need for the number of spaces proposed; and 
(6)  The application for authorization of an airport or heliport shall be accompanied by plans meeting the requirements of the FAA, other regulatory agencies and the city. 
(e)  Cemetery. A cemetery, mausoleum, or columbarium may be permitted in an industrial or A district as a special use, provided that: 
(1)  No graves shall be located less than 100 feet distant from any property line; 
(2)  There shall be a strip at least 75 feet in width adjacent to all boundaries of the cemetery landscaped and maintained as a green area; 
(3)  In any cemetery in which there will be permitted monuments and grave markers rising above the surface of the ground, the green area shall include a dense evergreen hedge at least six feet in height; and 
(4)  No mausoleum, columbarium, or cemetery chapel shall be erected within 200 feet of any boundary of the lot or parcel on which it is located. 
(f)  Golf driving range or miniature golf course. A golf driving range or miniature golf course may be permitted in an A or industrial district as a special use, provided that: 
(1)  The area within 500 feet of all boundaries of the lot is not developed in residences to a greater density than one family per acre; 
(2)  Any flood-lights used to illuminate the premises are so directed and shielded as to prevent the direct lighting area from extending beyond the property boundary; 
(3)  When the area within 500 feet of the property boundary is undeveloped, any approval is limited to one year and must be renewed annually. If residential development exceeding a density of one dwelling unit per acre is approved within this 500-foot area, the approval for this use may be withdrawn unless all property owners within the 500-foot area sign written consents to allow the use to continue on a year to year basis. 
(g)  Fire or emergency medical response. A facility providing fire and/or emergency medical response services may be permitted in any zoning district as a special use, provided that: 
(1)  Ingress and egress from the street shall be so designed and constructed as to provide safe traffic movement. A demand activated traffic control signal for emergency vehicle egress from the site may be required, 
(2)  Sufficient parking shall be provided to accommodate the maximum number of personnel per shift plus at least two visitor spaces; and, 
(3)  If the use is approved, landscaping, signage and design of the building exterior shall be reviewed and approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. 
(h)  Day care center. A day care center is a facility providing services to more than 12 children or any number of adults. A day care center requires a special use approval and must comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  The facility must receive state approval before an occupancy permit can be issued; 
(2)  For a facility catering to children, each building shall provide not less than 35 square feet of interior play area per child; 
(3)  For a facility catering to children, a fenced outdoor play area of not less than 75 square feet per child shall be provided that is located no closer than ten feet to an adjoining residential lot; 
(4)  For a facility catering to adults, there shall be an outdoor lawn area and covered porch offering either active recreation or passive activities for groups or individuals; 
(5)  As a minimum, onsite parking shall be provided at the ratio of one space per manager and employee per shift plus one space for each 12 clients; and 
(6)  Drop off and pickup of clients shall be in an area off the public street that is separate from parking spaces. 
(i)  Correctional facility. A correctional facility may be permitted in an industrial or A district as a special use, provided that: 
(1)  The facility fronts on an arterial street; 
(2)  There are no churches, schools or residentially developed property within 500 feet; 
(3)  The primary illumination field for exterior lighting shall not extend beyond the property boundary; 
(4)  No building shall be closer than 35 feet to any property line; and 
(5)  As a minimum, onsite parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each employee per shift plus one space per four inmates. 
(j)  Drug or alcohol outpatient treatment or counseling facility. A drug or alcohol outpatient treatment or counseling facility may be permitted as a special use in a regional commercial, industrial or A district and must comply with the following criteria: 
(1)  The facility fronts on an arterial street; 
(2)  As a minimum, onsite parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each employee per shift plus one space per two clients per hour; 
(3)  Hours of operation are limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.; 
(4)  The facility is no closer than 1,000 feet to a school, daycare facility or residentially developed property; and 
(5)  The facility is no closer than 500 feet to an establishment selling alcohol. 
(k)  Crematorium. A crematorium may be permitted as a special use with the following minimum restrictions: 
(1)  No crematorium equipment shall be placed within 100 feet of a property line excepting along adjacent right-of-way; and 
(2)  Crematoriums shall be located within the Mandan Union Cemetery. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0210; Code 1994, § 21-03-08; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 1976; Ord. No. 535, § 4, 1976; Ord. No. 610, § 1, 1979; Ord. No. 636, § 2, 1981; Ord. No. 657, § 2, 1982; Ord. No. 923, § 3, 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 963, § 7, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 1223, § 7, 11-3-2015; Ord. No. 1299, §§ 3, 4, 4-16-2019) 
Sec. 105-1-6. - Automobile parking. 
(a)  Off-street parking. Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy in any zone shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such a building, improvement or use a plot plan showing the required open space designated as being reserved for off-street parking purposes to be provided in connection with such a building, improvement or use in accordance with this section. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the required facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the attached plan. Such off-street parking shall be provided on the basis of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Dwellings. Dwellings, including single-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings require two off-street parking spaces for each dwelling unit, except that for an efficiency apartment of less than 400 square feet, only one off-street parking space shall be required if the parking space is exterior. Fifty percent of the required minimum parking spaces must be exterior parking. 
(2)  Hotels. Hotels, including clubs, require one space for each two guest rooms. If, in addition to sleeping rooms, patrons or residents are provided with assembly halls, bars, restaurants, nightclubs, retail shops, service establishments or other businesses, additional off-street parking spaces will be required for such other uses in accordance with the regulations of this section for such uses. 
(3)  Tourist homes, motels, trailer courts. Tourist homes, motels and trailer courts require one space for each guest room, cabin or trailer parking space. Off-street parking for auxiliary uses in the same building or on the same lot shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in this section for such uses. For tourist homes there must be provided in addition to off-street parking spaces for guests, one additional space for each family permanently residing in the building. 
(4)  Hospitals. Hospitals, including sanitariums, orphanages, nursing homes, treatment facilities, and similar institutions require one space for each two patient beds plus one additional space for each staff doctor, plus one additional space for each two regular employees, including nurses. 
(5)  Restaurants. Restaurants, including bars, taverns, nightclubs, lunch counters, diners and all other similar dining or drinking establishments require one space for each four seats provided for patron use. 
(6)  Theaters. Theaters require one space for each five seats provided for patron use. 
(7)  Places of public assembly. Places of public assembly, including private clubs, lodges, and fraternal buildings not providing overnight accommodations, assembly halls, exhibition halls, convention halls, auditoriums, skating rinks, dancehalls, bowling alleys, sports arenas, stadiums, gymnasiums, amusement parks, racetracks, fairgrounds, circus grounds, funeral homes, and mortuaries, community centers, libraries, museums and all other similar places of relatively infrequent public assembly require one space for each ten seats provided for patron use, one space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers, patrons, or clients, whichever requires the greater number of parking spaces. 
(8)  Medical clinics. Medical clinics, including offices of doctors, dentists and drugless physicians, require three spaces for each doctor using the office or clinic, plus one additional space for each two regular employees, including nurses. 
(9)  Retail establishments. Retail establishments, including personal service shops, equipment or repair shops, in a CA or CB Commercial District, require one space for each 400 square feet of floor area on the ground floor, plus one space for each 400 square feet of floor area in a basement of any story above the ground floor. 
(10)  Office buildings. Office buildings, including commercial, governmental and professional buildings, except as otherwise provided for in this section, require one space for each 400 square feet of floor area. 
(11)  Wholesale, manufacturing and industrial plants. Wholesale, manufacturing and industrial plants, including warehouses and storage buildings and yards, public utility buildings, contractor equipment and lumber yards, research laboratories, business service establishments, such as blueprinting, printing and engraving, soft drink bottling establishments, fabricating plants, and all other structures devoted to similar mercantile or industrial pursuits, require one space for each two employees, plus sufficient space to park all company-owned or -leased vehicles, including passenger automobiles, trucks, trailers and similar company-operated motor vehicles. 
(12)  Terminal facilities. Terminal facilities, including airports, railroad passenger, and freight stations, bus depots, truck terminals and all other similar personal or material terminal facilities, require off-street parking spaces in an amount determined by the board of adjustment to be adequate to serve the public as customers, patrons, and visitors, plus one space to provide one off-street parking space for each two regular employees, plus space to provide off-street parking for all owned, leased or operated commercial vehicles, buses, and similar motor vehicles. 
(13)  Schools. Schools, including colleges, elementary schools, junior and senior high schools, including public, private and parochial schools, require one space for each two staff members or employees, plus one space for each classroom, plus additional space for any places of public assembly in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section for such uses. 
(14)  Correctional facilities. Correctional facilities and similar institutions require one space for each two regular employees, plus one additional space for each four inmates. 
(b)  Off-street loading. Except as provided elsewhere in this section, no application for a building permit or certificate of occupancy for a commercial or industrial building or use shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvement or use, a plot plan showing the required space or structural design for off-street loading purposes to be provided in connection with such building, improvement or use, in accordance with this section; and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the required facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. Such off-street loading space shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Each department store, freight terminal or railroad yard, hospital or sanitarium, industrial plant, manufacturing establishment, retail establishment, storage warehouse or wholesale establishment which has an aggregate gross floor area of 25,000 square feet or more, arranged, intended or designed for such use, shall provide off-street truck loading or unloading berths in accordance with the following table: 
Square Feet of Aggregate Gross 
Floor Area Devoted to Such Use Required Number 
of Berths 25,000 but less than 40,000 1 40,000 but less than 100,000 2 100,000 but less than 160,000 3 160,000 but less than 240,000 4 240,000 up to and including 321,000 5 For each additional 90,000 1 additional  
(2)  Each multifamily dwelling having ten dwelling units: One off-street loading berth for ten up to and including 30 dwelling units, plus one additional off-street loading berth for each additional 30 dwelling units. 
(3)  Each auditorium, convention hall, exhibition hall, funeral home, hotel, office building, restaurant, sports arena, hospital or welfare institution which has an aggregate gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more arranged, intended or designed for such use shall provide one off-street loading berth for 50,000 square feet up to and including 250,000 square feet and one additional berth for each additional 200,000 square feet of floor space. 
(c)  Uses not specifically mentioned. For each use not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading facilities for a use which is so mentioned and to which said use is similar, shall apply. In such case, either the building inspector or the applicant for the certificate of occupancy or building permit may apply to the board of adjustment for an interpretation of the provision of this chapter for such off-street parking and off-street loading requirements and the board of adjustment shall render a decision in writing in the manner provided for in this chapter for such action. 
(d)  Continuing character of obligation. The schedule or requirements for off-street parking space and off-street loading space shall be a continuing obligation of the owner or the real estate on which any such structure is located, as long as the structure is in existence, and its use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities continues. It is unlawful for an owner of any building affected by this section to discontinue, change or dispense with, or cause the discontinuance or change of, the required vehicle parking or loading space apart from the discontinuance, sale or transfer of such structure without establishing alternative vehicle parking or loading space which meets the requirements of, and is in compliance with, this section. It is unlawful for any firm or corporation to use such building without acquiring such land or other suitable land for vehicle parking or loading space which meets with the requirements of and is in compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  Fractional measurements. When units or measurements determining a number of required off-street parking and off-street loading spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-fourth shall be disregarded, and fractions over one-fourth shall require one off-street parking or off-street loading space. 
(f)  Location of required parking and loading facilities. The off-street parking facilities required by this section shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve; provided, however, that when practical difficulties, as determined by the board of adjustment, prevent the establishment of such facilities upon the same lot or parcel, they shall be furnished within 400 feet of the premises to which they are appurtenant. The off-street loading facilities required by this section shall, in all cases, be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading space be part of the area used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Plan of required off-street parking or loading area. For the purpose of converting parking or loading spaces into the required parking or loading area, plans must be submitted to the building inspector to show how the required parking or loading space shall be arranged in the area supplied for that purpose and to indicate sufficient space for parking maneuvers, as well as adequate ingress and egress to the parking or loading area. For each parking space not under roof, there shall be provided 200 square feet in addition to all lanes, alleys, aisles and drives necessary for safe and adequate parking maneuvering. For each off-street loading space required by this section, there shall be provided space clear and free of all obstruction, at least ten feet in width, 50 feet in length and 14 feet in height. Off-street parking and off-street loading space shall be provided with methods of ingress and egress such that it will be unnecessary for trucks or tractor trailer combinations to back into them from a street or out of them into a street. 
(h)  Use of required off-street parking by another building. No part of an off-street parking area required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this section shall be included as a part of an off-street parking area similarly required for another building or use unless the type of structure indicates that the periods of usage of such structure will not be simultaneous with each other, as determined by the board of adjustment. 
(i)  Maintenance of public off-street parking places provided. All off-street parking facilities for the use of the public, required pursuant to the provisions of this section, shall be paved, drained, lighted and periodically maintained by the owner in accordance with specifications of the city engineer, and such facilities shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles. No open area in an off-street parking area shall be encroached upon by buildings, storage, or any other use; nor shall the number of parking spaces be reduced except upon the approval of the board of adjustment and then only after proof that, by reason of diminution in floor area, seating capacity, number of employees, or change in other factors controlling the regulation of the number of parking spaces, the proposed reduction is reasonable and consistent with the intent of this section. 
(j)  Collective action relative to off-street parking and loading. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the joint use of off-street parking or off-street loading space for two or more buildings or uses if the total of such space, when used together, shall not be less than the sum of the requirements of the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with this section. 
(k)  Mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately as specified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and the off-street parking and off-street loading space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street parking or off-street loading space for any other use. 
(l)  Nonconforming uses. In the case of nonconforming uses, where major repairs, substantial alterations, or extensions are made, no such major repairs, substantial alterations or extensions shall be permitted unless and until the off-street parking and off-street loading facilities space requirements of this section, so far as they apply to the use to which such building is devoted, shall be fully provided for. 
(m)  Commercial vehicles in residential districts. Parking of commercial vehicles weighing in excess of 2.5 tons in residential districts is not allowed, except for deliveries. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0212; Code 1994, § 21-03-10; Ord. No. 923, §§ 4, 5, 7-17-2001; Ord. No. 1108, § 1(j)(1), 2-21-2012; Ord. No. 1158, 10-15-2013; Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 105-1-7. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Duty of developer. Unless other written arrangements have been made with the city, it shall be the duty of developers of new subdivisions to construct or arrange for the construction of all required sidewalks and multi-use paths within the limits of the subdivision and within any areas outside the subdivision so designated during the review and approval process prior to the sale of lots within the subdivision. 
(b)  Property owners in established subdivisions. Property owners or occupants of lots in established subdivisions shall construct a sidewalk within the right-of-way adjacent to their property unless the city engineer has waived in writing the requirement for a sidewalk. 
(c)  Construction of sidewalk prior to occupancy permit. Unless the city engineer has granted a waiver in writing for good cause to allow a specified time delay in installing a sidewalk or specified in writing that a sidewalk is not required, the sidewalk shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. 
Sec. 105-1-8. - Delivery of goods in public places regulated. 
    Any person may place and leave, for a period not to exceed one hour, on an area three feet of the outer edge of the sidewalk, in front of his store or in the alley in the rear of his premises or building, any goods, wares or merchandise which he shall be in the act of receiving or delivering, provided that such goods shall not be packed or unpacked on the sidewalk or street. However, this section shall not be construed as to allow the displaying of goods contained in boxes, crates or barrels or any article or thing unsightly or dangerous to pedestrians or considered a nuisance. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-04; Code 1994, § 10-04-04) 
Sec. 105-1-9. - Building permits and approval of plans. 
    The building official shall in no case grant any permit for the construction, moving or alteration of any building if the building, as proposed to be constructed, moved or altered, would be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the plot to be built upon, the exact sizes and locations on the plot of the buildings and accessory buildings then existing, and the lines within which the proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing and intended use of such building or part of a building, the number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate, and such other information with regard to the plot and neighboring plots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this chapter. One copy of such plans shall be returned to the owner when the plans shall have been approved by the building official. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0222(1); Code 1994, § 21-05-01) 
Sec. 105-1-10. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    It is unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or premises or part, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, moved, altered or enlarged wholly, or partly in its use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefor by the building official. Such certificate shall show that such building or premises or part and the proposed use thereof are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0222(2); Code 1994, § 21-05-02) 
Sec. 105-1-11. - Fees. 
    The board of city commissioners shall establish, by resolution, filing fees for certificates of occupancy, variances, special use permits, large-scale development permits, amendments or changes of districts, appeals to the board of adjustment or other actions or proceedings conducted under this chapter. Before accepting for filing any application for an activity for which a fee has been established, the building official or other designated city official shall charge and collect the required fees. No fee shall be required for any appeal filed by an agency of government. All fees established under this section are in addition to any fees for building permits, business licenses or any other fees or charges required under other city ordinances. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0222(5); Code 1994, § 21-05-05) 
Sec. 105-1-12. - Board of Adjustment. 
(a)  The board of city commissioners may create a board of adjustment as authorized by N.D.C.C. or may perform the functions themselves. 
(b)  The board of adjustment is an administrative board whose powers and duties are limited generally by state laws and particularly by the powers and duties set forth in this section. The board of adjustment shall not have the power to amend this chapter on zoning, nor to permit nor prohibit any actions which accomplish an amendment of this chapter on zoning, nor to permit any action nor fail to prohibit any action which would violate this chapter. However, it is the declared intent of this section that any actions taken by the board of adjustment, in full compliance with the provisions of this section, shall be deemed to be administrative actions and shall not be interpreted as unauthorized amendments to the chapter. In addition to the powers provided by law, the board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Variances. 
a.  On appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official, the board of adjustment may vary or adjust the strict application of any of the requirements of this chapter in the case of an exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow or steep lot or other exceptional physical or topographical condition, by reason of which the strict application of the provisions of the chapter would result in unnecessary hardship that would deprive the owner of a reasonable use of the land or building involved, but in no other case. 
b.  No adjustment in the strict application of any provisions of this chapter shall be granted by the board of adjustment unless it finds that: 
1.  There are special circumstances or conditions, fully described in the findings of the board, applying to the land or buildings for which the variance is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or building, and do not apply generally to land or buildings in the neighborhood, and have not resulted from any act of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of this chapter, whether in violation of the provisions of the chapter, or not; 
2.  For reasons fully set forth in the findings of the board, the circumstances or conditions so found are such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of said land or building, and the granting of the variance is necessary for the reasonable use of the land or building, and that the variance as granted by the board is the minimum variance that will accomplish the relief sought by the applicant; 
3.  The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter, and not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(2)  Conditional variance. In granting any variance, the board of adjustment shall prescribe any conditions applying thereto that it may deem necessary or desirable to carry out the general purposes of this chapter or preserve the neighborhood or general welfare from injury. 
(3)  Allocation of unlisted uses. Upon application of a property owner, or upon a request of the building official or other administrative official or of any official, agency or board of the city, or on its own initiative, the board of adjustment shall add to any use group established by section 105-1-4, any other similar use which conforms to the conditions set forth in the special finding required and listed in this subsection: 
a.  Such use is not listed in any other use group, nor is it listed individually as a permitted use. 
b.  Such use is more appropriate in the use group to which it is added than in any other use group. 
c.  Such use conforms to the basic characteristics of the use group to which it is added as set forth in the general description of the use group. 
d.  Such use does not adversely affect the character of any of the districts in which the use group to which it is added is permitted. 
e.  Such use is not likely to create any more traffic than the other uses listed in the use group to which it is added, nor does it create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare, health or safety hazard or other objectionable influence than the minimum amount normally resulting from the other uses listed in the use group to which it is added. 
f.  When any use has been added to any use group in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section, such use shall thereafter be deemed to be permitted in any district in which such use group is permitted, and to be prohibited from any district in which such use group is prohibited. Such use shall be added to the use group in the published text of this chapter at the first convenient opportunity, with a notation indicating that the addition was made in accordance with this section. 
(4)  Renewal of certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use. The board of adjustment shall have the power to renew a certificate of occupancy for nonconforming use in accordance with the provisions of section 105-1-1. In granting such renewal, the board of adjustment shall determine that the temporary continuation will not be injurious to the neighborhood, nor to the public welfare, and that there are unusual circumstances or conditions which would create an unnecessary hardship on the applicant for extension if such extension were refused. The board of adjustment may refuse to grant an extension to the certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use if application for such extension is received by the board of adjustment less than 15 days prior to the expiration of the original certificate of occupancy. 
(5)  Renewal of automatically revoked building permit. Upon appeal by any person holding a building permit automatically revoked by the provisions of this Code, the board of adjustment shall hear and determine whether or not such revoked building permit will be renewed. The board of adjustment shall authorize such renewal only where it specifically finds: 
a.  Construction of the building has, in fact, been started. 
b.  Substantial expenditures have been made for such construction. 
c.  The plans for the building and actual construction of the building are in full compliance with the zoning ordinances in effect at the date of issuance of the building permit and in full compliance with the building code and any other city ordinances. 
(6)  Special uses. The board of adjustment shall, on application, hear a request for a special use in accordance with the provisions of section 105-1-5. The board of adjustment shall grant a permit for such special use if and only if it finds that such use is in full conformity with all standards relating thereto as specified in section 105-1-5, and with any other conditions, regulations and standards specified elsewhere in this chapter and applicable to said special use. 
(7)  Off-street parking. The board of adjustment shall, upon application, hear and decide any question relating to the decrease of required off-street parking or off-street loading spaces, as set forth in section 105-1-6. 
(8)  Airport zoning. The board of adjustment shall have all powers and duties granted to it by this chapter relating to airport zoning regulation. 
(9)  Recommendations to planning and zoning commission. The board of adjustment is authorized to recommend to the city planning and zoning commission, for study or action, any changes or amendments to the text or district zoning maps that the board finds desirable. The planning and zoning commission shall consider such recommendations and may prepare appropriate amendments for the consideration of the board of city commissioners to carry out said recommendation. 
(10)  Special permit for large-scale development. The board of adjustment shall hear and pass upon an application for a special permit for a large-scale development in accordance with the provisions of section 105-4-5. 
(11)  Miscellaneous powers and duties. The board of adjustment shall have such other powers and duties as may be authorized by this chapter, or any amendment thereto. 
(12)  Rules. The board of adjustment is authorized to establish such rules of procedure, not in conflict with any provisions of the laws of this state, this chapter, or any other ordinance of the city, as it may deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0224; Code 1994, § 21-06-02) 
Sec. 105-1-13. - Amendments. 
    Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice requires, the board of city commissioners may amend, supplement or change the regulations in the zoning ordinance, or the zoning boundaries or classification of property on the zoning map, as set forth in this chapter. 
(a)  Initiation of amendments. A proposed amendment may be initiated by the board of city commissioners upon its own motion, or upon receipt of a request therefor from the planning and zoning commission, or upon receipt of a petition therefor from any interested person or their agents. 
(b)  Report by planning and zoning commission; public hearing. The board shall require a report from the planning and zoning commission on a proposed amendment before taking final action thereon. The planning and zoning commission shall thereupon make a tentative report and hold a public hearing thereon with notice the same as required for a public hearing by the board of city commissioners, before submitting its final report. Such final report shall be submitted within 90 days of the referral of the proposed amendment to the planning and zoning commission unless the board is agreeable to an extension of time. 
(c)  Action by board of city commissioners; public hearing. After the receipt of the required final report on any amendment from the planning and zoning commission, or in the event of the failure of the planning and zoning commission to so report within 90 days following the time of referral of the proposed amendment to the planning and zoning commission, the board shall hold a public hearing, after which the board may make a final determination on the proposed amendment. A hearing shall be granted to any person interested at the time and place specified. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-0223, 14-0226; Code 1994, §§ 21-06-01, 21-07-01, 21-07-02) 
State Law reference- Board of adjustment and appeals, N.D.C.C. § 40-47-07 et seq.; amendments to zoning ordinances, N.D.C.C. § 40-47-05. 
Sec. 105-1-14. - Landscaping. 
    In addition to the requirements contained elsewhere in this title related to specific uses or districts, the following requirements shall apply to all property within the city. If these requirements conflict with the requirements for specific uses or districts, the requirements for specific uses or districts shall apply. 
(1)  Time limit. Each lot or parcel of land shall be landscaped within one year of issuance of a certificate of occupancy or within two years of issuance of a building permit if a certificate of occupancy has not been issued. 
(2)  Landscaping includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Grass that is maintained in a healthy condition; 
b.  Trees, shrubs, flowers, ground cover and other cultivated vegetation that are maintained in a healthy condition; 
c.  Walking paths or maintained trails; 
d.  Decorative walls or retaining walls; and 
e.  Rocks, ornamental structures or seating. 
(3)  Landscaping does not include: 
a.  Unmaintained areas containing weeds or grasses; 
b.  Paved parking and driveway areas; 
c.  Gravel or dirt surfaces; and 
d.  Areas used for the display of merchandise. 
(4)  Zoning district criteria. 
a.  For lots with residential structures containing one to four dwelling units, the requirement applies to every area of the lot not covered by structures or paving. 
b.  For lots containing multi-family (greater than four dwelling units), commercial and industrial structures, a landscaping plan shall be submitted to and approved by the MARC prior to issuance of a grading or building permit. 
c.  For lots within multi-family and commercial districts containing multi-family structures with more than four dwelling units or commercial structures, the requirement applies to the front yard setback and the rear yard or side yard setback bordering a residential zoned property. The requirement is the lesser of: 
1.  At least 50 percent of the yard setback areas must be landscaped; or 
2.  At least ten percent of the developable lot area must be landscaped. When determining developable area, areas with steep slopes or low areas subject to constant or frequent inundation may be excluded from the calculation. 
d.  For lots in industrial districts the requirement applies to the front yard setback and the rear yard or side yard setback bordering a residential zoned property. The requirement is the lesser of: 
1.  At least 25 percent of the yard setback areas must be landscaped; or 
2.  At least five percent of the developable lot area must be landscaped. When determining developable area, areas with steep slopes or low areas subject to constant or frequent inundation may be excluded from the calculation. 
e.  Large commercial and industrial lots. For commercial and industrial lots where the landscaping area requirement exceeds 5,000 square feet, trees or shrubs must be included in the landscaped area per the requirements of Chapter 14-01 administered by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. 
(5)  Enforcement. 
a.  Any authorized city employee or agent of the city may issue a notice of violation to a property owner. The notice of violation shall state the requirements to bring the property into compliance and shall set a time limit for accomplishing compliance. 
b.  Once the property owner has brought the property into compliance, the property owner shall contact the city and arrange for an inspection to document compliance. 
c.  When the city is satisfied that the lot has been brought into compliance, the city will issue a written letter acknowledging compliance and rescinding the notice of violation. 
d.  Should the property owner fail to bring the property into compliance within the specified timeframe, the city may grant a time extension for good cause or cite the property owner into municipal court. 
e.  Once the city has cited the property owner into municipal court, each day that the property remains in non-compliance is considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1188, § 1(21-03-11), 12-16-2014) 
Sec. 105-1-15. - Signs. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these sign requirements is to establish regulations that allow businesses to effectively convey information through signage while also maintaining a neat and orderly appearance. These regulations apply to new signs installed after adoption of these regulations and existing signs that are rebuilt or relocated. Permanent types of signs require a building permit and payment of the established fee. Permanent signs must meet building and utility code requirements. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Awning means a roof-like structure that is supported by a metal or wood frame. 
    Banner means a sign printed on lightweight, flexible material such as cloth, canvas or plastic that contains decorations and/or graphics or provides information to the public that is temporarily attached to a building or suspended between permanent poles or columns. 
    Bench sign means a place for people to sit that also contains wording and/or graphics advertising a business or activity. 
    Billboard means an off-premise sign constructed to industry standards that either advertises one business or contains an easily changeable face that can be rented by a business or multiple businesses for a period of time. 
    Canopy means a structure or architectural element, other than an awning, that is made of metal or other noncombustible materials and is either freestanding or attached to a building. 
    Canopy sign means a message or identification which is affixed to or supported by a canopy. 
    Directional means an on-premise sign using arrows and/or words to assist with internal circulation that may contain the name or logo of an establishment but no advertising copy. 
    Display means a structure of any kind that is arranged, intended, designed or used as an advertisement, announcement or direction. 
    Electronic or changeable copy means a portion of a sign that includes a screen or letters, characters, or graphics that are not permanently affixed to the structure, that can be modified from time to time either electronically or manually. 
    Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. 
    Facing or surface means the part of a sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated. 
    Figurative wall mural means an illustration, diagram or design, not intended to sell a product or to advertise an establishment, that is used for aesthetic purposes or to enhance architectural features of a building. 
    Flag sign means a loose section of fabric or other flexible material designed to move with the wind that is attached to a lightweight pole which is either pushed into the ground or into some form of support. 
    Flashing means a pattern of changing light, pictures or wording for the purpose of drawing attention to the sign. 
    Frame effect means a defining element on an electronic message center sign applied to a single frame or to transition from one frame to the next. 
    Frame hold means the duration or interval of time during which each individual advertisement or message is displayed on any sign which is capable of sequentially displaying more than one advertisement or message on its display surface. 
    Freestanding means a sign supported by uprights or braces placed in or upon the ground surface with no attachment to any building. 
    Illuminated means a sign that has either internal or external lights or luminous tubes. 
    Marquee means a hood or awning of permanent construction projecting from the wall of a building above an entrance and extending over a sidewalk. 
    Marquee sign means a message attached to the face of a marquee. 
    Monument means a freestanding sign where the entire bottom of the sign is affixed to a base on the ground that fully supports the sign. 
    NIT means a unit of illuminative brightness equal to one candela (12.5 lumens) per square meter measured perpendicular to the rays of the source. 
    Non-conforming means a sign that was lawfully erected prior to the effective date of the ordinance that adopted this article and that fails to conform to any of the provisions of this article. 
    Obstructive means a sign erected with the purpose of hiding or covering from the view of the public an adjacent or nearby sign. 
    Off-premise means a sign advertising a business, person, service or product which is located or conducted elsewhere than on the premises where the sign is located. 
    On-premise means a sign advertising a business, service or major product located on that property. 
    Permanent means a sign not falling under the definitions of temporary or portable. 
    Pole means a free standing sign supported from the ground by one or two supports that are normally bare. 
    Portable means a sign designed to be transported, including inflatable devices and signs carried or attached to a trailer or vehicle unless such trailer or vehicle is used in normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
    Post and panel means a freestanding sign that does not have a base other than the support posts. 
    Privilege panel means a permanent sign provided by the distributor or manufacturer of a product which utilizes a portion of the sign to advertise a specific product with the rest of the sign allocated to identifying business located at the property upon which the sign is placed. 
    Projecting means a sign which is attached directly to a building wall and which extends more than 12 inches from the face of the wall. 
    Pylon means a free standing sign supported from the ground by one or two supports that are normally shrouded. 
    Roof means a sign erected or constructed wholly upon or over the roof of a building. 
    Sign means any written announcement, demonstration, display, illustration, or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is displayed or placed out of doors in view of the general public and shall include every detached sign or billboard and every sign attached to or forming a component part of any building marquee, canopy, awning, street clock, pole, parked vehicle or other object whether stationary or moveable. 
    Sign size. 
(1)  The size of a sign shall mean the area including all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs, logos, and symbols. The area of a sign shall not include any supporting framework, bracing or trim which is incidental to the display, provided that it does not contain any lettering, wording, or symbols. 
(2)  Where the sign consists of individual letters, designs, or symbols attached to a building, awning, or wall, the area shall be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters, designs, and symbols. 
    Signable wall surface area means the portion of a building wall that is free of windows, doors or major architectural details. 
    Sight triangle means the area on each side of a driveway, the area at the intersection of two streets or the area at the intersection of an alley and a street that provides visibility along the street for drivers of vehicles, pedestrians and cyclists wishing to turn onto or cross the adjoining street or exit the property onto or across the street. 
    Streamer means one or more small, typically triangular, flags attached to a line or cable that can be tied or otherwise attached to a portion of a permanent structure or sign post. 
    Temporary means a sign that is designed to be used only for a limited period of time to advertise a special event or activity and includes banners, construction signs, finance signs, real estate signs, flag signs, political signs, portable signs and streamers. 
    Wall mount means a sign which is affixed parallel to the exterior wall of a building and which does not project more than 12 inches from the surface to which it is attached nor does it extend beyond the top of any parapet wall. 
    Window means a sign which faces the exterior of the building and is applied in any manner to the window from either side. 
(c)  Application for permit. An application for issuance of a sign permit shall be submitted to the City of Mandan Building Department. An application shall include all necessary drawings and specifications showing dimensions and materials to be used on the sign. Required fees must be paid before an application will be processed. Fees for processing and issuance of a sign permit shall be set by action of the board of city commissioners. Actions requiring a permit include the following. 
(1)  Alterations to an existing sign. No sign shall be altered except in conformity with the provisions of this policy. The changing of moveable parts of an approved sign that is designed for such changes, repainting the sign or reposting of display matter shall not be deemed an alteration provided the conditions of the original approval and the requirements of this section are not violated. 
(2)  New signs. 
(3)  Relocated signs. A sign that is moved to another location on the same premise or to another premise. 
(d)  Permit exemptions. No permit shall be required for signs or outdoor display structures listed here. However, not having to get a permit does not relieve the owner of the sign from responsibility for its erection and maintenance in a safe and conforming manner to the requirements contained in this section. 
(1)  Directional or instructional signs. Signs not exceeding four square feet in area which provide direction, instruction or identify public facilities; are located entirely on the property to which they pertain; and do not in any way advertise a business. 
(2)  Political signs. Signs that meet the standards contained in this section. 
(3)  Professional name plates. Professional name plates not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(4)  Real estate, construction and finance signs. These signs do not require a permit but signs larger than 16 square feet must be registered with the building department. 
(5)  Rental signs. Rental companies that provide portable signs to businesses must register with the building department and provide an inventory of where the signs are located by the 5th business day of each month in which they have a sign rented within the city. The inventory shall include the dates that the sign was or will be in place. 
(6)  Special displays. Decorative displays used for holidays, public demonstrations or promotion of civic welfare or charitable purposes and on which there is no commercial advertising. 
(7)  Store signs. Signs erected on a show window or on the door of a store or business establishment which announces the name of the proprietor and the nature of the business conducted therein as well as temporary signs placed in windows used to advertise a special product or sale. 
(8)  Street signs. Signs erected by the city for street direction. 
(9)  Transit directions. Signs designating the location of a transit line, a railroad station or other public carrier not more than three square feet in area. 
(e)  Processing of application . Upon receipt of a sign permit application, the building department shall process the application in a timely manner relaying all information that pertains to any violation of the city codes and ordinances so the applicant can make changes as needed to comply with standards set forth by this section. If a situation arises and the applicant requests a variation of this section an application to the Mandan Architectural Review Commission (MARC) can be requested by the applicant for a site specific waiver. The MARC meeting shall occur within thirty (30) days of the request for a site specific waiver. Once the MARC has reviewed the application and rendered a decision, the building department will process the application and issue any permit recommended by the MARC. 
(f)  Mandan Architectural Review Commission (MARC). The MARC is responsible to apply the standards contained in this section when reviewing any sign application submitted to it however it may also grant site specific waivers, for variations to this section, when it deems the design of the sign meets the intent of this section and will cause no disruption to pedestrians or surrounding buildings. The MARC shall review the application and notify the building department of its determination. If the MARC approves the application, the building department will issue the appropriate permit. The MARC may attach any conditions it deems appropriate to any approval granted. The reasons for the decision set forth by MARC must be documented in the minutes of the MARC meeting. 
(g)  Unsafe or unlawful signs. Unlawful signs shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer and an application for the unlawful sign shall be submitted to the Building Inspections Department. The Code Enforcement Officer and building department shall take whatever action is necessary to correct an unsafe condition with a sign or have an unlawful sign removed. If necessary, the Code Enforcement Officer and building department may file a complaint with any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(1)  Whenever any sign becomes insecure, in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, the owner of the sign shall be notified by the building department and given a specified time to correct the problem. 
(2)  The building department shall order the removal of any sign that has been unlawfully installed, erected or maintained in violation of any of the provisions of this code. 
(3)  The building department shall notify the owner and lessee of a building or structure whenever a sign is so erected as to obstruct free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way and shall require appropriate corrective action within a specified time frame. 
(4)  Signs damaged by storm or accident shall be repaired to a safe condition by the owner of the sign at the direction of the building department within a specified period of time. Signs that present a clear and present danger to the public shall be removed or repaired within 48 hours. Signs that are impeding traffic may be removed immediately by the city and the owner of the sign billed for the costs incurred by the city. 
(5)  Signs that are destroyed or removed shall not be re-erected, reconstructed, rebuilt or relocated unless the sign is made to comply with all applicable requirements of this section. 
(6)  A sign that no longer advertises a bona fide business or product is considered an unlawful sign and must be removed or covered. 
(h)  Non-conforming signs. 
(1)  A previously approved or permitted and properly maintained non-conforming permanent sign will be allowed until the building is remodeled to an extent greater than 50 percent of its value, a new business occupies the building or structural or dimensional changes are proposed for the sign. 
(i)  Maintenance and inspection. 
(1)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner or lessee of every sign to maintain the sign in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition. 
a.  The sign, together with all supports, braces, guy wires and anchors, and individual letters and symbols shall be kept in good repair 
b.  Parts that are not galvanized or constructed of approved corrosion-restrictive materials shall be painted as necessary to prevent corrosion. 
(2)  Every sign for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected by the building department upon completion of erection or installation. 
(j)  General requirements and provisions. 
(1)  All signs shall be designed and constructed in conformity to the provisions for materials, loads and stresses of the adopted version of International Building Code Appendix H. 
(2)  No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means and electrical devices. Wiring shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of the ND State Electrical Board. No open spark or flame shall be used for display purposes unless specifically approved in writing by the building department and the fire chief. 
(3)  No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any street, alley or driveway in such a manner as to obstruct the sight triangle. 
a.  A sign shall not be located within a sight triangle if the portion of the sign or support posts between three feet and ten feet above the edge of the roadway will be greater than ten inches wide. 
b.  The sight triangle for intersections that are not traffic light controlled is the area measured along the curb or edge of pavement of the street to a point with a straight line distance of 25 feet from the curb or edge of pavement of the intersecting street. 
c.  No sight triangle is required for intersections that are traffic light controlled. 
d.  For intersections that are only partially controlled with stop signs, the sight triangle is only applied to the side streets that have stop signs. 
e.  For an alley or driveway, the other side of the triangle is measured perpendicular to the street along the curb or edge of pavement of the alley or driveway to a point that is a distance of 15 feet from the curb or edge of pavement of the street. Sight triangles for alleys or driveways in commercial or industrial districts are not required but are recommended. Sight triangles for alleys and driveways in residential districts are not required. 
f.  In zoning districts with a zero front yard setback, the depth of the sight triangle is limited to the boulevard area of the public right-of-way. 
g.  Where existing conditions on a lot limit the options for location of a sign, the applicant may request that the MARC approve location of a designated type of sign within the limits of the sight triangle for a specific site. The reasons for the approval of the location must be documented in the minutes of the MARC meeting. 
(4)  No sign shall be erected that closely resembles or approximates the size, shape or form of an official traffic regulation sign or marker. 
(5)  No private sign shall be attached to a public building or structure, a utility pole or any existing public signage. 
(6)  The light for a sign shall not be directed into any residential dwelling or towards any oncoming vehicle. 
(7)  Signs, other than window signs, containing or utilizing flashing, rotating, or moving lights shall be prohibited unless they are used solely for public safety, e.g. construction markers. 
(8)  The use of laser lights, strobe lights, searchlights, beacons and similar upward or outward oriented lighting as part of any sign is prohibited. 
(9)  No sign or wall mural shall be painted on any building without prior approval from the MARC. 
(10)  No sign shall be attached to, affixed to, painted or drawn on trees, shrubs, rocks, other natural features or organic material unless approved by the MARC or the city commission for a specific site or application. Certain species of wood products may be used for construction of a sign with approval of the MARC or city commission. 
(11)  No Permanent sign shall use fluorescent type coloring such as that known as "day-glow". 
(12)  No sign shall be attached to the stairwell railing of a basement business unless a site specific waiver of this requirement is approved by the MARC or the city commission. 
(13)  Obstructive signs are prohibited. 
(14)  No advertising sign within 300 feet of a residentially zoned area shall have any bulb that is greater than 11 watts of incandescent lighting or generate more than 165 lumens in light brightness. Public service information signs and other electronic message signs permitted within an area zoned for commercial or industrial use shall have a bulb no greater than 75 watts of incandescent lighting or generate more than 1,125 lumens of light brightness. 
(15)  Illuminated signs are permitted for buildings housing three or more dwelling units. 
(16)  No sign shall hide from a driver's view or interfere in any material degree with the effectiveness within 500 feet of any traffic control device, sign or signal. 
(17)  No advertising sign, by reason of location, position, shape, or color may be designed to be confused with any public sign. The use of cautionary words such as: "stop", "danger", "caution", "beware" or similar words is prohibited. 
(18)  No sign shall contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent, pornographic, or immoral character. 
(19)  Except for sidewalk signs in the downtown commercial area and signs above sidewalks, no sign shall be allowed in the public right-of-way unless otherwise provided for in this section. 
(20)  Signs that can only be accessed from a state controlled roadway must have written approval from NDDOT. 
(21)  No motorized vehicle or trailer on which is attached thereto or located thereon any sign or advertising device that provides the advertisement of products, services, or directs people to a business may be parked in a public right-of-way or on public property. This subsection shall not apply to vehicles that have been decorated with signs or messages advertising a business or product or to vehicular signs that are attached to or affixed on a motor vehicle used in the normal day-day-day operations of a business. 
(22)  No sign shall be permitted to obstruct any window, door, fire escape, stairway, or opening intended to provide air, ingress or egress for any building or structure. 
(23)  Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics are prohibited on or in association with a sign. 
(24)  The total sign area for all permanent signs associated with a structure may not exceed 30% of the street fronting sides of the structure. 
(k)  Zoning district requirements. 
(1)  On single family and two family residentially zoned lots or subdivisions the following sign standards shall apply. 
a.  Each lot may have one sign not exceeding two square feet in area. The sign may be of a wall, foundation or projecting type. Signs may not project past the property boundary. House numbers are not counted as a sign. 
b.  For existing subdivisions, one sign not exceeding 12 square feet in area identifying the subdivision is allowed at each principal entrance. 
c.  For existing subdivisions that were platted more than two years ago, one sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be erected at each principal entrance to the subdivision advertising property for sale or rent within the subdivision. 
d.  For new subdivisions that were platted less than two years ago, one sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area may be erected at each principal entrance to the subdivision advertising lots or dwellings for sale within the subdivision. 
e.  No sign shall be illuminated. 
(2)  In business and industrial zoning districts and residential lots containing three or more dwelling units the following sign standards shall apply. 
a.  Each business on a lot containing one or two businesses may have an individual freestanding sign. Lots with more than two businesses must share any freestanding signage. The MARC shall determine the number of signs allowed on any lot with multiple businesses. 
b.  Each business may have one projecting, roof or marquee sign per building side. 
c.  Each business may have one wall sign per building side. 
d.  Each multi-family residential lot may have up to two signs. 
(l)  Awnings and awning signs. 
(1)  Awnings may extend from a building over the public right-of-way two feet less than the distance from building to curb. Such structures shall be at least eight feet above the sidewalk or ground grade line. Suspended signage or valances shall be at least eight feet above the sidewalk or ground grade line. 
(2)  Awnings should complement the building architecture. Awning shape, color, material, and location on the building shall be compatible with the building architecture and relate well to the dominant architectural features. 
(3)  Signs will be allowed on the band or the valance. Signs on a sloped surface shall be at the discretion of the MARC. The sign band shall be no greater than 12 inches in the downtown commercial area. Signs shall not be the dominant feature of an awning. 
(4)  Awnings in historic areas and on historic buildings should respect the history of the area and buildings. Historic colors, styles, and mounting locations based on research, old photographs, and historic records are encouraged. 
(5)  Awnings should generally be located to fit within window and/or door recesses. 
(6)  A uniform shape, color, and placement should be used when multiple awnings are proposed for a single building. New awnings should generally match any existing awnings on the building. Existing inconsistent awning styles of a building do not justify approval of additional or new awning styles. Inconsistent awning styles are to be reduced, not increased with new awning approvals. 
(7)  Individual awning proposals for multi-tenant buildings will be evaluated as to their acceptability as a model for use by all other similarly located tenants in the buildings. 
(8)  Awnings shall be approved by the MARC if installed under significant eave overhangs, cantilevers, or other prominent architectural projections. 
(9)  In the downtown commercial area, day-glow colors, reflective materials and illuminated back lighting of transparent materials are not allowed. 
(10)  Solid colors or low contrast, non-jarring patterns are generally acceptable awning color treatments. 
(11)  Fabric awnings shall not be painted. 
(12)  Awnings shall be maintained in good repair with a clean and attractive appearance as long as they are installed on the building. Torn, bent and/or faded awnings shall be repaired, replaced or removed. 
(13)  An application for an awning that is submitted to the MARC shall include a sample of the proposed awning material to show color, texture and finish. 
(14)  If any upper story window is treated with an awning, then all upper story windows on that side of the building shall be treated with awnings. 
(m)  Basement business signs. 
(1)  When only one business is utilizing a basement area, an appropriate wall sign may be provided. 
(2)  When two businesses exit from the basement of a building, appropriate signs or directories to such businesses may be provided on the wall over the entrance to the basement and coordinated with other building signs. 
(3)  Signs or directories shall not exceed nine square feet in area. 
(n)  Benches or structures with signage. 
(1)  The total number of bench signs located in any district shall be limited and approved by the MARC. 
(2)  Bench signs shall not be located closer than 75 feet to one another (measured from base to base). 
(3)  Maximum height of four feet. 
(4)  Maximum sign area of 20 square feet. 
(5)  Only one advertising panel advertising one business is permitted per bench. 
(6)  Bench rental companies shall be licensed with the city. 
(7)  All signs and structures shall be properly maintained, well-kept and in good condition. 
(8)  If signage is out of date, the signage or the structure shall be removed or replaced. 
(9)  Signs must advertise Mandan businesses or events if they are located within public right-of-way. 
(10)  MARC must review and recommend the design and content of any bench sign that will be located in public right-of-way. The city commission must grant approval for any bench sign that is to be located in public right-of-way. City commission may include conditions or design requirements with its approval. 
(o)  Billboard signs. 
(1)  No billboard sign shall exceed a height of 40 feet above the lot grade of the adjacent roadway. 
(2)  The exposed upright or super structure of billboard signs shall be of non-corrosive metal materials or be painted a color so as to blend with the surrounding environment. 
(3)  Billboard signs shall be of all steel or similar material, constructed and designed in accordance with the Mandan Building Code. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum of 300 feet between billboards. 
(5)  All billboards shall meet city, state and federal requirements and must be located totally on private property. 
(p)  Canopy and canopy signs. 
(1)  Canopies and canopy signs attached to a building may extend from the building into the public right-of-way to a point within two feet of the back of curb or edge of pavement where there is no curb. No portion of such a structure or anything attached to the structure shall be lower than eight feet above the sidewalk or ground grade line. 
(2)  Canopy signs shall not extend more than 12 inches above or below a canopy. 
(3)  Canopy signs shall not extend closer than three inches to any edge of a canopy. 
(4)  Canopy signs may be located beneath or above an overhead canopy but shall not project lower than eight feet above the sidewalk. 
(5)  There shall be only one canopy sign per business on each street exposure. 
(6)  Canopies should complement the building architecture. Canopy shape, color, material, and location on the building shall be compatible with the building architecture, relate well to the dominant architectural features, and not cover up or hide handsome materials or important details. 
(7)  Canopies in historic areas and on historic buildings should respect the history of the area and buildings. Historic colors, styles, and mounting locations based on research, old photographs, and historic records are encouraged. 
(8)  Individual canopy proposals for multi-tenant buildings will be evaluated as to their acceptability as a model for use by all other similarly located tenants in the buildings. 
(9)  Solid colors and/or low contrast, non-jarring patterns are generally acceptable canopy color treatments. 
(10)  All applications for canopies shall include a sample of the proposed awning material to show color, texture, and finish. 
(11)  If any upper story window is treated with a canopy, then all upper story windows shall be treated with canopies. 
(q)  Electronic signs. 
(1)  Flashing is prohibited. 
(2)  The city reserves the right to require any sign to be modified based on display message including timing or frame changes or effects of movements displayed. 
(3)  Ground signs, as defined by the IBC Appendix H102 and commonly referred to as billboards or off-premise signs, are permitted in commercial and industrial districts. When adjacent to federal or state aid highways, all NDDOT standards for design and approval must be followed. In those districts where permitted, ground signs must be spaced at least 300 feet apart along the roadway. Ground signs may not exceed 16 feet by 50 feet per face of sign in size (multiple faces must be treated as one face), and the support structure and sign may not exceed 50 feet in height, measured from the top of the nearest curb line to the top of the sign or structure. Additional requirements for digital billboards are included elsewhere in this section. 
(4)  No electronic message center sign installed after January 1, 2010, shall be permitted to operate unless it is equipped with: 
a.  A default mechanism that shall freeze the sign in one position as a static message if a malfunction occurs; and 
b.  A mechanism able to automatically adjust the illuminative brightness of the display according to ambient light conditions by means of a light detector/photocell. 
(5)  An electronic message center sign installed prior to January 1, 2010, shall be allowed to continue operation provided the brightness of the sign does not exceed a maximum illumination of 5,000 NITS during daylight hours or a maximum illumination of 750 NITS between one-half hour before sunset to one-half hour after sunrise as measured at the sign's face at maximum brightness. These illumination levels may be set manually or by an alternative method approved by the building official. 
(6)  Only one electronic message center sign shall be allowed per property. 
(7)  The electronic message center sign portion of any sign shall not exceed the area specified in the table below. The maximum size is based on the type of zoning district in which the sign is located and the functional classification of the roadway adjacent to the sign or 50 percent of the total sign area, whichever is less. 
Functional Classification of Adjacent Roadway Zoning District Interstate Principal Arterial Minor Arterial Collector Local Industrial 100 sf 100 sf 72 sf 48 sf 32 sf Commercial 100 sf 100 sf 72 sf 48 sf 32 sf Neighborhood 
Commercial 72 sf 72 sf 48 sf 32 sf 32 sf  
(8)  Electronic message center signs shall be subject to the following operational requirements: 
a.  The sign shall have a frame hold time of no less than one second. The use of animation and background animation is allowed and is not subject to the one second frame hold time requirement. 
b.  Entrance and exit effects may be used to transition from one frame to another, provided said entrance effects result in all of the text within the frame appearing at once or in the order that the text is normally read (including, but not limited to, scrolling from right to left or scrolling from bottom to top entrance effects). Entrance effects where all of the text within the frame does not appear at once or in the order that the text is normally read are prohibited (including, but not limited to, scrolling from left to right, scrolling from top to bottom, and entrance effects referred to as slot machine, slots, splice, mesh, radar, kaleidoscope and spin). There are no limitations on the types of exit effects used. Except for such transitions, each frame shall remain static with no additional frame or hold effects applied to text within the frame (including, but not limited to, the fading or flashing on any part of the message and hold effects referred to as flash, spin, twinkle, wavy and rumble). The use of bijou lights as a frame effect is allowed. 
c.  The use of streaming video or full-motion video on any electronic message center sign is prohibited. 
(9)  Electronic message center signs located within 300 feet of any residentially zoned district, as measured from any part of the sign to the nearest property line within any residential zoning district, are subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  The sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, or 50 percent of the total sign area, whichever is less. 
b.  Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., the sign shall be allowed to operate. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the sign shall only display static images with a frame hold time of no less than three seconds and shall be limited to instantaneous transitions from one static frame to another static frame without the use of any frame entrance, exit or hold effects or the use of any animation or background animation. 
(10)  An electronic message center sign cannot be installed on an existing sign that is nonconforming unless the entire sign is brought into compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(11)  No portion of any existing sign shall be replaced with an electronic message center sign unless a sign permit is obtained for the new electronic message center sign. 
(12)  Digital billboards must be located at least 300 feet from any other non-digital ground sign (billboard), at least 1,200 feet from any other digital billboard, and at least 500 feet from an interstate interchange, as measured from any part of the sign to the nearest portion of any part of any other billboard sign on the same side of the roadway or to the nearest right-of-way line of the interchange. Digital billboards that face state or federal highways are subject to NDDOT regulation. 
(13)  Digital billboard signs shall have a frame hold time of no less than seven seconds and must transition instantaneously from one static image to another static image without any special effects. The use of streaming video, full-motion video, and animation or frame effects is prohibited. 
(r)  Marquee and marquee signs. 
(1)  Marquees and marquee signs attached to a building may extend from the building into the public right-of-way to a point within two feet of the back of curb or edge of pavement where there is no curb. No portion of such a structure or anything attached to the structure shall be lower than eight feet above the sidewalk or ground grade line. 
(2)  A sign attached to the face of a marquee may not exceed three feet above the top edge of the marquee and not to extend below the marquee's lower edge. 
(3)  Marquee signs shall be constructed entirely of approved materials and size. 
(4)  Marquee signs may extend the full length but in no case shall they project beyond the ends of the marquee. 
(s)  Monument signs. 
(1)  A monument sign shall be solid from the grade to the top of the structure using non-flammable architectural materials. 
(2)  The minimum setback is ten feet from the property line or sight triangle, whichever is greater. 
(3)  The maximum allowable height of a monument sign is 12 feet unless the sign is set back farther from the property line or sight triangle. For each additional two feet of setback, the height of the sign can be increased by one foot up to a maximum sign height of 16 feet. 
(4)  Monument signs may be incorporated into a retaining wall or masonry wall. 
(5)  The bottom edge of the sign portion of a monument sign must be in continuous contact with the base and be a minimum of 12 inches above grade. 
(6)  Monument signs must be placed within a landscaped area. 
(7)  No sign shall be attached to the stairwell railing of a basement business. 
(t)  Post and panel signs. 
(1)  A post and panel sign shall be no taller than 12 feet off the ground. 
(2)  No part of the sign may encroach on the sight triangle. 
(3)  The bottom edge of a post and panel sign must be a minimum of 12 inches above grade and must be placed within a landscaped area. 
(4)  The support posts must be made of a non-flammable material. 
(u)  Projecting signs. 
(1)  The bottom edge of the sign board, or of any affixed devices, must be at least eight feet above grade. 
(2)  A projecting sign or any part thereof may not project more than 36 inches from the face of the supporting building, not be within less than two feet of the back of the curb, not be more than ten feet in height and not be greater than 30 inches in width. 
(3)  No projecting sign shall extend more than four feet above a building roof eave or parapet. 
(4)  No projecting sign shall originate from other than a front wall of the building. The maximum square footage for sign face is 50 square feet. 
(5)  No projecting sign shall be permitted in any alleyway. 
(v)  Pylon and pole signs. 
(1)  No pylon or pole sign shall extend into a public utility easement or right-of-way. 
(2)  The maximum pylon or pole sign height is 25 feet in the downtown commercial area; 40 feet in the other commercial and industrial districts; and 60 feet in the Gateway Overlay Zone. 
(3)  The sign portion of a pylon or pole sign shall be a minimum of ten feet above the top of curb or surrounding grade, whichever is higher. The clearance shall be a minimum of 13 feet within a vehicle parking or travel area. 
(4)  For single business properties with sufficient frontage, multiple pylon or pole signs will be allowed provided they can be set back from the adjacent or adjoining lot line a minimum of 25 feet and are no closer to each other, as measured parallel to the property frontage, than 155 feet. 
(5)  A pylon or pole sign's support shall originate from the surface of the ground only and be made of non-flammable material. 
(6)  Pylon or pole signs may be used as a directory for more than one business. 
(7)  The maximum sign area for pylon and pole signs is 2.5 square feet per 1 foot of lot frontage but cannot exceed 30% of the area of all sides of the building that front a street. 
(w)  Roof signs. Roof signs shall not project above the roof peak (this includes mounting brackets). 
(x)  Sidewalk signs. 
(1)  All signs must be self-supporting and not be attached to any other structure or object. 
(2)  One sign of this type will be allowed per place of ground level business. 
(3)  The maximum width of a sign shall be two and one-half feet, a minimum height of three feet and a maximum height of four feet. 
(4)  The sign support and base shall not extend beyond the edge of the sign. 
(5)  A sign shall be placed only where a minimum width of three feet for pedestrian movements can be maintained. 
(6)  This type of sign is allowed only within a business district. 
(7)  Signs may be placed on the sidewalk only during hours of operation and must be stored inside the building during non-business hours. 
(8)  Signs may be used for on-premise advertising only. 
(9)  Signs shall not be illuminated. 
(10)  Streamers, flags or banners shall not be attached to the sign or use the sign as an anchor. 
(y)  Temporary signs. 
(1)  Temporary signs are not to be used as a substitute for erecting a permanent sign. Temporary signs are to be used for short duration events that do not occur on a regular basis. Activities that repeatedly occur throughout the year are to be publicized using permanent signage. 
(2)  Use of off-premise temporary signs is limited to a maximum of 30 days per event, activity or function. Off-premise temporary or portable signs may be used only in places where they meet all city, state and federal regulations. Temporary or portable off-premise signs are treated the same as permanent billboards under federal law administered by NDDOT. Signs proposed to be located along federal aid routes that are impacted by the federal rules regulating off-premise signs must receive written permission from NDDOT. A copy of the written permission from NDDOT must be presented to the city building department prior to sign installation. Off-premise temporary or portable signs can be no closer together than 100 feet along a state highway. 
(3)  The owner of a property where a temporary or portable off-premise sign is to be placed must provide the city with written permission for the placement of the sign prior to installation of the sign. 
(4)  Except for the requirements for construction, finance and real estate signs and political signs; each type of temporary sign is limited to 240 days per calendar year per property. 
(5)  Banner signs are limited to three per property. The total area of all banner signs on a wall may not be larger than 20 percent of the wall surface area of the wall to which they are attached or which they are in front of. 
(6)  Construction, finance and real estate signs. 
a.  Construction and finance signs may be displayed during the duration of the construction phase of a project and must be removed within 30 days after receiving a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  Signs indicating that an individual lot is for sale, sold, for rent or for lease are limited to 16 square feet in size. 
c.  Signs indicating that a large, undeveloped property is for sale are limited to 48 square feet in size unless a larger size is approved by the city engineer for a specific parcel. 
d.  Open house signs advertising a one or two day event that are no greater than 36 inches in height and in place for less than 48 hours may be placed in the public right-of-way provided that they are located at least one foot behind the back of curb or three feet off the pavement where no curb exists. Other types of real estate signs or signs that will be in place for more than 48 hours may be authorized by city commission to be placed in the public right-of-way. 
e.  Once a property has been sold, the sale sign must be removed within 30 days after closing. 
f.  Parade of Homes signs shall conform to the following requirements. 
1.  The signs shall be placed at least one foot behind the back of curb or three feet off the edge of pavement where no curb exists. 
2.  The signs may be in place for no more than 12 days twice each year. 
3.  The signs shall be located no closer than 100 feet to an intersection as measured from the pedestrian crossing or stop bar. 
4.  The signs shall not be attached to trees, traffic control signs, traffic signal poles or street light poles. 
5.  No ribbons, balloons, streamers, lighting or ancillary devises may be attached to the signs. 
6.  The Bismarck-Mandan Home Builders Association shall be responsible for any costs incurred during installation or removal of the signs. 
7.  The signs shall not be higher than three feet above the road surface. 
(7)  Flag signs are limited to one per 20 feet of lot frontage with a limit of five per lot. 
(8)  Political signs. Political signs shall follow North Dakota Century Code (N.D.C.C.) regulations. 
(9)  Portable signs. 
a.  All companies that rent portable signs to customers within the city must be licensed with the city and carry liability insurance in a form and amount specified by the city. Each rental sign shall have the rental companies name and phone number clearly visible on the sign. 
b.  All portable signs and sign lettering shall be properly maintained, well-kept and in good condition. The city may order removal of a sign that is not advertising a current event or is not being maintained in good condition. 
c.  No ribbons, balloons, streamers, lighting or ancillary devises may be attached to any portable sign. 
d.  Each property is allowed one portable sign. Larger properties may have more than one portable sign as long as they are placed a minimum of 155 feet apart. 
e.  Maximum square footage for a portable sign shall be 64 square feet and maximum height shall be eight feet. The portable sign shall not be illuminated or electronic. 
f.  The owner of each rented portable sign shall submit a monthly report to the building department showing days in use and the location of the sign. 
g.  "Floppy guy" signs are a type of portable sign. 
(10)  Streamers may be strung on a line or cord no longer than three times the width of the lot. 
(z)  Wall signs. 
(1)  Wall signs shall be securely fastened to the wall of a building by its supporting structure. 
(2)  Wall signs placed against exterior walls of buildings and structures shall not extend more than 12 inches from a wall's surface. The lowest edge of such sign shall be a minimum of eight feet above grade unless a lower height is approved by MARC. 
(3)  No combination of wall signs and supports shall exceed 20 percent of the signable wall surface area up to a maximum of 200 square feet. 
(4)  Signs printed directly on exterior walls or surface of a building shall be prohibited. 
(5)  No wall sign shall extend beyond the width of a building or project above the roof eave. 
(6)  Wall signs advertising products or services not related to the primary business shall be approved by the MARC. 
(7)  Second floor businesses can utilize wall signs to advertise their establishments but must do so between floors and not below their floor. 
(8)  A wall sign shall not obstruct the required door or exit window of any building nor shall it be attached to or placed on fire escapes. 
(aa)  Window signs. 
(1)  No paper or solid surface signs shall be permitted on a second floor window or above. 
(2)  No window signs shall advertise or identify a business other than the one contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 1241, § 2, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 1298, § 1, 12-18-2018; Ord. No. 1309, 5-7-2019) 
Sec. 105-1-16. - Chickens. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the keeping of chickens at an individual or household scale to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. This section in no way applies to commercial production and processing of poultry as regulated in section 105-3. 
(b)  Permit required. A renewable permit issued by the city planner or his/her designee shall be required prior to conducting any keeping of chickens at an individual or household scale. The permit shall be good for one calendar year as measured from the date of issuance and is tied to both the applicant and the land. Permits shall be non-transferrable. 
(c)  Revocation. A permit may be revoked by the city planner or his/her designee for failure to comply with the requirements outlined in this section or any other local or state regulation governing keeping or cruelty to animals. Any person whose permit is revoked shall, within ten business days thereafter, humanely dispose of all chickens being owned, kept or harbored by such person, and no part of the application fee shall be refunded. 
(d)  Appeal. The permittee may appeal the revocation or refusal of renewal of the permit by timely request for a hearing before the board of city commissioners. The request for hearing must be received by the city planner or his/her designee within ten business days following the date of the notice of revocation or refusal of renewal. The board of city commissioners shall hold a hearing on the permittee's request for hearing and shall render a final decision on the matter after said hearing. 
(e)  Multiple property limitation. An applicant owning multiple properties abutting or in close proximity is limited to a single permit. The planner or his/her designee shall make the determination of what is considered "close proximity." 
(f)  Application. An application for a permit shall include: 
(1)  General form established by staff to capture applicant, property owner, and property information, including necessary signatures. 
(2)  Property owner and applicant, if different than the property owner, signed understanding of the requirements and responsibilities outlined in this section. 
(3)  Site plan illustrating: 
a.  Property lines and distance to proposed coop and run 
b.  Neighboring residence(s) location and distance to proposed coop and run 
c.  Type and style of back and side yard fence 
(4)  Construction drawings including at least one of the following: 
a.  Materials used in the construction of the coop and run 
b.  Diagram and illustration if provided in a prefabricated kit 
(5)  Fee. A non-refundable application fee as established by the board of city commissioners shall be required at the time of application. The board of city commissioners may establish a different fee to be applied to new applications and renewal applications. 
(g)  Late renewal applications not accepted. Late renewal applications shall be treated the same as new applications, including fee and submittal requirements. 
(h)  Definitions. The established definitions are for purposes of this section only. If any conflict exists with other sections of this code the more restrictive shall apply. 
    Brood means group of chickens, whether or not from the same hatching. 
    Brooding means the period in the animal's growth when supplemental heat must be provided due to the bird's inability to generate enough body heat. 
    Chicken means a domesticated fowl more formally known and scientifically classed as gallus gallus domesticus. 
    Coop means a fully enclosable, non-residential structure for housing chickens. 
    Hen means a female chicken. 
    Rooster means a male chicken. 
    Run means a fully enclosed and covered area attached to a coop where the poultry can roam unsupervised. 
(i)  Standards. 
(1)  No more than four hens shall be permitted on any one lot. 
(2)  Roosters shall not be permitted. As soon as a rooster is identified it shall be culled from the brood. 
(3)  The chickens, coop, and run, shall be located in the rear or side yard obscured from view from any street, trail, public park, or other right-of-way. 
(4)  Chickens outside of the coop and run shall be supervised at all times. 
(5)  The coop dimensions shall total less than 120 square feet. 
(6)  Coop height as measured from the average ground elevation to the highest point on the coop shall not exceed eight feet. 
(7)  The coop and run shall be located no closer than ten feet from the property line and no closer than 20 feet from an adjacent property dwelling. 
(8)  The coop shall be constructed in a manner which prevents rodent infiltration. 
(9)  The coop shall be constructed to provide a minimum of four square feet per chicken. 
(10)  The run shall be constructed to provide a minimum of ten square feet per chicken. 
(11)  Chickens shall at no time be located off the property for which they have been permitted. 
(12)  Coops, runs, and manure storage shall be kept 20 feet from streams, tributaries, ditches, storm water management facilities, drop inlets, or other storm drainage areas that would allow fecal matter to enter any city storm drainage system or stream. Dumping chicken manure into the city's storm drainage system is prohibited. 
(13)  Except for chickens properly slaughtered for consumption, dead chickens must be disposed of within 24 hours after death. Legal forms of chicken carcass disposal include burial and off-site incinerate or rendering. All slaughtering of chickens shall be conducted so as not to be visible to the public or adjacent property owners and occupants. 
(14)  All grain and food stored for the use of the chickens shall be kept in a rodent proof container. 
(Ord. No. 1306, § 2, 3-5-2019) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 6. 
ARTICLE 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED; ZONING MAP[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning districts authorized, N.D.C.C. § 40-47-02. 

Sec. 105-2-1. - Division of city into districts. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, the city is divided into districts. 
(1)  Residential districts. 
a.  R7 Residential. 
b.  R3.2 Residential. 
c.  RM Residential. 
d.  RH Residential. 
e.  RMH Residential Mobile Home. 
(2)  Commercial districts. 
a.  CA Commercial. 
b.  CB Commercial. 
c.  CC Commercial. 
(3)  Industrial districts. 
a.  MA Light Industrial. 
b.  MB Industrial. 
c.  MC Industrial. 
d.  MD Industrial. 
(4)  Special purpose districts. 
a.  A Agricultural. 
c.  DC Downtown Core. 
d.  DF Downtown Fringe. 
g.  Planned unit development. 
b.  F Floodplain. 
f.  Large scale development. 
e.  Gateway Overlay and Memorial Highway Overlay. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0203; Code 1994, § 21-03-01; Ord. No. 353, (part), 1966; Ord. No. 508, § 1, 1976; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 1977; Ord. No. 670, § 1, 1984; Ord. No. 728, (part), 1987) 
Sec. 105-2-2. - Boundaries of districts and zoning map. 
    The location and boundaries of districts established in the city are shown on the official zoning map of the city. The map entitled "Zoning Map of the City of Mandan, North Dakota" is on file in the office of the city planner or engineer. This map is made a part of this chapter. This map shall reflect the ordinances adopted prior to, and all ordinances adopted after, the effective date of this chapter relating to the boundaries of the zoning districts. The city planner or engineer is authorized and directed to make the necessary changes upon the official zoning map of the city in accordance with such ordinances as they are from time to time adopted. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0204; Code 1994, § 21-03-02; Ord. No. 670, § 2, 1984) 
Sec. 105-2-3. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainties exist as to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map accompanying and made a part of this chapter, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  District boundary lines are intended to follow street, alley or lot lines, or lines parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions as shown on the zoning map. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or alley lines or proposed street or alley lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines and are not more than ten feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be such boundaries. 
(4)  Where land within the city limits is not subdivided into lots and blocks, or where district boundary lines are not approximately street, alley or lot lines, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale shown on such map, and where uncertainty exists, the district boundary line shall be determined by the board of adjustment by written decision. If land within the city limits has been or is subsequently subdivided into lots and blocks by a duly recorded subdivision map, and the lot and block arrangement does not conform to that anticipated when the district boundaries were established, or property is re-subdivided by a duly recorded subdivision map into a different arrangement of lots and blocks than shown on said zoning maps, the board of adjustment, after notice to the owners of property affected thereby and after public hearing, may interpret the zoning map and make minor readjustments in the district boundaries in such a way as to carry out the intent and purposes of these regulations and conform to the street and lot layout of the ground. Such interpretations or adjustments shall be by written decision, and thereafter the copies of the zoning map in the office of the city planning and zoning commission and the engineering department shall be changed to conform thereto. 
(5)  Any street, alley or railroad right-of-way, watercourse, channel or body of water included on the zoning map shall, unless otherwise indicated, be included within the zoning district of adjoining property on either side thereof. Where such street, alley, right-of-way, watercourse, channel or body of water serves as a boundary between two or more different zoning districts, a line midway in such street, alley, right-of-way, watercourse, channel or body of water and extending in the general direction of the land dimension thereof shall be considered the boundary between zones. If a dedicated street or alley shown on the zoning map is vacated by ordinance, the property formerly in said street or alley shall be included within the zone of adjoining property on either side of said vacated street or alley. In the event said street or alley was a zone boundary between two or more different zones, the new boundary shall be the former centerline of said vacated street or alley. 
(6)  All land and/or territory not specifically included within a district or which is annexed to the city after the date of adoption of this chapter shall automatically be classed as lying and being in the R7 Residential District and the zoning map shall thereupon be amended to indicate such land or territory in the R7 Residential District without additional procedure until such classification shall have been changed by amendment to the zoning ordinance as provided by law. Where uncertainty exists as to the zoning classification to be indicated on the map, such zoning shall be determined by the board of adjustment by written decision. 
(7)  All unplatted land or territory lying in an A Agricultural District of the city, upon being platted, shall automatically be classed as lying and being in the R7 Residential District and the zoning map shall thereupon be amended to indicate such land or territory in the R7 Residential District without additional procedure, until such classification be changed by amendment to the zoning ordinance as provided by law. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0205; Code 1994, § 21-03-03) 
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1242, § 5, adopted Dec. 20, 2016, amended Art. 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 3, §§ 105-3-1-105-3-12, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1957, §§ 14-0213-14-0219, 14-0228, 14-0228.1, 14-0229, 14-0231; Ord. No. 308, § 1, 1961; Ord. No. 429, § 1, 1972; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 1972; Ord. No. 508, §§ 3-5, 1976; Ord. No. 535, §§ 1-3, 1976; Ord. No. 545, § 1, 1977; Ord. No. 554, § 2, 1977; Ord. No. 572, §§ 1-4, 1978; Ord. No. 584, § 1, 1978; Ord. No. 617, § 1, 1979; Ord. No. 618, § 1, 1979; Ord. No. 634, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 670, § 3, 1984; Code 1994, §§ 21-04-01-21-04-04, 21-04-06-21-04-13; Ord. No. 852, §§ 1-4, 3-4-1997; Ord. No. 868, §§ 3-6, 1-6-1998; Ord. No. 882, § 1, 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 883, § 1, 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 885, § 1(2), 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 886, § 1(1), 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 892, § 3(1), 5-4-1999; Ord. No. 998, § 2, 6-21-2005; Ord. No. 1021, § 1, 3-20-2007. 

Sec. 105-3-1. - Applicability of standards. 
(a)  When making computations to determine compliance with these standards, where appropriate, the result shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. Where a standard sets a minimum requirement, the computation shall not be rounded. 
(b)  Conditional uses are to be evaluated on the following criteria to the extent applicable to the proposed conditional use: 
(1)  Does the proposed use meet the goals and objectives for the area as expressed in the adopted comprehensive plan? 
(2)  Will the proposed use be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be compatible in appearance with the existing or intended character of the neighborhood? 
(3)  Will the proposed use be served adequately by essential facilities and services including streets, police and fire protection, drainage, refuse disposal, potable water and sanitary sewer services, emergency services and schools? 
(4)  Will the proposed use not create additional requirements for public facilities and services at public cost and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community? 
(5)  Will the proposed use involve activities, processes, materials, equipment or conditions of operation that will be incompatible with the neighborhood due to the production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors? 
(6)  Will the proposed use have vehicular approaches to the property which do not create traffic congestion or interfere with traffic on surrounding public streets? 
(7)  Will the proposed use result in the destruction, loss or damage of a natural, scenic, or historic feature of importance to the community? 
(8)  Will the proposed use depreciate surrounding property values? 
(9)  Will the hours of operation of the proposed use be different than the adjacent uses? 
(10)  Will the proposed use require exterior lighting of a type and intensity greater than the adjacent uses? 
(11)  Will the site of the proposed use have sufficient area to provide the parking required for the use? 
(12)  Will the proposed use require adjustments to the normal lot size, height and setback requirements of the district? 
(13)  Has adequate provision been made for those individuals who are mobility impaired? 
(14)  Will screening or buffering be required to compensate for any departure that the proposed use has from existing adjacent uses? 
(c)  When recommending approval of a conditional use, the planning and zoning commission may specify certain design parameters to be applied to the approval. 
(d)  Conditional uses approved by the planning and zoning commission shall be ratified by the city commission. 
(e)  Should any person object to the approval by the planning and zoning commission of a conditional use, they may file an appeal as provided for in Chapter 101, Article 3. 
(f)  If an appeal is filed and the appeal is scheduled for consideration by the city commission, the action on the appeal by the city commission shall be taken after holding a public hearing. 
(g)  If no appeal of a planning and zoning recommendation for a conditional use is received, the action by the city commission may be by consent. 
(h)  Conditional use approval is valid for one year. Should a building permit not be issued within one year of receiving conditional use approval from the city commission, the approval will lapse. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 105-3-3. - Reserved. 
Sec. 105-3-4. - R12 Residential District. 
(a)  General description. The purpose of this district is to provide an opportunity to construct single-family housing on large lots that are protected from being further subdivided. 
(b)  Primary uses. The primary permitted use is a single-family dwelling unit, either site built or modular, with a minimum habitable space of 3,500 square feet. 
(c)  Secondary uses. A group dwelling for six or fewer individuals with developmental disabilities as defined in N.D.C.C. 25-16-14 is a permitted secondary use. This use requires one additional on-site mobility impaired parking space. 
(d)  Conditional uses. These uses are permitted on a specific site only after review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and ratification by the city commission. A PUD district will be created to document any conditional use approval. 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit. 
(2)  Education group. 
(3)  Public recreation group. 
(4)  Utility service group. 
(5)  Religion group. 
(6)  Bed and breakfast. 
a.  One additional parking space per bedroom. 
b.  One sign no larger than four square feet. 
c.  Must maintain state facility license in good standing. 
(e)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Lots fronting on an arterial or collector street as designated on road network maps produced by the metropolitan planning organization are discouraged. If lots must front on roads with these designations, the front yard setback is increased. 
a.  The minimum front yard setback for an arterial roadway is 50 feet. 
b.  The minimum front yard setback for a collector street is 45 feet. 
c.  The minimum front yard setback for a local street is 40 feet. 
d.  The required front yard setback for each lot shall be determined during the platting process and shall be documented in a development agreement that is signed and recorded. 
(2)  For a side yard that fronts on a public right-of-way, the minimum setback is the same as the front yard. For all other situations the minimum side yard setback is 12 feet. 
(3)  The minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet. 
(4)  Any portion of a structure containing a garage door facing a public street, alley or private access easement must be set back at least 25 feet. 
(f)  Lot coverage. The perimeter of the ground or first floor of each structure shall be used when computing lot coverage. Lot coverage for all structures shall not exceed 40 percent of the square foot area of the lot. For water lots the computation shall be made using the portion of the lot that is above the shore line. 
(g)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 12,000 square feet. 
(h)  Lot frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage along a public street or private access easement configured in conformance with fire code emergency access standards. 
(i)  Building height limits. Principal building height shall be limited to three and one-half stories. Accessory building shall be limited to two stories. 
(j)  Parking. At least four parking spaces shall be provided per lot. This includes garage spaces and exterior spaces measuring at least 25 feet long. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-5. - R7 Residential District. 
(a)  General description. The purpose of the R7 Residential District is to provide an opportunity to construct single-family dwellings in an area where few other uses are permitted. 
(b)  Primary uses. The primary permitted use is a single-family dwelling unit. 
(c)  Secondary uses. A group dwelling for six or fewer individuals with developmental disabilities as defined in N.D.C.C. 25-16-14 is a permitted secondary use. This use requires one additional on-site mobility impaired parking space. 
(d)  Conditional uses. These uses are permitted on a specific site only after review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and ratification by the city commission. A PUD district will be created to document any conditional use approval. 
(1)  Public recreation group. 
(2)  Education group. 
(3)  Utility service group. 
(4)  Religion group. 
(5)  Accessory dwelling unit. 
(6)  Bed and breakfast 
a.  One additional parking space per bedroom. 
b.  One sign no larger than four square feet. 
c.  Must maintain state facility license in good standing. 
(e)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Lots fronting on an arterial or collector street as designated on road network maps produced by the metropolitan planning organization are discouraged. If lots must front on roads with these designations, the front yard setback is increased. 
a.  The minimum front yard setback for an arterial roadway is 50 feet. 
b.  The minimum front yard setback for a collector street is 35 feet. 
c.  The minimum front yard setback for a local street is 20 feet. 
d.  The required front yard setback for each lot shall be determined during the platting process and shall be documented in a development agreement that is signed and recorded. 
(2)  For a side yard that fronts on a public right-of-way, the minimum setback is the same as the front yard. For all other situations the minimum side yard setback is six feet. 
(3)  The minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet. 
(4)  Any portion of a structure containing a garage door facing a public street, alley or private access easement must be set back at least 25 feet. 
(f)  Lot coverage. The perimeter of the ground or first floor of each structure shall be used when computing lot coverage. Lot coverage for all structures shall not exceed 40 percent of the square foot area of the lot. For water lots the computation shall be made using the portion of the lot that is above the shore line. 
(g)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 7,000 square feet. 
(h)  Lot frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage along a public street or private access easement configured in conformance with fire code emergency access standards. 
(i)  Building height limits. Principal building height shall be limited to two and one-half stories. Accessory buildings shall be limited to two stories. 
(j)  Parking. At least three parking spaces shall be provided per lot. This includes garage spaces and exterior spaces measuring at least 25 feet long. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-6. - R4 Residential District. 
(a)  General description. The purpose of this district is to provide an opportunity to construct single-family dwelling units on reduced size lots and allow a second limited size rental unit. 
(b)  Primary uses. The primary permitted use is a single-family dwelling unit. 
(c)  Secondary uses. 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit. 
(2)  Group dwelling for eight or fewer individuals with developmental disabilities as defined in N.D.C.C. 25-16-14. This use requires one additional on-site mobility impaired parking space. 
(d)  Conditional uses. These uses are permitted on a specific site only after review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and ratification by the city commission. A PUD district will be created to document any conditional use approval. 
(1)  Public recreation group. 
(2)  Education group. 
(3)  Utility service group. 
(4)  Religion group. 
(e)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Lots fronting on an arterial or collector street as designated on road network maps produced by the metropolitan planning organization are discouraged. If lots must front on roads with these designations, the front yard setback is increased. 
a.  The minimum front yard setback for an arterial roadway is 50 feet. 
b.  The minimum front yard setback for a collector street is 30 feet. 
c.  The minimum front yard setback for a local street is ten feet. 
d.  The required front yard setback for each lot shall be determined during the platting process and shall be documented in a development agreement that is signed and recorded. 
(2)  For a side yard that fronts on a public right-of-way, the minimum setback is the same as the front yard. For all other situations the minimum side yard setback is five feet. 
(3)  The minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet. 
(4)  Any portion of a structure containing a garage door facing a public street, alley or private access easement must be set back at least 25 feet. 
(f)  Lot coverage. The perimeter of the ground or first floor of each structure shall be used when computing lot coverage. Lot coverage for all structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the square foot area of the lot. For water lots the computation shall be made using the portion of the lot that is above the shore line. 
(g)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 4,000 square feet. 
(h)  Lot frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage along a public street or private access easement configured in conformance with fire code emergency access standards. 
(i)  Building height limits. Principal building height shall be limited to three stories. Accessory buildings shall be limited to two stories. 
(j)  Parking. At least two parking spaces shall be provided per lot. This includes garage spaces and exterior spaces measuring at least 25 feet long. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-7. - R3.2 Residential District. 
(a)  General description. The purpose of this district is to provide an opportunity to construct single-family dwelling units on reduced size lots in the form of a single-family dwelling or twin home. 
(b)  Primary uses. The following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Twin home. 
(2)  Single-family dwelling. 
(c)  Secondary uses. A group dwelling for six or fewer individuals with developmental disabilities as defined in N.D.C.C. 25-16-14 is a permitted secondary use. This use requires one additional on-site mobility impaired parking space. 
(d)  Conditional uses. These uses are permitted on a specific site only after review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and ratification by the city commission. 
(1)  Public recreation group. 
(2)  Education group. 
(3)  Utility service group. 
(4)  Religion group. 
(e)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Lots fronting on an arterial or collector street as designated on road network maps produced by the metropolitan planning organization are discouraged. If lots must front on roads with these designations, the front yard setback is increased. 
a.  The minimum front yard setback for an arterial roadway is 50 feet. 
b.  The minimum front yard setback for a collector street is 25 feet. 
c.  The minimum front yard setback for a local street is eight feet. 
d.  The required front yard setback for each lot shall be determined during the platting process and shall be documented in a development agreement that is signed and recorded. 
(2)  For a side yard that fronts on a public right-of-way, the minimum setback is the same as the front yard. For all other situations the minimum side yard setback is five feet. The side yard setback shall apply to both sides for a single-family dwelling and one side for a twin home. 
(3)  The minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet. 
(4)  Any portion of a structure containing a garage door facing a public street, alley or private access easement must be set back at least 25 feet. 
(f)  Lot coverage. The perimeter of the ground or first floor of each structure shall be used when computing lot coverage. Lot coverage for all structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the square foot area of the lot. For water lots the computation shall be made using the portion of the lot that is above the shore line. 
(g)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 3,200 square feet. 
(h)  Lot frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage along a public street or private access easement configured in conformance with fire code emergency access standards. 
(i)  Building height limits. Principal building height shall be limited to three stories. Accessory buildings shall be limited to two stories. 
(j)  Parking. At least two parking spaces shall be provided per lot. This includes garage spaces and exterior spaces measuring at least 25 feet long. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 1301, § 2, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 105-3-8. - RMH Residential District. 
(a)  General description. The RMH Residential District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for single-family manufactured dwelling units. 
(b)  Primary uses. The primary permitted use is a single-family manufactured dwelling unit. 
(c)  Secondary uses. 
(1)  Accessory dwelling unit. 
(2)  Group dwelling for eight or fewer individuals with developmental disabilities as defined in N.D.C.C. 25-16-14. This use requires one additional on-site mobility impaired parking space. 
(3)  Activity center or recreation facility serving the subdivision. 
(d)  Conditional uses. These uses are permitted on a specific site only after review and approval by the planning and zoning commission and ratification by the city commission. A PUD district will be created to document any conditional use approval. 
(1)  Education group. 
(2)  Religion group. 
(3)  Utility service group. 
(4)  Public recreation group. 
(5)  Site built or modular dwelling unit. 
(e)  Setbacks. 
(1)  Lots fronting on an arterial or collector street as designated on road network maps produced by the metropolitan planning organization are discouraged. If lots must front on roads with these designations, the front yard setback is increased. 
a.  The minimum front yard setback for an arterial roadway is 50 feet. 
b.  The minimum front yard setback for a collector street is 25 feet. 
c.  The minimum front yard setback for a local street is eight feet. 
d.  The required front yard setback for each lot shall be determined during the platting process and shall be documented in a development agreement that is signed and recorded. 
(2)  For a side yard that fronts on a public right-of-way, the minimum setback is the same as the front yard. For all other situations the minimum side yard setback is five feet. 
(3)  The minimum rear yard setback is 20 feet. 
(4)  Any portion of a structure containing a garage door facing a public street, alley or private access easement must be set back at least 25 feet. 
(f)  Lot coverage. The perimeter of the ground or first floor of each structure shall be used when computing lot coverage. Lot coverage for all structures shall not exceed 60 percent of the square foot area of the lot. For water lots the computation shall be made using the portion of the lot that is above the shore line. 
(g)  Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 3,000 square feet. 
(h)  Lot frontage. Each lot shall have a minimum of 20 feet of frontage along a public street or private access easement configured in conformance with fire code emergency access standards. 
(i)  Building height limits. Principal building height shall be limited to one and one-half stories. Accessory buildings shall be limited to one story. 
(j)  Parking. At least two parking spaces shall be provided per lot. This includes garage spaces and exterior spaces measuring at least 25 feet long. 
(k)  Skirting requirements. Skirting may be used in lieu of a solid perimeter foundation. Skirting may be constructed of brick, stone, finished metal or other acceptable materials approved by the building inspector. The skirting shall be in place prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The tongue and axle shall be removed if not covered by the skirting. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-9. - RM Residential District. 
    In any RM Residential District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  General description. The RM Residential District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for residences, including multifamily dwellings and similar high-density residential development. For the RM Residential District, in promoting the general purposes of this chapter, the specific intent of this section is: 
a.  To encourage the construction of, and continued use of, the land for residential purposes. 
b.  To prohibit commercial and industrial use of the land and to prohibit any other use that would substantially interfere with the development and continuation of residential structures in the district. 
c.  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses in the district. 
d.  To discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would generate traffic or require municipal services substantially in excess of traffic and services that would exist if the district was developed solely for multifamily dwellings and similar residential uses. 
(2)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted: 
a.  Single-family dwelling. 
b.  Two-family dwelling. 
c.  Multifamily dwelling. 
d.  Group dwelling. 
e.  Educational group. 
f.  Church. 
g.  Health-medical group. 
h.  Utility service group. 
i.  Public recreation group. 
j.  Railroad line trackage. 
k.  Funeral establishments, provided that the following requirements are met: 
1.  Each such establishment shall provide an off-street parking area on the premises equal to 35 percent of the lot area and in no case less than 4,900 square feet exclusive of the area needed to park vehicles owned or operated by such establishment. For the purpose of determining such parking area, neither the required side yards nor the area in front of the building setback line shall be included as a part of such parking area. 
2.  Each parcel upon which a funeral establishment is to be maintained shall have two side yards, one on each side of the building. The sum of the widths of the two side yards shall not be less than 20 percent of the average width of the lot, but in no event shall any side yard be less than ten feet. 
3.  No parking shall be permitted within ten feet of the side lot lines or in the area ahead of the building setback line. 
l.  Office-bank group. 
m.  Bed and breakfast facility located in a single-family dwelling, provided that the owner of the dwelling is the holder of a current bed and breakfast facility license for not to exceed four lodging units issued pursuant to the provisions of N.D.C.C. ch. 23-09.1 and that the owner provides one off-street vehicle parking space for each such unit and one off-street parking space for the owner/operator of such facility, and provided, further, that only one sign, not exceeding four square feet in size, advising such facility, may be placed on the premises. 
n.  Manufactured home. 
(3)  Density. The maximum allowable density is 30.0 families per net acre. 
(4)  Lot area. 
a.  Each building containing dwelling units hereafter erected shall be located on a lot having an area not less than that shown in the following schedule: 
Lot Area in Square Feet Maximum Number 
of Dwelling Units 4,000 but less than 5,000 1 5,000 but less than 6,000 2 6,000 but less than 7,000 3 7,000 or more 4  
b.  For each 1,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, in excess of 7,000 square feet contained in a lot, the principal building may contain one dwelling unit in addition to the four dwelling units permitted in a principal building located on a lot having an area of 7,000 square feet. Any other permitted building or structure, together with accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 7,000 square feet; provided, however, that if a building designed for efficiency apartment units having not more than one-bedroom units, intended to house not more than two persons per dwelling unit, not exceeding the floor area ratio provided in subsection (6) of this section and meeting all other provisions of this section and the provisions of this Code relating to the minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of dwelling units, a building containing not more than six such efficiency dwelling units may be erected on a lot having not less than 7,000 square feet in area. 
(5)  Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than 50 feet measured along the front building line; provided, however, that on a record lot having a width of less than 50 feet at the front building line and corresponding to a record lot shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the minimum lot width measured along the front building line may be reduced to not less than 40 feet. 
(6)  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio of the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 0.40 for single-story buildings, nor shall it exceed 1.20 for buildings of more than one story. The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 40 percent of the total area of the lot. In computing floor area ratio and ground coverage, 200 square feet shall be added to the actual area of the building for each car space required by this chapter, if such space is not furnished within a building. 
(7)  Front yard. Each lot shall have a front yard not less than 15 feet in depth. 
(8)  Side yards. Each lot shall have two side yards, one on each side of the principal building. The sum of the widths of the two side yards shall be not less than 20 percent of the average width of the lot. On any lot having an average width of 50 feet or less, each side yard shall be not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, and in no case shall a side yard be less than four feet in width. On any lot having an average width greater than 50 feet, neither side yard shall be less than five feet in width. In no event shall any side yard be less than the requirements set forth in this subsection, provided that in computing the side yard width on any lot, the first one foot of any overhang for eaves shall not be counted. 
(9)  Rear yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth. 
(10)  Height limits. Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings shall not exceed 2.5 stories, nor shall they exceed 35 feet in height. No principal building for any other permitted use shall exceed six stories, nor shall it exceed 60 feet in height. For each one foot or fraction thereof that a building exceeds 35 feet in height, there shall be added two feet to the minimum width of each side yard, two feet to the minimum depth of the front yard and one foot to the minimum depth of the rear yard required by this section. No accessory building shall exceed two stories, nor shall it exceed 25 feet in height. 
(11)  Exception. Notwithstanding the limitations imposed by any other provision of this chapter, upon due application by the owner and the recommendation thereof by the planning and zoning commission, the board may permit the subdivision of an existing lot and approve the replat thereof to show the lot lines along the centerline of a common wall, and the renumbering of the lot upon which multifamily townhouses or row dwelling units are being or have been constructed so as to permit separate ownership of a lot without side yards and having an area and width smaller than that required for a single-family dwelling, subject to the following: 
a.  Each of the lots created by the subdivision shall contain an average of not less than 2,400 square feet of area. 
b.  Each lot shall front on a dedicated street, or access shall be provided by platting a common driveway area and utility easements. 
c.  Except for setbacks along the common property lines, all other setbacks and yard requirements shall be met. 
d.  Each lot shall have separate water and sewer service lines into such lot or an appropriate written agreement between the adjoining property owners establishing the manner in which the cost of maintenance and repair of such lines will be shared. 
e.  The subdivision of the lot shall be accomplished by the platting thereof in accordance with subdivision regulations of the city ordinances, including required public hearings for the plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-10. - RH Residential District. 
    In any RH Residential District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home means a mobile structure manufactured upon a chassis or an undercarriage which is an integral part of the structure and which: 
a.  Is transported to the site on wheels; 
b.  Comes fully equipped with flush toilet, tub or shower and kitchen facilities; 
c.  Is ready for immediate occupancy upon its arrival to the site and its connection with utilities; and 
d.  Is designed for long-term use as a single-family residence without permanent foundation. 
    Mobile home park means a plot or parcel of land, under single ownership, which has been improved for purposes of locating mobile homes as dwellings. 
    Mobile home site means a parcel of land, within a mobile home park, designed and improved for the accommodation of not more than one mobile home as a single-family residence. 
    Mobile home stand means that part of a mobile home site which has been reserved and improved for the placement of a mobile home, appurtenant structures or additions to a mobile home. 
    Self-propelled mobile home means a self-propelled vehicle containing living facilities, including the terms "house car" and "motor home," which was designed for temporary dwelling, generally for travel and recreational use, and licensed by a state as a motor vehicle. 
    Travel trailer means a vehicular portable structure having no foundation other than wheels or jacks, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational activities, which is not more than eight feet in body width. 
    Travel trailer park means a plat or parcel of land, under single ownership, which has been improved for the purposes of locating travel trailers. 
    Travel trailer site means a parcel of land within a travel trailer park designed and improved for the accommodation of not more than one travel trailer. 
    Unit, dependent, means a mobile home, travel trailer or self-propelled mobile home without bath or shower and toilet facilities. 
    Unit, nondependent, means a mobile home, travel trailer or self-propelled mobile home with bath, shower and toilet facilities. 
(2)  General description. The RH Residential District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for residences, including mobile homes and travel trailers, located within mobile home parks and travel trailer parks. 
(3)  Location. All mobile home and travel trailer parks shall be located in approved subdivisions according to the city's subdivision regulations. 
(4)  Mobile home and travel trailer park locations. 
a.  Mobile homes. All mobile homes in the city shall be located in an approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision before being occupied. Also, no business shall be conducted out of a mobile home, except administrative duties of the court owner or manager of home occupation uses according to the city's zoning ordinances. 
b.  Mobile home parks. Mobile home parks shall be located in an RH zoning district according to future provisions. Mobile home parks should be considered medium-density residential. 
c.  Travel trailers. Travel trailers shall be located in an approved travel or mobile home park. 
d.  Travel trailer parks. Travel trailer parks shall be located in an RH zoning district according to future provisions. 
e.  Self-propelled mobile homes. Self-propelled mobile homes shall be located in an approved travel trailer or mobile home park. 
(5)  Licenses and/or permit requirements. 
a.  It is unlawful for any person to maintain, operate, alter or expand any mobile home or travel trailer park within the city's jurisdiction (one mile) without first obtaining a valid license and building permit from the designated officials of the city. Alteration or expansion of an existing mobile home or travel trailer park shall include any addition or reduction of a park site or rearrangement of other service buildings within the park. 
b.  All mobile home and park license fees shall be set by resolution of the board. 
c.  Application for a mobile home or travel trailer park license shall be filed with and issued by the state department of health and the city. The application shall be reviewed by the state health officer and city departments as deemed necessary by the building inspector. The site plans, specifications and zoning shall be reviewed by the city planning and zoning department. Application for subdivision or site plan approval and zoning changes for a mobile home or travel trailer park shall include payment of a planning review fee. These fees shall parallel the fee schedule of the city for subdivision and zone changes. The purpose of these fees is to offset the cost of publication and review by the planning department. An application for mobile home or trailer court approval shall be submitted to the city planner, along with said fee, and shall include the following: 
1.  Name and address of the applicant and engineer or surveyor. 
2.  Location map and legal description of the proposed or existing trailer or mobile home park. 
3.  A complete site plan and specification of the proposed travel trailer or mobile home park or of the alteration or expansion of an existing park indicating: 
(i)  Total acreage and all dimensions of the tract of land. 
(ii)  Date of plan. 
(iii)  Lot and block acreage. 
(iv)  Scale and north arrow. 
(v)  Locations and dimensions of all existing and proposed streets, alleys and walkways, and location and size of all sidewalks. 
(vi)  Locations and dimensions of all proposed mobile home sites. 
(vii)  Locations, plans and specifications of all proposed service buildings. 
(viii)  Contours of the land at one-foot intervals for ground slopes between zero and two percent, two-foot contours between two and five percent, and four-foot contours for over five percent. 
(ix)  Finished grade plan for all streets and developed areas as required by the city engineer. 
(x)  Locations and dimensions of all utility easements. 
(xi)  Locations and sizes of water, sewer and storm sewers or open drainage lines. 
(xii)  Locations of fire hydrants. 
(xiii)  Locations of all recreational areas. 
(xiv)  Locations of lighting stands. 
(xv)  All setback dimensions. 
(xvi)  Location and dimensions of mobile home park buffer. 
(xvii)  Such further information as may be required by the health officer to determine if the proposed mobile home park is in compliance with the applicable health regulations. 
4.  If the applicant desires to alter or expand an existing mobile home park, an additional site plan shall be submitted indicating the locations and dimensions of existing mobile home sites, streets, walkways and service buildings. 
5.  A reproducible Mylar and six blue line prints, 24 inches by 36 inches, shall be submitted to the planning and zoning office upon final approval by the board. Said site plan shall have the signatures of the owner, city engineer, planning and zoning commission chairperson and board president. 
6.  Within two weeks of moving into a mobile home, the owner will be required to have a certificate of occupancy. Before issuing the certificate of occupancy, the building inspector or designate shall inspect all utility connections, stabilizing devices, anchoring equipment and determine that the address has been properly installed. A fee for the certificate of occupancy, as set by the board, shall be required of the mobile home owner. 
7.  All mobile home and travel trailer parks shall be located in an approved subdivision according to the city's subdivision regulations. 
(6)  Design requirements for mobile home parks. 
a.  Minimum size. Each parcel of land to be used for a mobile home park shall be a minimum of ten acres, and any addition to said park must contain a minimum of four acres and be contiguous to the park with a boundary of at least 100 feet. The ratio of average depth to average width shall not be in excess of 4:1. There shall be a minimum width of 150 feet along any abutting public right-of-way. 
b.  Streets and parking; access to park. Direct vehicular access to the mobile home park shall be only from an abutting approved public street. Access shall be so located as to provide minimum congestion on the external streets and to provide for good circulation within the park. Private access right-of-way shall intersect public right-of-way no closer than 150 feet from the intersection of two public streets. 
c.  Width of streets. Streets in a mobile home park shall be private, but shall be constructed and paved in accordance with city street specifications and approved by the city engineer, except as to the paved width, which shall be as follows: 
1.  Two-way streets with parking on both sides shall be 40 feet in width. 
2.  Two-way streets with parking on one side shall be 32 feet in width. 
3.  Two-way streets with no parking on either side shall be 24 feet in width. 
4.  No streets shall be less than 24 feet in width. 
d.  Entrance roads; easements and intersections. All entrance roads into a mobile home park shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 60 feet and a minimum paving width of 36 feet at the point of entry. All streets into the mobile home park shall be designed for two-way traffic. Easements shall be provided on all streets within the mobile home park for the provision of city services, such as police, fire, and refuse collection. Street intersections should be at right angles on all major streets and minor streets, if possible. 
e.  Curb and gutter and street grades. Curb and gutter or alternatives shall be laid on all streets according to the city engineer. Street grades shall be sufficient to ensure surface drainage. 
f.  Parking. At least two off-street paved parking spaces per mobile home site shall be provided in the mobile home park. Clustered parking to meet the off-street requirements is allowed, but shall not be on the street right-of-way. Off-street parking for guests should be on the basis of one parking space for each four mobile home lots. Off-street parking shall be provided on the basis of one parking space for each 300 square feet of gross floor space in recreational, service and community buildings. 
g.  Buffer strip. Mobile homes shall be set back from any public right-of-way 25 feet and not less than 15 feet from any other boundary. Said buffer strip may be platted as part of the mobile home site. The buffer strip may not be designed for streets and utility sites, but may be utilized for drainage structures. No other structures shall be placed within any of the buffer strips. 
h.  Recreation areas. Mobile home park owners are encouraged to design parks with recreational areas sufficient for park residents. 
(7)  Design requirements for mobile home site. 
a.  Minimum size. Each mobile home site shall have a minimum of 5,000 square feet of area with a minimum average width of 50 feet and minimum average depth of 100 feet. Mobile home sites located on a cul-de-sac may reduce frontage at the street line to 35 feet, but lot area must contain 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Land coverage. Total structural coverage of a mobile home site shall not exceed 50 percent of the site area. In computing the ground coverage, 400 square feet shall be added to the area of the mobile home site for the two required off-street parking spaces and all accessory buildings. All nonattached storage sheds must be located in the backyard and not within five feet of the side or rear site line. 
c.  Access. Each mobile home site shall abut on a street within the mobile home park, and access directly to the site shall only be from such an internal street. 
d.  Setback requirements. No part of the mobile home or other structure upon a mobile home site shall be closer than five feet to a mobile home site boundary line. Mobile homes shall be set back from each other and accessory buildings by at least 15 feet on adjacent lots. There shall be a minimum of ten feet between an individual mobile home and any abutting pavement of a park street. 
(8)  Provisions of services in mobile home park. 
a.  Service buildings. Service buildings may include management offices, laundry facilities, repair shops and storage areas, sanitary facilities and indoor recreation facilities and incidental commercial uses. 
b.  Service building requirements. All service buildings shall comply with the city ordinances and state laws and regulations concerning buildings, electrical installations, plumbing and sanitation systems. They shall, at all times, be operated and maintained in a clean, sightly condition by the park management. 
c.  Building height requirements. No structure erected in a mobile home park shall exceed 25 feet in height. 
d.  Water supply. Each mobile home park shall be connected with the city's water supply system and designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the city's ordinances and state laws and regulations. Each mobile home park shall be provided with at least one above-ground water service connection which shall be capped when a mobile home does not occupy the site. 
e.  Sewage disposal. All mobile home parks shall be connected to the city central sewer system, and sewer lines shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the city's ordinances and state laws and regulations and shall be capped when not in use. 
f.  Street lighting. All entrances, exits and streets in mobile home parks shall be well-lighted. Street lighting may be either overhead or low level, but must be reflected onto the street. 
g.  Electricity and grounding. Each mobile home and mobile home site shall be provided with electricity and proper grounding in accordance with the city's ordinances. Each mobile home site shall be individually metered by the supplying electrical utility company. 
h.  All service utility lines. All service utility lines for electrical, telephone, gas and television communication shall be placed underground and designed and constructed in accordance with the city's ordinances. 
i.  Refuse handling. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park shall be provided for in accordance with the applicable city ordinances and state laws and regulations. 
j.  Fire protection. All mobile home parks shall be subject to the regulations stated in the fire protection codes adopted by the city and state. Mobile home parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. Portable fire extinguishers, rated for class B and C, shall be kept in service buildings, readily accessible for use by all occupants and maintained in good operating condition. 
k.  Street signs and mobile home site address and design. The owner of a mobile home park shall provide street name signs. The individual mobile home owner shall be responsible for displaying on the front of the mobile home the address in letters no smaller than two inches in height before occupancy. All street names shall conform to the city's street plan. All existing and new mobile home parks shall construct street signs, and all sign material shall conform to the city's street sign specifications. 
l.  Register of occupants. 
1.  A register of all mobile home occupants and owners of mobile homes in the park shall be maintained with the following information: 
(i)  The name and address of each mobile home occupant. 
(ii)  The name and address of the owner of each mobile home, if different from the occupant. 
(iii)  The dates of arrival and departure of each mobile home. 
2.  An updated register of occupancy shall be provided to the city every three months with the data in subsection (8)l.1 of this section, as required by the county tax equalization department. 
(9)  Temporary parking of travel trailers, camper trailers, cargo trailers and boat trailers. 
a.  Forty-eight-hour parking limit. No owner of property within the corporate limits of the city shall permit the parking, maintaining or keeping upon his property, and no person shall park, maintain or keep any travel trailer, camper trailer, cargo trailer or boat trailer for more than 48 hours, unless such trailer is located in a garage. Trailer sales of new and used unoccupied trailers, house cars or camp cars by an individual, firm, or corporation, properly licensed and zoned for trailer sales use shall be located in commercial zoning districts. 
b.  Parking sites in mobile home parks. A separate travel trailer park site for travel trailers or camper trailers shall be permitted in any mobile home park, provided that: 
1.  Said camp area comprises less than ten percent of the total area of said mobile home park; 
2.  A 25-foot buffer strip exists between said camp site and any mobile home site; and 
3.  Toilet, water and garbage disposal facilities are available and easily accessible to users of said camp site. 
c.  Parking of trailers in residential districts. 
1.  Travel trailers, camper trailers and boat trailers not in excess of eight feet in width shall be permitted to park on private property in any residential district, provided that they are: 
(i)  Located behind the front building line and not on the public boulevard; 
(ii)  Located in a storage shed or garage; or 
(iii)  Located in a driveway area permitted for the parking of passenger cars. 
2.  Collapsible camping trailers, when stored on a residential lot, shall be stored in a collapsed state. 
d.  Parking of self-propelled mobile homes. Self-propelled mobile homes, not exceeding state department of transportation limits in length, shall be permitted to park as a passenger vehicle, but shall not be permitted to be used as a living unit on any public right-of-way. 
e.  Parking on public property prohibited. No trailer or mobile home shall be parked upon any public right-of-way, park or other public property within the corporate limits of the city more than 48 hours, and shall not be used for sleeping, housekeeping or living quarters while so parked, unless located in an area publicly designated for such use. 
f.  Parking of construction trailers. Trailers used for construction offices on a construction site in a subdivision shall be permitted during the period of construction only after a building permit for the construction job has been issued. Such trailers must be removed from the site or subdivision before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the new construction. Such permitted trailers shall not be used for sales, habitation or promotional purposes and shall be permitted only after receiving a permit from the building inspector for each such trailer. 
(10)  Design requirements for travel trailer park. 
a.  Site plans. Site plans and specifications for travel trailer parks are required as stated in subsection (10)e of this section. 
b.  Minimum size. Each parcel of land to be used for a travel trailer park shall be a minimum of 2.5 acres, and the ratio of average depth to average width shall not be in excess of 4:1. If included as part of a mobile home park, a travel trailer park cannot occupy more than ten percent of the area. 
c.  Streets and parking. 
1.  Access to park. Direct vehicular access to the travel trailer park shall be only from an abutting, approved public street. Access shall be located so as to provide minimum congestion on the external streets and to provide for good circulation within the park. 
2.  Width of streets. Streets in a travel trailer park shall be private and shall be of the following width: 
(i)  Two-way streets with no parking on either side shall be at least 24 feet in width. 
(ii)  Two-way streets with parking on one side shall be at least 32 feet in width. 
(iii)  No roads will be permitted with parking on both sides of the street. 
(iv)  One-way streets are permitted with a minimum width of 24 feet. 
3.  Street surfacing. All streets shall be paved according to specifications set forth by city ordinances. 
4.  Parking. At least one off-street parking space per travel trailer site in each travel trailer park is required. 
5.  Travel trailer site. Each travel trailer site shall be well drained and contain a stabilized vehicular parking pad composed of paving or other suitable material as determined by the city engineer. The remainder of the site shall be grassed and landscaped. 
d.  Buffer strip. There shall be a well-landscaped buffer strip not less than 25 feet in depth between travel trailer sites and all public streets abutting the travel trailer park and a landscaped buffer strip of not less than 15 feet in depth between travel trailer sites and all other boundaries of the park. Nothing contained in this subsection is to be construed to require a 25-foot buffer strip or 15-foot buffer strip between individual travel trailer sites. The landscaped buffer shall be separate from travel trailer sites, recreation areas, streets, and the utility sites, but may be utilized for drainage structures and utilities distribution and collection. No other structures shall be placed within any of the buffer strips. 
e.  Recreation areas. A minimum of ten percent of the total land area of a travel trailer park shall be devoted to one or more common use areas for recreation activity. These recreation areas shall be storage areas, utility sites, and all nonrecreational service buildings. They shall be easily accessible to all park users and shall be owned and maintained by the park management. Although the required space for recreation usage can be met through more than one recreation area in a travel trailer park, minimum size of any area shall be 5,000 square feet. 
f.  Tent camping. Tent camping shall be permitted in a travel trailer park on individual travel trailer sites or as accessory uses to travel trailers, if occupied by members of the same party. 
(11)  Design requirements for travel trailer sites. 
a.  Minimum size. Each parking site shall have a minimum of 1,500 square feet of area with a minimum average width of 25 feet and a minimum average depth of 60 feet. There shall be a maximum of 15 travel trailer sites per acre of land within the travel trailer park. 
b.  Access. Each travel trailer site shall abut on at least one street within the travel trailer park, and access directly to the site shall be only from such an internal street. 
c.  Setback requirements. No part of a travel trailer placed on a travel trailer site shall be closer than five feet to a site line. 
d.  Appurtenances. No permanent external appurtenances, such as cabanas or awnings, may be attached to a travel trailer, and the removal of wheels or the placement of the unit on a permanent foundation is prohibited. 
(12)  Provisions of services in travel trailer parks. 
a.  Service buildings. 
1.  Service buildings may include management offices, laundry facilities, storage areas and any other such buildings necessary to the proper operation of a travel trailer park. 
2.  All service buildings shall comply with the city ordinances and state law and regulations concerning buildings, electrical installations, plumbing and sanitation systems. They shall, at all times, be operated and maintained in a clean, sightly condition by the park management. 
b.  Water supply. 
1.  An adequate supply of water shall be provided in accordance with the state sanitary codes and city ordinances. Travel trailer parks shall be connected to the city's central water system and with water lines designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the city's ordinances. 
2.  A minimum of one water supply outlet shall be provided for every two travel trailer sites. 
c.  Sewage disposal. 
1.  All sewage disposal facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the state sanitary codes and city ordinances. All travel trailer parks shall be connected to the central sewer system of the city. 
2.  At least one sanitary dumping station shall be provided for every travel trailer park with at least one connection for every 50 travel trailer sites or fractional part. 
3.  A complete restroom facility shall be located within a travel trailer site in accordance with the following schedule for 30 travel trailer sites or fractional part: 
(i)  Toilets: Two men, four women. 
(ii)  Urinal: Two men. 
(iii)  Washstand: Three men, three women. 
(iv)  Showers: Two men, two women. 
d.  Lighting. All entrances, exits, streets and service buildings shall be well-lighted during the hours of darkness. Street lighting may be either overhead or low-level, but must be reflected into the street. 
e.  Electricity and grounding. Each travel trailer site shall contain at least one approved electrical receptacle having a minimum of 100/115 volt alternating current. 
f.  Service utility lines. All service utility lines within a travel trailer park shall be placed underground and designed and constructed in accordance with city ordinances. 
g.  Refuse handling. Each travel trailer site shall be provided with either a metal can with a tight-fitting metal covering, of a capacity not less than four gallons and not to exceed 30 gallons, or dumpster containers, one to four cubic yards, for 14 travel trailer sites that can be maintained by the city. 
h.  Fire protection. All travel trailer parks shall be subject to the regulations stated in the Fire Protection Code adopted by the city. Travel trailer parks shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and other flammable materials. 
i.  Animal control. No owner or person in charge of an animal shall permit said animal to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the limits of any travel trailer park. 
j.  Street names. The owner of the travel trailer park shall provide for street name signs. All street names shall conform to the city's street plan. All existing and new travel trailer parks shall construct street signs, and all sign material shall conform to the city's street sign specifications. 
(13)  Operation of travel trailer park. 
a.  Permitted uses. A travel trailer park may include travel trailers and any such service buildings or accessory uses necessary for the proper, safe, sanitary operation of the travel trailer park. One mobile home may be located in any travel trailer park for the exclusive use of the owner or park manager as an office or residence. 
b.  Responsibilities of park management. The owner of a travel trailer park or the park management shall, at all times, keep the park and its facilities in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The park management shall inform all park occupants of the provisions of this article and other related ordinances and state laws and of the responsibilities under this section. 
c.  Register of occupants. A register of all travel trailer occupants in the park shall be maintained with the following information: 
1.  The name and address of each travel trailer owner or operator making use of the travel trailer park. 
2.  The make, model, year and vehicle license number of each travel trailer and motor vehicle. 
3.  The state, territory and county in which all vehicles are registered. 
4.  The dates of arrival and departure of each travel trailer. 
(14)  Penalty. Every person violating this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. The court has the power to suspend the sentence or any part and to revoke the suspension thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-11. - CA Commercial District. 
    In any CA Commercial District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  General description. Thee CA Commercial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for commercial and service uses to serve the surrounding residential district and in which traffic and parking congestion can be reduced to a minimum in order to preserve residential values and to promote the general welfare of the surrounding residential districts. For the CA Commercial District, in promoting the general purposes of this chapter, the specific intent of this section is: 
a.  To encourage the construction of, and continued use of, the land for neighborhood, commercial and service purposes. 
b.  To prohibit heavy commercial and industrial use of the land and to prohibit any other use that would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of the commercial structures in the district. 
c.  To discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would interfere with the use of the land in the district as a shopping and service center for the surrounding residential districts. 
(2)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted: 
a.  Single-family dwelling. 
b.  Two-family dwelling. 
c.  Multifamily dwelling. 
d.  Group dwelling. 
e.  Retail group A. 
f.  Service group A. 
g.  Filling station. 
h.  Office-bank group. 
i.  Health-medical group. 
j.  Bed and breakfast facility located in a single-family dwelling, provided that the owner of the dwelling is the holder of a current bed and breakfast facility license for not to exceed four lodging units issued pursuant to the provisions of N.D.C.C. ch. 23-09.1 and that the owner provides one off-street vehicle parking space for each such unit and one off-street parking space for the owner/operator of such facility, and provided, further, that only one sign, not exceeding four square feet in size, advertising such facility, may be placed on the premises. 
(3)  Dwelling regulations. Each single-family, two-family, multifamily or group dwelling hereafter erected shall comply with all regulations governing such uses in an RM Residential District as provided under section 105-3-9. 
(4)  Lot area. No CA Commercial District shall contain less than two acres. No zoning lot on which an individual building is placed shall contain less than 5,000 square feet; provided, however, that a building having one or more party walls and a common roof with one or more similar buildings, but individually owned, may be on a lot of any size as long as all other provisions of this chapter, including all provisions for off-street parking and loading, are fully complied with on that lot. 
(5)  District width. Each CA Commercial District shall have an average width of not less than 200 feet and shall have no boundary line less than 100 feet in length. 
(6)  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio of the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 0.25 for single-story buildings, nor shall it exceed 0.35 for buildings of more than one story. The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 25 percent of the total area of the lot. 
(7)  Yards. No building shall be less than 25 feet distant from the front lot line. Each lot shall have two side yards, one on each side of the building. The sum of two side yards shall not be less than 20 percent of the average width of the lot, but in no event shall any side yard be less than ten feet in width. Each lot shall have a rear yard not less than ten feet in width. 
(8)  Height limits. No building shall exceed two stories, nor shall it exceed 25 feet in height. 
(9)  Divided district. For the purpose of calculating the minimum area, lot width, lot dimension, floor area ratio percentage of lot covered by building, and yard requirements established by this section, a single CA Commercial District cannot lie on two sides of a public street or alley. Any area designated as being zoned CA Commercial and lying on both sides of a public street or alley shall be deemed to be two CA Commercial Districts, and all minimum requirements shall be met by buildings on each side of said public street or alley as separate districts. 
(10)  Nonconforming uses. It is the intent of this chapter and this section to designate no area as a CA Commercial District in which there is, at the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, any nonconforming use. It is the further intent of this chapter and this section that, insofar as possible, all neighborhood commercial and service areas in newly developed portions of the city shall take place in a CA Commercial District, in order to decrease traffic and parking congestion and to preserve the residential values of the city. The planning and zoning commission shall refuse to approve any requests for an amendment rezoning any portion of the city to a CA Commercial District if there is in that district any use which would be a nonconforming use upon the passage by the board of the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-12. - CB Commercial District. 
    In any CB Commercial District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  General description. The CB Commercial District is established as the Central Business District of the city in which the principal use of the land is for commercial and service uses for the city and its regional market area. For the CB Commercial District, in promoting the general purposes of this chapter, the specific intent of this section is: 
a.  To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of, the land for regional, commercial and service uses. 
b.  To provide for the orderly expansion of such uses within the CB Commercial District as designated on the zoning map. 
c.  To prohibit heavier commercial and industrial use of the land and to prohibit uses which would substantially interfere with the continuation of the uses presently in the district or with the orderly growth of the district to meet the needs of increased population in the regional market area. 
d.  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this section. 
e.  To encourage the development of the district with such uses and in such a manner as to minimize traffic and parking congestion and in such manner as to provide for the safety and convenience of shoppers, visitors, and other pedestrians in the district. 
f.  To discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create abnormal traffic congestion or fire or safety hazards in the district. 
(2)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted: 
a.  Single-family dwelling. 
b.  Two-family dwelling. 
c.  Multifamily dwelling. 
d.  Group dwelling. 
e.  Hotel. 
f.  Motel. 
g.  Retail group A. 
h.  Service group A. 
i.  Filling station. 
j.  Office-bank group. 
k.  Retail group B. 
l.  Service group B. 
m.  Commercial recreation group. 
n.  Wholesale group. 
o.  Church. 
p.  Health-medical group. 
q.  Education group. 
r.  Public recreation group. 
s.  Fire station. 
t.  Railroad line trackage. 
u.  Railroad spur trackage. 
v.  Railroad or bus passenger station. 
w.  Utility service group. 
x.  Bed and breakfast facility located in a single-family dwelling, provided that the owner of the dwelling is the holder of a current bed and breakfast facility license for not to exceed four lodging units issued pursuant to the provisions of N.D.C.C. ch. 23-09.1 and that the owner provides one off-street vehicle parking space for each such unit and one off-street parking space for the owner/operator of such facility, and provided, further, that only one sign, not exceeding four square feet in size, advertising such facility, may be placed on the premises. 
(3)  Dwelling regulation. Each single-family, two-family, multifamily or group dwelling hereafter erected shall comply with all regulations governing such uses in an RM Residential District as provided under section 105-3-9. 
(4)  Lot area. Except as provided in subsection (3) of this section, any permitted principal building or structure, together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 2,500 square feet; provided, however, that such principal building and accessory buildings may be erected on a record lot having an area of less than 2,500 square feet, corresponding to a record lot shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(5)  Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than 20 feet measured along the front line of said lot; provided, however, that said minimum width of 20 feet shall not be required on a record lot corresponding to a record lot shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(6)  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio of any principal nonresidential building and its accessory buildings shall not exceed 1.00 for single-story buildings, nor shall it exceed 5.00 for buildings of more than one story. 
(7)  Front yard. No front yard shall be required of any principal nonresidential building in a CB district. 
(8)  Side yards. No side yard shall be required of any principal nonresidential building in a CB district. 
(9)  Rear yards. Each lot shall have a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth; provided, however, that where the rear of a lot adjoins an alley, no rear yard shall be required for a principal nonresidential building. 
(10)  Height limits. No building shall exceed nine stories nor shall it exceed 85 feet in height. 
(11)  Special conditions for a specified lot. By ordinance, the board authorized inclusion of Lot 12 of Lot A, Sunview Heights Addition, and that vacated portion of section line street known as Twenty-Seventh Street Northeast between Old Red Trail and Interstate 94 in the Southwest Quarter, Section Sixteen, Township One Hundred Thirty-Nine North, Range Eighty-One West of the Fifth Principal Meridian of the City of Mandan within a CB Commercial District subject to the following zoning conditions: 
a.  Any structure built on Lot 12, Sunview Heights Addition, shall have a side yard setback of at least 100 feet between Lots 11 and 12. 
b.  The owner of said Lot 12 shall erect and maintain a chain-link fence east of the buffer zone near the common boundary between Lots 11 and 12, Sunview Heights Addition. 
c.  Trees shall be planted to the west of the chain-link fence as recommended by the city forester to act as a screen and buffer zone between Lots 11 and 12, Sunview Heights Addition. 
(12)  Off-street parking and loading requirements in CB Commercial District. 
a.  In that section of the CB Commercial District described as follows: 
Commencing at the intersection of the centerline of Main Street at Fourth Avenue NE; thence northerly along centerline of Fourth Avenue NE to the intersection of centerline of the alley in Block 3, Original Town of Mandan; thence westerly along the centerline of alleys in Blocks 3, 4, 5, and 6 to the north-south alley in said Block 6, thence northerly along centerline of First Street NE; thence westerly along centerline of First Street NE to the intersection of centerline of Collins Avenue; thence northerly along centerline of Collins Avenue to the intersection of projected south boundary line of Lot 3 Block 22 of Original Town of Mandan; thence westerly along south boundary line of Lots 3 and 10, Block 22; Lots 3 and 10, Block 21; Lots 3 and 10, Block 20; and Lots 3 and 10, Block 19 all of the Original Town of Mandan to the intersection of centerline of Fourth Avenue NW; thence southerly along centerline of Fourth Avenue NW to the intersection of centerline of First Street NW; thence westerly along centerline of First Street NW to the intersection of centerline of Sixth Avenue NW; thence southerly along the centerline of Sixth Avenue NW to the intersection of center of east-west alley of Block 13 of Original Town of Mandan; thence westerly along the centerline of east-west alley in Block 13 and 14 of Original Town of Mandan to the intersection of centerline of Eighth Avenue NW; thence southerly along centerline of Eighth Avenue NW to the intersection of centerline of Main Street; thence easterly along centerline of Main Street to intersection of centerline of Fourth Avenue NE the same being the point of beginning. 
b.  Provisions of this section regarding off-street parking shall be applied in the following: 
1.  For any building replacing a building existing at the date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, a new building being constructed on vacant land or a building in which the floor space is increased by any additions or structural alternations, off-street parking space will not be required under this chapter, but will be provided by the city as the governing body of this city may from time to time provide by eminent domain or other authorized legal means and assessed against the benefited property. 
2.  Notwithstanding any other requirements of this section relative to off-street parking, off-street loading shall be provided as designated elsewhere in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-13. - CC Commercial District. 
    In any CC Commercial District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted: 
a.  Any use permitted in a CB Commercial District, except residential dwellings. 
b.  Storage building and warehouse. 
(2)  Lot area. Each principal building hereafter erected, together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 7,000 square feet. 
(3)  Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than 50 feet measured along the front building line. 
(4)  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall be as prescribed for CB Commercial Districts as set out in section 105-3-12(6). 
(5)  Front yard. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 35 feet. 
(6)  Side yards. No side yard shall be required of any building, except on lots which abut on a public street, in which event no building shall be less than 35 feet from any lot line. 
(7)  Rear yards. Each lot shall have a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth. 
(8)  Height limits. No building shall exceed nine stories, nor shall it exceed 85 feet in height. 
(9)  Off-street parking and loading space. Parking and loading spaces shall be as required by section 105-1-6. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-14. - MA Industrial District. 
    In any MA Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  General description. The MA Industrial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for heavy commercial establishments and non-nuisance industries. For the MA Industrial District, in promoting the general purposes of this chapter, the specific intent of this section is: 
a.  To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of, the land for commercial and industrial buildings. 
b.  To prohibit use of the land for heavy nuisance industry and to prohibit any other use which would substantially interfere with the development or continuation of commercial and industrial establishments in the district. 
c.  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted: 
a.  Retail group A. 
b.  Retail group B. 
c.  Service group A. 
d.  Service group B. 
e.  Filling station. 
f.  Wholesale group. 
g.  Fire station. 
h.  Truck terminal. 
i.  Railroad line trackage. 
j.  Railroad spur trackage. 
k.  Railroad or bus passenger station. 
l.  Railroad freight station. 
m.  Utility service group. 
n.  Industrial group A. 
o.  Animal hospital. 
p.  Radio or television transmitting station. 
(3)  Lot area. Each principal building hereafter erected, together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 5,000 square feet. 
(4)  Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than 50 feet measured along the front building line; provided, however, that on a record lot having a width of less than 50 feet at the front building line, and corresponding to a record lot shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the minimum lot width measured along the front building line may be reduced to not less than 25 feet. 
(5)  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio of the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 1.0 for single-story buildings, nor shall it exceed 2.0 for buildings of more than one story. 
(6)  Front yard. No front yard shall be required, except where the majority of lots in a block have been lawfully occupied with buildings having front yards, in which case the regulations of section 105-1-2 shall apply. 
(7)  Side yards. No side yards shall be required, except where a lot adjoins a lot in a residential district, then a building on a lot in the MA Industrial District shall observe the side yard requirements of the adjacent residential district. 
(8)  Rear yard. No rear yard shall be required. 
(9)  Height limits. No principal building shall exceed four stories, nor shall it exceed 50 feet in height. 
(10)  Off-street parking and loading spaces. The intent of this section in reducing the required yards to a minimum is to allow a greater flexibility in locating buildings on a lot. It is not the intent of this section to eliminate or exempt any use permitted in the district from full compliance with all off-street parking and loading requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-15. - MB Industrial District. 
    In any MB Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  General description. The MB Industrial District is established as a district in which the principal use of land is for heavy commercial and industrial establishments, which may create some nuisance, and which are not properly associated with, nor compatible with, residential, institutional and neighborhood commercial and service establishments. For the MB Industrial District, in promoting the general purposes of this chapter, the specific intent of this section is: 
a.  To encourage the construction of, and the continued use of, land for heavy commercial and industrial purposes. 
b.  To prohibit any other use that would substantially interfere with the development, continuation or expansion of commercial and industrial uses in the district. 
c.  To encourage the discontinuance of existing uses that would not be permitted as new uses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted: 
a.  Filling station. 
b.  Retail group B. 
c.  Service group B. 
d.  Wholesale group. 
e.  Fire station. 
f.  Truck terminal. 
g.  Railroad line trackage. 
h.  Railroad spur trackage. 
i.  Railroad freight station. 
j.  Railroad freight classification yard. 
k.  Truck farming group. 
l.  Utility service group. 
m.  Industrial group A. 
n.  Industrial group B. 
o.  Livestock sales pavilion. 
p.  Oil and gas well. 
q.  Radio or television transmitting station. 
r.  Sand and gravel extraction. 
s.  Sewage treatment plant. 
t.  Animal hospital. 
u.  Taxidermy. 
(3)  Lot area. Each principal building erected, together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having not less than 10,000 square feet; provided, however, that in an MB Industrial District, and in no other residential, commercial or industrial district, it is permissible to erect more than one principal building on a zoning lot, provided that all other requirements of this section and this chapter are complied with. 
(4)  Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than 75 feet measured along the front building line; provided, however, that on a record lot having a width of less than 75 feet at the front building line and, corresponding to a record lot shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the minimum lot width measured along the front building line may be reduced to not less than 50 feet. 
(5)  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio of the principal buildings or building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 0.30 for single-story buildings, nor shall it exceed 0.60 for buildings of more than one story. The ground area occupied by the principal building or buildings and accessory buildings shall not exceed 30 percent of the total area of the lot. 
(6)  Front yard. Each lot shall have a front yard not less than 50 feet in depth. 
(7)  Side yards. Each lot shall have two side yards, one on each side of any principal building. The sum of the widths of the two side yards shall not be less than 20 percent of the average width of the lot. On any lot having an average width of 75 feet or less, each side yard shall be not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, and in no case shall a side yard be less than five feet in width. On any lot having an average width greater than 75 feet, no side yard shall be less than 7.5 feet in width and no side yard need be greater than 50 feet in width. On a lot containing two principal buildings located side by side, there are no minimum requirements for side yards between the two buildings. 
(8)  Rear yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard not less than 25 feet in depth. 
(9)  Height limits. No principal building shall exceed four stories, nor shall it exceed 50 feet in height. No accessory building shall exceed two stories, nor shall it exceed 25 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-16. - MC Industrial District. 
    In any MC Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. Any use permitted in an MA Industrial District, except residential dwellings and an animal hospital. 
(2)  Lot area. Each principal building hereafter constructed, together with its accessory buildings, shall be located on a lot having an area of not less than 7,000 square feet. 
(3)  Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than 50 feet measured along the front building line. 
(4)  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio shall be as prescribed for MA Industrial District as set out in section 105-3-14(5). 
(5)  Front yard. Each lot shall have a front yard of not less than 35 feet. 
(6)  Side yards. No side yard shall be required for any building, except on lots which abut on a public street, in which event no building shall be less than 35 feet from any lot line. 
(7)  Rear yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard not less than ten feet in depth. 
(8)  Height limits. No principal building shall exceed four stories, nor shall it exceed 50 feet in height. 
(9)  Off-street parking and loading space. Parking and loading spaces shall be as required by section 105-1-6. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 105-3-17. - MD Industrial District. 
    In any MD Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Uses permitted. The following uses are permitted: 
a.  Any use permitted in an MB Industrial District. 
b.  Temporary livestock handling and retention facilities as necessary for the operation of a livestock sales market, and an abattoir. 
c.  Medical marijuana growing facility. 
(2)  Dimensional standards. The provisions of section 105-3-15 relating to an MB Industrial District concerning lot area, lot width, floor area ratio, front yard, side yard, rear yard, and height limits shall apply to any MD Industrial District. 
(3)  Off-street parking and loading space. Parking and loading spaces shall be as required by section 105-1-6. 
(Ord. No. 1242, § 5, 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 1266, § 4, 7-10-2018) 
ARTICLE 4. - SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 105-4-1. - A Agricultural District. 
    In any A Agricultural District, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  General description. The A Agricultural District is established as a district in which the predominant use of land is for general agricultural uses. For the A Agricultural District, in promoting the general purposes of this chapter, the specific intent of this section is as follows: 
a.  To encourage the continued use of the land for agricultural uses. 
b.  To prohibit scattered commercial and industrial uses of the land and to prohibit any other use which would interfere with an integrated and efficient development of the land for more intensive urban uses as the city expands. 
c.  To discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create unusual requirements and costs for public services, such as police and fire protection, water supply and sewage before such services could be expanded efficiently in the normal development of the city. 
(2)  Uses permitted. 
a.  The following uses are permitted: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Church. 
3.  Education group. 
4.  Public recreation group. 
5.  Fire station. 
6.  Railroad line trackage. 
7.  General farming group, as defined in section 105-1-4. 
8.  Truck farming group, as defined in section 105-1-4. 
9.  Utility service group. 
10.  Airport. 
11.  Golf course. 
12.  Oil and gas well. 
13.  Radio or television transmitting station. 
14.  Sand or gravel extraction. 
15.  Sewage treatment plant. 
16.  Fireworks stand. 
b.  Provided, however, that on a record lot having an area of less than five acres, but not less than 20,000 square feet, corresponding to a record lot shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, any of the following uses are permitted: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Church. 
3.  Education group. 
4.  Public recreation group. 
5.  Fire station. 
6.  Railroad line trackage. 
7.  General farming group, as defined in section 105-1-4. 
8.  Truck farming group, as defined in section 105-1-4. 
9.  Utility service group. 
10.  Animal hospital. 
11.  Oil or gas well. 
12.  Fireworks stand. 
c.  And on a similar lot having an area of less than the 20,000 square feet but not less than 5,000 square feet, the following uses are permitted: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  Church. 
3.  Fire station. 
4.  Railroad line trackage. 
5.  Truck farming group. 
6.  Utility service group. 
(3)  Lot width. Each lot shall have a width of not less than 100 feet measured along the front building line; provided, however, that on a record lot having a width of less than 100 feet at the front building line, and corresponding to a record lot shown on a plat or deed recorded prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, the minimum lot width measured along the front building line may be reduced to not less than 50 feet. 
(4)  Floor area ratio. The floor area ratio of the principal building and all accessory buildings shall not exceed 0.30 for all single-story buildings, nor shall it exceed 0.40 for the buildings of more than one story. The ground area occupied by the principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed 30 percent of the total area of the lot. 
(5)  Front yard. Each lot shall have a front yard not less than 25 feet in depth. 
(6)  Side yard. Each lot shall have two side yards, one on each side of the principal building. The sum of the width of the two side yards shall not be less than 20 percent of the average width of the lot. On any lot having an average width of 60 feet or less, each side yard shall be not less than ten percent of the width of the lot, and in no case shall a side yard be less than five feet in width. On any lot having an average width greater than 60 feet, neither side yard shall be less than six feet in width; provided, however, that for any building 35 feet in height or less, no side yard greater than 15 feet in width shall be required; provided, further, that no building housing livestock or poultry shall be less than 50 feet distant from any residential building on an adjacent lot, nor shall such building be less than 50 feet from the boundary of any lot in a residential or commercial district. 
(7)  Rear yard. Each lot shall have a rear yard not less than 20 feet in depth. 
(8)  Height limits. No single-family dwelling shall exceed 2.5 stories, nor shall it exceed 35 feet in height. No principal building for any other permitted use shall exceed four stories, nor shall it exceed 50 feet in height. For each one foot or fraction thereof that a building exceeds 35 feet in height, there shall be added four feet to the minimum width of each side yard, two feet to the minimum depth of the front yard and two feet to the minimum depth of the rear yard required by this section. Any accessory building that exceeds 25 feet in height shall be considered a principal building for the purpose of figuring yards and distances from lot boundary lines. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0220; Code 1994, § 21-04-14; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 1987; Ord. No. 884, § 1(2), 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 1291, § 3, 3-5-2019) 
Sec. 105-4-2. - Downtown districts. 
(a)  Districts established. The following downtown zoning districts are hereby established: 
(1)  DC Downtown Core District; and 
(2)  DF Downtown Fringe District. 
(b)  Use table. The table contained herein lists the uses allowed within the downtown zoning districts. 
(1)  Use categories. All of the categories listed in the use table are explained in detail elsewhere in this chapter. The second column of the use table contains an abbreviated explanation of the respective use category. If there is a conflict between the abbreviated explanation and the full explanation elsewhere in this chapter, the full explanation shall prevail. 
(2)  Use standards. An "X" in the third column of the use table indicates that the use is subject to use-specific standards. 
(3)  Uses permitted by right. A "P" indicates that a use category is allowed by right in the respective zoning district. These permitted uses are subject to all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Special uses. An "SUP" indicates that the use is allowed only if reviewed and approved as a Special Use and is subject to all other applicable regulations in this chapter. 
(5)  Uses not allowed. An "-" indicates that the use is not allowed in the respective zoning district. 
(6)  Uses requiring administrative approval. An "A" indicates that the use requires administrative approval in the respective zoning district. 
Use Table 
Proposed Use Category Definition Use 
Standard District DC DF Residential Uses Group Dwelling Residential occupancy of a structure by a group of people who do not meet the definition of household. P P Household dwelling Residential occupancy of a dwelling unit by a household (related or up to four unrelated). Single-family, detached P Duplex/single-family attached (2) P Single-family, attached (3-8) e.g., condos P Multifamily structure P P Residences on 2nd floor & above P P Commercial Uses Drive-through facilities Drive-through facilities in conjunction with a permitted principal use. X SUP SUP Entertainment event, major Activities and structures that draw large numbers of people to specific events or shows. This category does not include outdoor recreation and entertainment uses, such as golf driving ranges and racetracks. P P Office group Activities conducted in an office setting and generally focusing on business, government, professional, medical or financial services. P P Parking, accessory Parking that is an accessory to a specific use, but not located on the same parcel as the use - use standards for accessory parking that is adjacent to a residential use. X SUP SUP Parking, commercial Parking that is not an accessory to a specific use - fees may or may not be charged. X P SUP Retail sales and services 
Retail group A 
Service group A 
Service group B 
Groups are modified by description of this item and other items in this table. Establishments involved in the sale, lease or rental of any new or used products to the general public - they may also provide personal services or entertainment or provide product repair or services for consumer and business goods - use standards for convenience store/gas stations, mortuaries/funeral homes. This category does not include self-service storage uses, adult entertainment centers, animal hospitals or kennels, or off-premises advertising signs. X P P Retail group B Auto, truck, motor cycle, off-road, and boat sales; Feed, grain, and farm supply sales. X - SUP Auto repair garage Service to passenger vehicles, light trucks and other consumer motor vehicles generally, the customer does not wait at the site while the service or repair is being performed. X SUP P Auto service, limited Direct services to motor vehicles where the driver generally waits in the car or nearby while the service is performed. X SUP P Institutional Uses Colleges Colleges and institutions of higher learning. P P Community services Public, non-profit or charitable uses, generally providing a local service to the community. X P P Day care Care, protection and supervision for children and adults on a regular basis away from their primary residence for less than 24 hours/day. X SUP P Health care facilities Medical or surgical care to patients, with overnight care. P P Parks and open areas Natural areas consisting mostly of vegetative landscaping or outdoor recreation, community gardens, etc. P P Religious institutions Meeting area for religious activities X P P Safety services Public safety and emergency response services. P P Schools Schools at the primary, elementary, middle, junior high or high school level. X - P Other Uses Detention facilities Government-operated facilities for the detention or incarceration of people. X - - Moving of buildings/structures Moving in of a building or structure that has been previously occupied in another location. X - SUP Passenger terminals Passenger terminals for regional bus and rail service. X P P Public/community events Planned gathering on public property consisting of 50 or more people or any sized event which blocks, or otherwise reserves, access to public property/right-of-way 1 . X A A Telecommunications facilities Devices and supporting elements necessary to provide telecommunication services. SUP SUP Utilities and essential services Infrastructure services that need to be located in or near the area where the service is provided. P P  
1 Does not apply to spontaneous responses to current events or activities common to public parks/property that do not alter the day-to-day functionality of the site. 
(Code 1994, § 21-04-17; Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 105-4-2.1. - DC Downtown Core District. 
(a)  General description. The purpose of the DC Downtown Core District is to preserve and enhance the mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented nature of the city's downtown area. The district allows a wide range of mutually supportive uses in order to enhance Downtown Mandan's role as a commercial, cultural, governmental, health/medical, entertainment, education and residential center. The district standards also facilitate the creation of a strong and distinctive sense of place through the inclusion of open space and public plazas. The use of design standards will maintain the historical integrity, enhance the quality of design, and preserve the human-scale development of downtown. 
(b)  Location. The following described property shall be included in the DC Downtown Core District: 
In Mandan Proper Subdivision, Morton County, North Dakota in Section 27, Township 139 North, Range 81 West: 
All of Blocks 3-10 and 19-22; Lots 7-12, Block 23; Lots 1-6, Block 36; Lots 7-12, Block 35. 
(c)  Dimensional standards. Development within the DC Downtown Core District is subject to the following dimensional standards: 
(1)  Lot area. The minimum lot area is 2,500 square feet, unless a lot is recorded to have less than 2,500 square feet prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(2)  Lot width. The minimum lot width is 20 feet. 
(3)  Lot depth. There is no lot depth requirement. 
(4)  Front yard setback. There is no minimum front yard setback. If the development site is between two existing buildings, which are both setback from the front property line, the front yard setback may not exceed the average setback of the adjoining buildings. In no case shall a setback greater than 15 feet be allowed, and this area must be landscaped and/or incorporate streetscape elements. 
(5)  Side yard setback. There is no minimum side yard setback, unless the side property line abuts residentially zoned property, in which case the minimum side yard setback shall be six feet. 
(6)  Rear yard setback. The minimum rear yard setback is ten feet; provided that, where the rear of a lot adjoins an alley, no rear yard shall be required for a principal nonresidential building. 
(7)  Height limits. The maximum height is 130 feet, unless a special use permit to exceed this height is granted. The minimum height is two stories or 20 feet. 
(8)  Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage is 100 percent. 
(d)  Design standards. All development within the DC Downtown Core District is subject to the following design standards: 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the design standards is to create and maintain a high visual quality and appearance for the DC Downtown Core District. The regulations are also intended to stimulate and protect investment through the establishment of high standards with respect to materials, details and appearance. 
(2)  Review and approval. Compliance with these design standards shall be carried out in conjunction with the city's site plan review procedures. An administrative decision by the Mandan Architectural Review Committee regarding the design standards may be appealed to the city commission and will be subject to the commission's standard public hearing procedures. 
(3)  Building materials. 
a.  All walls visible from the street shall be primarily faced with brick, stone, architectural or pre-cast concrete, EFIS, stucco, or an equivalent or better. The use of plain surface concrete or block shall be prohibited (i.e., the surface must be dimensional). Nontransparent glass shall be prohibited from covering more than 40 percent of the exterior walls. 
b.  All subsequent renovations, additions and related structures constructed after the construction of an original building shall be constructed of materials comparable to those used in the original construction and shall be designed in a manner conforming to the original architectural design and general appearance. 
c.  In order to maintain a sense of harmony within the area, the colors and materials used should generally be compatible with or complementary to those used for buildings on adjoining parcels. 
(4)  Height. The height of a new mid-block building shall be within one story/15 feet of any adjacent building. If a proposed mid-block development is between two existing buildings that vary more than three stories in height, the new building shall be within one story/15 feet in height of either the taller or shorter building. The height of a new corner building may be higher than buildings on adjacent parcels, but should generally be within the average height of the buildings occupying the three adjacent corners of the intersection. It is not the intent of this provision to regulate the height of a building that occupies one-quarter of a block or more as it relates to adjacent or adjoining buildings. 
(5)  Alignment. New infill development in the downtown district shall maintain the continuity of setback and alignment of adjoining facades at the property line. 
(6)  Width. New buildings shall reflect the existing characteristic rhythm of facades along the street. New construction, including parking ramps that require two or more lots, should respect this pattern by designing the pattern of adjacent facade widths into the new facade. 
(7)  Horizontal rhythms. New development shall maintain the alignment of building windows, cornices and rooflines that dominate the block on which it will be constructed. Character and scale shall be compatible with surrounding structures through the use of materials, detailing and window placement. A clear visual division between the street level and upper floors shall also be maintained. Canopies and awnings, consistent with the architectural style of the building, are strongly encouraged to accentuate the street level relationship between the building and streetscape and to provide protection of pedestrians. 
(8)  Entrances. Main entrances to buildings shall face and be clearly visible from the street and define the entry point. 
(9)  Historic preservation. Rehabilitation of existing historically significant buildings shall be in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation to the greatest degree practicable. 
(10)  Display windows. The original size and shape of display windows on existing buildings shall be preserved. For nonresidential buildings, a minimum of 50 percent of first floor facades fronting the street shall be windows, doors and other transparent elements. 
(11)  Rooftop equipment. Rooftop equipment shall be screened from ground level views with parapet walls or enclosures similar in form, material and detail to the primary structure. 
(12)  Vacant buildings. Vacant and abandoned buildings shall be made to appear inhabited. Boarding up windows in vacant or abandoned buildings shall be prohibited. Window coverings shall be aesthetically pleasing. 
(13)  Demolition and vacant lots. Any demolition shall be in accordance with the provisions of the building construction requirements of this Code. Any lots left vacant after demolition shall be treated to control fugitive dust. If the lot is to remain vacant for more than 180 days, said lot shall be landscaped. The lot shall be maintained and kept free of debris and litter. 
(14)  Exposed common walls. If common walls are exposed due to demolition of adjoining buildings, the walls shall be treated to ensure that the walls do not become a visual eyesore. The treatment may be temporary or permanent depending on the potential for redevelopment of adjoining parcels. Temporary alternative treatments must be approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. Permanent alternative treatments include architectural treatment that is similar to the front facade of the building or stucco. The wall treatment shall be in place within 90 days of the date of demolition, unless a longer period is authorized at the time of approval of the demolition plans, and shall be the financial responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the demolished building was located. 
(15)  Work in public right-of-way. Any work within the public right-of-way must be approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission, shall be in accordance with any city guidelines and shall comply with the standards established by the city engineer. 
(e)  Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 105-1-6. Off-street parking shall not be required for properties within the downtown parking district (section 105-3-12(12)). 
(f)  Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening shall meet the approval of, and guidelines set forth by, the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. Development within the DC Downtown Core District, including the development of parking areas, shall be subject to the requirements of section 105-1-6. If decorative fencing or any other streetscape elements are used, they shall be consistent with, or complementary to, the designated downtown streetscape elements. 
(g)  Signage. All signage in the DC Downtown Core District shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the city policy. Canopies used for signage shall be consistent with the architectural style of the building. 
(Code 1994, § 21-04-17.1; Ord. No. 1013, § 2, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 1107, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 105-4-2.2. - DF Downtown Fringe District. 
(a)  General description. The purpose of the DF Downtown Fringe District is to strengthen and complement the city's downtown area by allowing uses not normally allowed in the DC Downtown Core District. The Downtown Fringe District also serves to provide a transitional area between the DC Downtown Core District and adjacent commercial and residential zoning districts. The uses allowed in this district usually require larger parcels and a greater emphasis on automobile access and parking. 
(b)  Location. The following described property shall be included in the DF Downtown Fringe District: 
(1)  In Mandan Proper Subdivision, Morton County, North Dakota in Section 27, Township 139 North, Range 81 West: 
All of Blocks 1 and 2, 11-18, 24-34, 37-58; Lots 1-6, Block 23; Lots 1-6, Block 35; Lots 7-12, Block 36. 
(2)  All of Albers-Neff First Addition, City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota 
(3)  All of Collin's Court Addition, City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota. 
(4)  In Meads Addition, City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota:All of Blocks 1 and 8-11; Lots 1-12 of Blocks 7 and 12; Lots 1-3, and 13, Block 15. 
(5)  In Albers-Neff Second Addition, City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota: 
Lot 1, Block 1; Lots 10-12, Block 4. 
(6)  In First Northern Pacific Addition, City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota: 
All of Blocks 59-74 and 81; Lots 4-9, Blocks 76-79 and 82; Lots 4-12, Block 80; Lots 7-9, Block 83. 
(7)  In Don's Addition, City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota: 
Lots 1-3 and 8, Block 3. 
(8)  In Helmsworth and McLean's Addition, City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota: 
All of Blocks 1-23; Lots 7-18, Blocks 24-29; Lots 7-12, Block 30 All of Koch Commercial Park. 
(9)  All of Helmsworth's and McLean's Second Addition, City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota 
(10)  All lands between 10th Avenue West and the Railroad overpass east of Mandan Avenue bounded on the north by Main Street and bounded on the south by the BNSF Railroad Trackage. 
(11)  All lands bounded on the west by Mandan Avenue, bounded on the east by BNSF Railroad Trackage between 3rd Street NE and Main Street. 
(c)  Dimensional standards. Each single-family, two-family, multifamily, or group dwelling hereafter erected shall comply with all regulations governing such uses in an RM Residential District as provided under section 105-3-9. Nondwelling development within the DF Downtown Fringe District is subject to the following dimensional standards: 
(1)  Lot area. The minimum lot area is 2,500 square feet unless the lot is recorded to have less than 2,500 square feet prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(2)  Lot width. The minimum lot width is 25 feet. 
(3)  Lot depth. There is no lot depth requirement. 
(4)  Front yard setback. There is no minimum front yard setback, unless the property is immediately adjacent to a residentially zoned property, in which case the minimum front yard setback shall be 15 feet. In no case shall a setback greater than 25 feet be allowed, and this area must be landscaped and/or incorporate streetscape elements. 
(5)  Side yard setback. There is no minimum side yard setback, unless the property is immediately adjacent to a residentially zoned property, in which case the minimum side yard setback shall be five feet. 
(6)  Rear yard setback. There is no minimum rear yard setback, unless the property is immediately adjacent to a residentially zoned property, in which case the minimum rear yard setback shall be ten feet. 
(7)  Height limits. The maximum height is 75 feet, unless the property is immediately adjacent to a residentially zoned property, in which case the maximum height is 50 feet. 
(8)  Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage is 100 percent, unless the property is immediately adjacent to a residentially zoned parcel, in which case the maximum lot coverage shall be 70 percent. 
(d)  Design standards. All development within the DF Downtown Fringe District is subject to the following design standards: 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the design standards is to create and maintain a high visual quality and appearance for the DF Downtown Fringe District. The regulations are also intended to stimulate and protect investment through the establishment of high standards with respect to materials, details and appearance. 
(2)  Review and approval. Compliance with these design standards shall be carried out in conjunction with the city's site plan review procedures. An administrative decision by the Mandan Architectural Review Committee regarding the design standards may be appealed to the city commission and will be subject to the commission's standard public hearing procedures. 
(3)  Building materials. 
a.  For nonresidential and multifamily residential buildings containing more than eight units, all walls visible from the street shall be primarily faced with brick, stone, architectural or pre-cast concrete, EFIS, stucco, or an equivalent or better. The use of plain surface concrete or block shall be prohibited (i.e., the surface must be dimensional). Nontransparent glass shall be prohibited from covering more than 40 percent of the exterior walls. 
b.  For residential buildings containing eight or fewer units, traditional residential building materials may be used. 
c.  All subsequent additions and related structures, constructed after the construction of an original building, shall be constructed of materials comparable to those used in the original construction and shall be designed in a manner conforming to the original architectural design and general appearance. 
(4)  Height. The height of a new building should be within one-story/15 feet of any buildings on adjacent parcels. It is not the intent of this provision to regulate the height of a building that occupies one-quarter of a block or more as it is related to buildings on adjacent parcels. 
(5)  Alignment. The setbacks and alignment of a new building should be similar to any buildings on adjoining parcels. 
(6)  Entrances. Main entrances to buildings shall face and be clearly visible from the street. 
(7)  Historic preservation. Rehabilitation of existing historically significant buildings shall be in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation to the greatest degree practicable. 
(8)  Rooftop equipment. Rooftop equipment shall be screened from ground level views with parapet walls or enclosures similar in form, material and detail to the primary structure. 
(9)  Vacant buildings. Vacant and abandoned buildings shall be made to appear inhabited. Boarding up windows in vacant or abandoned buildings shall be prohibited. Window coverings shall be aesthetically pleasing. 
(10)  Demolition and vacant lots. Any demolition shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code. Any lots left vacant after demolition shall be treated to ensure to control fugitive dust. If the lot is to remain vacant for more than 180 days, said lot shall be landscaped. The lot shall be maintained and kept free of debris and litter. 
(11)  Exposed common walls. If common walls are exposed due to demolition of adjoining buildings, the walls shall be treated to ensure that the walls do not become a visual eyesore. The treatment may be temporary or permanent depending on the potential for redevelopment of adjoining parcels. Temporary alternative treatments must be approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Committee. Permanent alternative treatments include architectural treatment that is similar to the front facade of the building or stucco. The wall treatment shall be in place within 90 days of the date of demolition, unless a longer period is authorized at the time of approval of the demolition plans, and shall be the financial responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the demolished building was located. 
(e)  Work in public right-of-way. Any work within the public right-of-way must be approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission, shall be in accordance with any city guidelines and shall comply with the standards established by the city engineer. 
(f)  Off-street parking and loading. Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 105-1-6. Off-street parking shall not be required for properties within the downtown parking district (section 105-3-12(12)) for all uses except those outlined in Retail Group B (section 105-1-4 (d)). 
(g)  Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening shall meet the approval of and guidelines set forth by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. If decorative fencing or any other streetscape elements are used, they shall be consistent with, or complementary to, the designated downtown streetscape elements. 
(h)  Signage. All signage in the DF Downtown Fringe District shall be installed and maintained in accordance with city policy. Canopies used for signage shall be consistent with the architectural style of the building. 
(Code 1994, § 21-04-17.2; Ord. No. 1013, § 5, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 1107, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 1296, § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 105-4-3. - Planned unit developments. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to encourage flexibility in development of lands within the jurisdiction of the city in order to: 
(1)  Promote its most appropriate use; 
(2)  Improve the design, character and quality of new developments; 
(3)  Facilitate the adequate and economical provisions of streets and utilities; and 
(4)  Preserve the natural and scenic features of open space. 
(b)  Re-zone to planned unit development district (PUD) required. In order to take advantage of the flexibility provided by this section, an applicant shall be required to submit an application to create a PUD district. Each PUD district shall have a unique re-zone PUD district number that shall be recorded on the zoning map. 
(c)  Approval; denial. All planned units shall be considered by the planning and zoning commission and the city commission in the same manner as a zoning change. The city commission may grant the proposed planned unit, in whole or in part, with or without modifications and conditions, or deny it. 
(d)  Ordinance requirements. The ordinance establishing the new PUD district shall: 
(1)  Specify the PUD re-zone ordinance number. 
(2)  All land development standards that shall apply to the PUD district. 
(3)  Specify findings of fact and conclusions of law that substantiate the benefit of any and all deviations from existing city land development regulations. 
(4)  Shall specify that all land development shall be in compliance with the adopted PUD re-zone ordinance. 
(e)  Changes; amendments. 
(1)  Requested amendments or changes to an approved planned unit development shall be processed based on the nature, scope and magnitude of the requested change. Major changes to an approved PUD shall be processed as though it were a first or original PUD. 
(2)  The following shall be considered major changes to an approved PUD: 
a.  A change in the land area of the PUD in excess of five percent of the approved land area. 
b.  A change in the residential density or number of residential dwelling units in excess of ten percent of the approved number of residential dwelling units. 
c.  A change in the aggregate square footage of nonresidential buildings in excess of ten percent of the approved aggregate square footage of nonresidential buildings. 
d.  Any change to a condition of approval that appears in the ordinance conditionally approving the PUD. 
e.  Any change in the location, type or size of a building located within 100 feet of a property line that abuts an existing or planned residential use or residential zoning district. 
f.  A significant departure from the approved alignment of a major through-street. 
(3)  All other changes to an approved PUD shall be considered administrative and processed and acted upon by staff. 
(f)  Review criteria. The proposed PUD must meet each of the following criteria: 
(1)  The proposal conforms to the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(2)  The character and nature of the proposal contains a planned and coordinated land use or mix of land uses which are compatible and harmonious with adjacent land areas. Any and all potential land use incompatibilities have been satisfactorily mitigated. 
(3)  All existing and proposed streets and other transportation system improvements are designed to adequately accommodate the expected amount and type of traffic generated from the proposed PUD. 
(4)  The PUD is in compliance with the following development standards: 
a.  Land use intensity. The maximum density of residential uses and the maximum intensity of nonresidential uses shall not exceed that allowed by the underlying zoning districts. 
b.  Mixed uses. A PUD may have a mix of land uses, provided that any one land use type shall not comprise more than 70 percent, nor less than 30 percent of the total land area and/or total square footage of the PUD; provided, further, that the PUD is designed to maximize the compatibility of all adjacent land uses, both within and outside the PUD. 
(g)  Site plan, written statement and architectural drawings. The application must be accompanied by a site plan, a written statement and architectural drawings. 
(1)  Site plan. A complete site plan of the proposed PUD prepared at a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet shall be submitted in sufficient detail to evaluate the land planning, building design, and other features of the PUD. The site plan must contain, insofar as applicable, the following minimum information: 
a.  The existing topographic character of the land; 
b.  Existing and proposed land uses; 
c.  The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and improvements; 
d.  A phasing plan for the PUD, including all public improvements, such as improvements to or new streets, water system infrastructure, sewer system infrastructure, parks and recreational facilities; 
e.  The maximum height of all buildings; 
f.  The density and type of dwelling; 
g.  The internal traffic and circulation systems, off-street parking areas, and major points of access to the public right-of-way; 
h.  Areas which are to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common park areas, including public parks and recreational areas and public roadway right-of-way; 
i.  Proposed interior buffer areas between uses, as well as landscape buffers, including the width and landscaping specifications for all buffer areas abutting adjacent properties; 
j.  Acreage of the PUD; 
k.  Utility service plan showing existing utilities in place and all existing and proposed utility easements; 
l.  Landscape plan, including the location, size, and type of all landscape buffer areas; and 
m.  Surrounding land uses, zoning and ownership. 
(2)  Written statement. The written statement to be submitted with the application must contain the following information: 
a.  A statement of the present ownership (attorney's title opinion or title commitment) and a legal description of all the land included in the PUD, including any abutting or adjacent land owned by the applicant or others. 
b.  An explanation of the objectives to be achieved by the PUD, including the functional interaction of all proposed and adjacent existing land uses, and how potential land use incompatibilities will be successfully mitigated. 
c.  The designation of all common areas and assurances of how the common areas will be adequately maintained. 
(3)  Architectural renderings. Architectural renderings of proposed buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow evaluation of building form, massing, and primary residential architectural features. The renderings shall be of the front and one side elevation of the proposed buildings. 
(h)  Architectural review. All applications will require submittal to, and approval of, the Mandan Architectural Review Committee. 
(Code 1994, §§ 21-13-01-21-13-03; Ord. No. 1146, 5-7-2013) 
Sec. 105-4-4. - F Floodplain District. 
(a)  Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose, and objectives. 
(1)  Statutory authorization. This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of N.D.C.C. chs. 40-47 and 61-16.2 to provide regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. Therefore, the Board of City Commissioners of the City of Mandan does ordain as provided in this section. 
(2)  Findings of fact. 
a.  The flood hazard areas of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are subject to periodic inundation which can endanger life, result in loss of property, create health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental services, cause extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impair the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
b.  Flood losses can occur due to increases in flood heights and velocities caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the special flood hazard areas. Inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise unprotected structures also contribute to flood losses. 
(3)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
c.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding that are generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
d.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
e.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges that are located in special flood hazard areas; 
f.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
g.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a special flood hazard area; and 
h.  Ensure that those who occupy the special flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions. 
(4)  Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this section includes methods and provisions for: 
a.  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which cause damaging increases in erosion, flood heights or flood velocities; 
b.  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
c.  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
d.  Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
e.  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the flood administrator's interpretation of any provision of this section or a request for a variance. 
    Base flood or 100-year flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the height of the base flood or 100-year flood, usually in feet above mean sea level. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor below ground level on all sides. 
    Best available data (BAD) means water elevation information from any source used to estimate or determine a base flood elevation (i.e. high water mark). 
    Conveyance or hydraulic conveyance means a geometric characteristic of a river or watercourse at a given point that determines the flow-carrying capacity at that point. 
    Development means any man-made change to land, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within a special flood hazard area. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where special flood hazard areas are designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH, A1-A30 or A-99. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or from the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Floodproofing (dry) means protection provided a portion of a structure to a specific elevation in relation to the base flood elevation, together with attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, which is watertight with walls that are substantially impermeable to the passage of water. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of a structure, including the basement. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle or travel trailer but does include a mobile home. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    New construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
    Reasonably safe from flooding means base flood waters will not inundate the land or damage structures and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis. 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections. 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or towable by a light duty truck. 
(4)  Designed for use as temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal use, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, trailers on wheels, park-model trailers, and other similar vehicles. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area of land that would be inundated by a flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Start of construction means and includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; the installation of streets or walkways; excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; or the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a manufactured home, and gas or liquid storage tanks that are primarily above ground. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the building to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this section which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this section. 
(c)  General provisions. 
(1)  Lands to which this section applies. This section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(2)  Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas. The scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Mandan, North Dakota" and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps with an effective date of October 16, 2015, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, that identifies the special flood hazard areas within the city is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section. The scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for Morton County, North Dakota" and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps with an effective date of October 16, 2015, prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, that identifies the special flood hazard areas within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section. The Flood Insurance Studies are on file at City Hall, 205 2nd Ave. NW, Mandan, North Dakota. 
(3)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this section and other applicable regulations. 
(4)  Greater restrictions. This section is not intended to repeal, remedy or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this section and another section, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(5)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this section, all provisions shall be: 
a.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
b.  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and 
c.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(6)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This section does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This section shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(d)  Administration. 
(1)  Development permit required. A development permit shall be obtained before any earth moving or structure construction begins within any special flood hazard area established in subsections (c)(2) or (d)(3)(b) of this section. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city and may include, but not be limited to, plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill storage materials and drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Plans should be submitted electronically whenever possible. Specifically, the following information is required: 
a.  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all structures; 
b.  Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has been floodproofed; 
c.  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any non-residential structure meet the floodproofing criteria in subsection (e)(2)(b) of this section; and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(2)  Designation of the flood administrator. The building official is appointed to administer and implement this section. The name and contact information for the flood administrator shall be posted on the city web site. The flood administrator shall be responsible for granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Duties and responsibilities of the flood administrator. Duties of the flood administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Application review. 
1.  Review all development applications to determine that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. 
2.  Review all development applications to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required. 
3.  Review all development applications to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of subsection (e)(3)(a) are met. 
b.  Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with subsection (c)(2) of this section, the flood administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, as criteria for requiring that new construction, substantial improvements or other development in the floodplain are administered in accordance with subsection (e)(2) of this section. 
c.  Information to be obtained and maintained. 
1.  Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures. Document whether or not the structure contains a basement. 
2.  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
(i)  Obtain and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which the structure has been floodproofed; 
(ii)  Record the base flood elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the site; and 
(iii)  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in subsection (d)(1)c of this section. 
3.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this section. 
d.  Alteration of watercourses. The flood administrator shall: 
1.  Notify nearby communities, water resource districts and the North Dakota State Engineer, as necessary, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
2.  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished; and 
3.  Notify the appropriate water resource district prior to removal or placement of fill within 200 feet of the bank of a body of water during normal flow or stage. 
e.  Interpretation of flood insurance rate map (FIRM) boundaries. Make interpretation, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas. The flood administrator shall document in writing the procedure followed and the criteria applied in making the interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given 30 days to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection (d)(4) of this section. 
(4)  Appeal and variance procedure. 
a.  Board of adjustment. 
1.  The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this section. 
2.  The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the flood administrator in the enforcement or administration of this section. 
3.  Those aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the district court as provided in N.D.C.C. § 40-47-11. 
4.  In passing upon such appeals, the board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Code; and: 
(i)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(ii)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(iii)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(iv)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(v)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(vi)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(vii)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(viii)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(ix)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(x)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(xi)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
b.  Variances. 
1.  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the items in subsection (d)(4)a.4 of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
2.  Upon consideration of the factors in subsection (d)(4)a.4 of this section and the purposes of this section, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this section. 
c.  Conditions for variances. 
1.  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
2.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
3.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
4.  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
(i)  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(ii)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
(iii)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in subsection (d)(4)a.4 of this section, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
5.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  Documentation and notification. The flood administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request 
(e)  Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(1)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following standards are required: 
a.  Anchoring. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements, including additions, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
2.  All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Construction materials and methods. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
2.  All new and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
3.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
c.  Utilities. 
1.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
2.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
3.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
d.  Subdivision proposals. 
1.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
2.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
3.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and 
4.  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals. 
(2)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided as set forth in subsections (c)(2) or (d)(3)(b) of this section, the following provisions are required: 
a.  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Nonresidential construction. Construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall: 
1.  Be floodproofed to at least two feet above the base flood elevation, so that below this elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
2.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
3.  Be certified in a stamped, signed and dated document by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. 
c.  Manufactured homes. 
1.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with subsection (e)(1)a,2 of this section. 
2.  All manufactured homes or those to be substantially improved shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to at least two feet above the base flood elevation, and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system. 
(3)  Floodways. Located within the special flood hazard areas established in subsection (c)(2) of this section are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  If subsection (e)(3)a. of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of subsection (e) of this section. 
(f)  Violations; penalties. 
(1)  Violation of the provisions of this section or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations on conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances, shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor. Any person who violates this section or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as specified in section 1-9 of this code. In addition, the defendant may be required to pay costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(2)  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1994, § 21-04-15; Ord. No. 558, 1977; Ord. No. 728, § 1, 1987; Ord. No. 989, § 1, 5-5-2005; Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 1225, 1-19-2016) 
Sec. 105-4-5. - Large-scale developments. 
    It is the intent of this section to permit, in a large-scale development, a more flexible placing of buildings on the land, the grouping of open space, and accessory facilities as garages or parking spaces, and flexibility in architectural design, including multifamily dwellings of the row house or garden-apartment type of construction. The owner of such proposed large-scale development may apply for a special permit to vary from the requirements of this chapter in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Size, location and ownership of area. 
a.  The area proposed shall be in one ownership, or, if in several ownerships, the application for the special permit shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the properties included in the plan. 
b.  The plan shall cover an area of not less than 20 acres. 
c.  Not less than 90 percent of the area shall be in one or more residential or agricultural districts. Not more than ten percent of the area may be in a commercial district. No part of the area shall be in an industrial district. 
(2)  Data to accompany application. Each application for a special permit for a large-scale development shall be submitted with a preliminary overall development plan which shall include: 
a.  Topography, including contours at no greater vertical interval than two feet. 
b.  Proposed street system. 
c.  Proposed lot layout. 
d.  Proposed reservation for parks, playgrounds, school sites, and other open spaces. 
e.  Proposed location of commercial development and off-street parking space therefor. 
f.  Types of dwellings and site locations therefor. 
g.  Proposed locations of garages and parking spaces. 
h.  Preliminary plans and elevations of dwellings and commercial buildings. 
i.  Tables showing total number of acres in the proposed development and the percentage designated for each of the proposed dwelling types, commercial structures and other nonresidential uses, including off-street parking, streets, parks, playgrounds and schools. 
j.  Tabulations of the overall density for residential uses and other data that the planning and zoning commission or board of adjustment may require. 
(3)  Specific requirements. Any large-scale development for which a special permit is granted shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The overall density of residential development shall not exceed the average density that would have been permitted if the area had been developed conventionally under the regulations covering the districts in which the property was located. For the purposes of calculating this density, and for no other purposes, the density permitted in any agricultural zone shall be considered to be 5.0 families per acre. 
b.  No less than ten percent of the gross area of the project shall be devoted to parks or playgrounds and such parks or playgrounds shall be dedicated to the public use; provided, further, that except with the written approval of the park district of the city no dedicated park or playground shall contain less than 2.0 acres. 
c.  All buildings, when completed, shall be served by public sewers and public water supply. 
d.  No single buildings shall contain more than eight dwelling units. 
e.  No building shall exceed 2.5 stories or 35 feet in height. 
f.  The minimum distance between two buildings which face each other shall be 2.5 times the average height of the two buildings. 
g.  The front of no residential building shall face the rear of another building. 
h.  Where the front of one building faces the side of another building, the minimum distance between the two buildings shall be 1.5 times the average height of the two buildings. 
i.  No two residential buildings shall, at any point, be less than 20 feet apart. 
j.  Whenever the project is adjacent to, or on the opposite side of, a street from a residential or agricultural district, then, for such portion of the development adjacent to, or across the street from, such residential or agricultural district, all yard and setback regulations pertaining to the adjacent or opposite district shall be applied to that portion of the large-scale development. 
k.  The plan shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission prior to the review of the application by the board of adjustment. The commission shall review the plan to determine its compliance with any portion of the master plan that shall have been adopted or any portion of any other plans adopted or under study by the commission, including, but not limited to, plans for parks, playgrounds, public utilities, streets and schools. 
(4)  Board of adjustment review. Upon receipt of the application for a special permit for a large-scale development, together with the plan meeting the requirements of this section, the application shall be reviewed by the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall handle such application for a variance in the manner provided in this chapter for handling variances. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0221; Code 1994, § 21-04-16) 
Sec. 105-4-6. - Gateway Overlay District and Memorial Highway Overlay District. 
(a)  General description. 
(1)  The Gateway Overlay District provides a higher standard of appearance for corridors that serve as the main entrances to the community. The Gateway Overlay District includes properties partially or fully within 200 feet of the rights-of-way of the following corridors: I-94 and its ramps within Mandan's city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction. Main Street west from 10th Avenue West to the western edge of the extraterritorial jurisdiction and from Mandan Avenue east to I-94; Highway 6 south from Main Street to the edge of the extraterritorial jurisdiction; Highway 1806 south from Main Street to the edge of the extraterritorial jurisdiction and north from Old Red Trail to the edge of the extraterritorial jurisdiction and Sunset Ave NW north from Old Red Trail to Highway 1806 or County 38th Street North and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction to the City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota. 
(2)  The Memorial Highway Overlay District provides a higher standard of appearance for heavily traveled and highly visible areas of the community. The Memorial Highway Overlay District includes properties partially or fully within 200 feet of the rights-of-way of the following corridors: Memorial Highway, McKenzie Drive, 40th Avenue SE from Memorial Highway to McKenzie Drive, and 46th Avenue SE from Memorial Highway to McKenzie Drive to the City of Mandan, Morton County, North Dakota. 
(b)  Applicability. New buildings, additions and renovations to existing buildings within the Gateway Overlay District shall meet the requirements established in this section. The city reserves the right to reject projects that do not meet the intent of this section. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Accessory uses are limited to those in the underlying zoning districts. Accessory uses shall meet the yard requirements set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses included in the underlying districts are allowed as long as they meet the provisions outlined in section 105-1-5. 
(e)  Lot requirements and setbacks. The following minimum requirements shall apply in the Gateway Overlay District. Where additional requirements, exceptions and modifications are set forth in this chapter for the underlying districts, the more restrictive shall apply. 
(1)  Lot area. Requirements specified in the underlying district shall apply. 
(2)  Lot width. Requirements specified in the underlying district shall apply. 
(3)  Building setbacks for yards directly abutting Interstate 94. For properties separated from the interstate by frontage roads, setbacks established in the underlying zones shall apply. Building setback for yards directly abutting Interstate 94 and its ramps are as follows: 
a.  Commercial/industrial uses. Commercial/industrial uses shall be 45 feet. 
b.  Residential uses. Residential uses shall be 45 feet. Four buffer points shall be provided within the setback between residences and the interstate. Buffer points must be satisfied as indicated in subsection (l) of this section. 
c.  Exception. Buildings initially constructed prior to January 1, 2006, are exempt. If necessary, residential properties will be allowed to rebuild within their existing setbacks. 
(4)  Impervious surface setbacks. For multifamily residential, commercial and industrial properties abutting either a gateway or a frontage road abutting a gateway, hard surfaces visible from the gateway used for parking, loading, storage and display shall be set back a distance sufficient to provide green space of a minimum of ten feet wide between the edge of the roadway/sidewalk and the hard surface. The green space may be located in the public right-of-way when space is available. Any planting in the public right-of-way must meet all related city regulations. Only five feet or less of private land will be required for setback, with remaining setback accommodated in the right-of-way or optionally on private land. Total impervious surface setbacks may be reduced to five feet, where a berm (3:1 slope), a wall (brick, stone or concrete), or a decorative railing of at least 2.5 feet in height and approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission is provided. Setbacks shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs, where possible, that may be included as part of the plant units required as follows: The minimum plant units for each 1,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof shall be four in commercial and multifamily residential districts, and 2.5 in industrial districts. Where hardship is proven, the MARC retains the option to relocate the green space requirement to another part of the lot or to dismiss the requirement in extreme situations. 
(5)  Impervious surface coverage. Requirements of the underlying districts shall apply. 
(f)  Site requirements. Multifamily, commercial and industrial properties abutting gateways or their frontage roads shall meet the following site standards: 
(1)  Landscaping and buffer yards. Plantings used to fulfill the requirements of the Mandan Architectural Review Commission and city guidelines shall be grouped for visual impact from the gateways, located to accentuate the building and maximize environmental benefits. 
(2)  Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area, sign or other structure shall be arranged as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential zone or from the public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes, such as combustion or welding, shall not be directed into any adjoining property. The source of light shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Bare light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights, which casts light on residential property, shall not exceed four foot-candles (meter reading) as measured from said property. This subsection shall not apply to sports stadiums and athletic fields or to public recreational facilities. 
(3)  Storage and display. Storage and display shall be consistent with subsection (k) of this section. In addition: 
a.  No required setback abutting a gateway shall be used for outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of materials and large equipment shall be screened from gateways by two buffer points, including at least one point of fencing and/or plantings. 
b.  Distinctive examples of large-scale construction equipment, RVs, trucks, cars and agricultural equipment may be displayed within a landscaped yard abutting a gateway, if approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. Rows of product whose individual differences cannot be distinguished from public right-of-way shall not be located in yards abutting Interstate 94. 
c.  All refuse and refuse handling equipment, including, but not limited to, garbage cans, dumpsters and recycling containers, must be stored within the principal structure, within an accessory building or in a screened enclosure, except for the following: 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Two-family dwellings. 
d.  Screened enclosures must meet the following: 
1.  Screened enclosures must be located in a rear or side yard and must meet all applicable setback requirements and easements. 
2.  The screened enclosure must be in an accessible location for sanitation vehicles. 
3.  Screened enclosures must consist of a fence or wall at least six feet in height and a minimum opaqueness of 80 percent. 
(4)  Signs. Signs shall be consistent with city policy and subject to the approval of the Mandan Architectural Review Commission, with these additional standards: 
a.  Freestanding signs in the yard adjoining the highway shall be clustered in an area landscaped with ornamental trees, shrubs and/or flowers. 
(g)  Building design and construction. Multifamily residential, commercial and industrial buildings in the Gateway Overlay District shall meet the following standards, unless specifically exempted: 
(1)  Buildings shall be attractive and constructed of materials that will maintain their appearance over the long term. 
(2)  All exterior walls exposed to public view shall be of consistent quality and characteristics. 
(3)  Main entrances shall be emphasized by distance recessed or projected, by accent materials, change of grade or by pedestrian-scale lighting and other pedestrian amenities. 
(4)  Exterior building walls greater than 60 feet in length shall be divided visually into sections or bays to break up the mass. 
(5)  Architectural elements, approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission, shall be combined with landscaping to add interest to buildings, and especially to break up long expanses. Standards for architectural elements include: 
a.  Exteriors of industrial buildings shall be comprised of at least 30 percent quality materials other than steel and fiberglass. Commercial and residential building exteriors shall be comprised of at least 50 percent quality materials other than steel and fiberglass. 
b.  Exterior building walls shall incorporate no fewer than three architectural elements comparable to those listed in this subsection. Architectural elements contributing to this requirement shall have sufficient visual impact to be noticeable from the gateway and may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Accent materials. 
2.  Public art, subject to approval of Mandan Architectural Review Commission. 
3.  Architectural details, such as tile work and moldings integrated into the building facade. 
4.  Windows. 
5.  Recesses/projections. 
6.  Roof overhang. 
7.  Varied rooflines. 
8.  Articulated cornice line. 
9.  Canopies/awnings/porticos. 
(6)  Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened in a manner that is incorporated in the architectural form of the building. 
(h)  Overhead doors and loading docks for multifamily residential, commercial and industrial uses. Overhead doors and loading docks for multifamily residential, commercial and industrial uses shall: 
(1)  Not face gateways, other arterial or collector streets, unless architectural in nature and approved by the Mandan Architectural Review Commission; 
(2)  Not be located in required front yards; and 
(3)  Meet the requirements of section 105-1-6. 
(i)  Maximum building height; principal building. Requirements specified in the underlying district shall apply. 
(1)  Principal building. Requirements specified in the underlying district shall apply. 
(2)  Accessory buildings. Requirements specified in the underlying district shall apply. 
(j)  View from gateways and memorial highway areas. Development plans for property adjacent to the overlay districts or their frontage roads shall include both building elevation and vista drawings. Context and compatibility with neighboring buildings shall be considered in the plan review. 
(k)  Screening and buffering standards; fencing and screening; business/industrial, multifamily. Where any business, industrial use, or multifamily building of four or more units (i.e., structure, parking or storage) abuts property zoned for residential use, that business, industry or multifamily building shall provide screening along the boundary of the residential property. Screening shall also be provided where a business, industry or multifamily building of four or more units is across the street from a residential zone, but not on that side of a business, industry or multifamily building considered to be the front yard; provided, however, that the provisions of this section will not apply where a multifamily building abuts property also zoned for multifamily use. All fencing and screening specifically required by this chapter shall be subject to city regulations and shall consist of either a fence with plantings or a greenbelt planting strip as provided for in this subsection: 
(1)  A greenbelt planting strip shall consist of evergreen trees and/or deciduous trees and plants and shall be of sufficient width and density to provide an effective visual screen. This planting strip shall be designed to provide substantial visual screening to a minimum height of six feet. Earth mounding or berms may be used, but shall not be used to achieve more than three feet of the required screen. The planting plan and type of plantings shall require the approval of the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. 
(2)  A required screening fence shall be constructed of masonry, brick, wood, decorative metal or other materials upon approval. Such fence shall provide a solid screening effect six feet in height for multifamily uses and at least six feet in height for business and industrial uses. The design and materials used in constructing a required screening fence shall be subject to the approval of the Mandan Architectural Review Commission. Fences in excess of eight feet in height shall require a conditional use permit. If a screening fence is utilized to satisfy the requirements of this section, a minimum of one plant unit per five linear feet of fencing is also required. Plant unit equivalencies shall be measured as follows: 
Type of Plant Material Minimum Size at Time 
of Planting Equivalent 
Plant 
Units Large, mature deciduous tree 1.5-inch to 3-inch caliper 10 Large, mature evergreen tree 4 feet to 8 feet in height 10 Small, mature deciduous tree 1.5-inch to 3-inch caliper 5 Small, mature evergreen tree 3 feet to 6 feet in height 5 Mature shrub 2 gallon 2.5 Perennials 1 gallon 1  
(l)  Buffer yards. Buffer yards shall be provided consistent with the following standards: 
(1)  Land uses, existing or zoned, shall be assigned the following values: 
1 Single-family/two-family 2 SF attached (more than 2 units) 3 Multifamily (3-15 units) 4 Multifamily (more than 15 units) 5 Church/school 6 Neighborhood commercial 7 Other uses  
(2)  In determining the required buffer yard, the following formula shall be used: 
Value of proposed use (as specified in this section) less the value of adjacent use (as specified in this section) = Required buffer points (see subsection (l)(4) of this section). 
(3)  Should the formula produce a negative value, said value shall be converted into a positive value in instances where such use is located adjacent to an existing use which has not met the applicable buffering standards. 
(4)  Buffer points must be satisfied through a combination of the following: 
a.  One point for each 25 feet of separation between buildings. 
b.  One point for a single row of conifers, six feet in height, 15 feet on center (e.g., two points for double row, three points for a triple row, etc.). 
c.  One point for a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height, provided that landscaping is installed between said fence or wall and the adjacent property lines. 
d.  One point for a berm at least three feet in height (e.g., two points for a 12-foot berm). 
e.  One-half point for overstory trees, 30 feet on center. 
f.  One-half point for a hedge or shrub at least four feet in height and 75 percent opaque. 
(Code 1994, § 21-04-18; Ord. No. 1012, 10-17-2006; Ord. No. 1027, 6-19-2007; Ord. No. 1144, §§ 1, 13, 4-26-2013) 
ARTICLE 5. - ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 105-5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate adult entertainment establishments in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects and concentrations of adult entertainment establishments within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the board, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976)/FW/PBS, Inc. V. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Thomas v. Chicago Park District, 122 S. Ct. 775 (2002); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 1 09 (1972) City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 {2002); and other cases; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around adult entertainment establishments, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis., Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma County, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Dallas, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; St. Croix County, Wisconsin; Bellevue, Washington; Newport News, Virginia; New York, New York; Phoenix, Arizona; and from summaries of several of the foregoing secondary effects reports; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the board finds: 
(1)  The nature of adult establishments is such that they are recognized as having adverse secondary characteristics, particularly when they are accessible to minors and located near residential property or related residential uses, such as schools, day care centers, libraries, churches or parks. 
(2)  The concentration of adult establishments has an adverse effect upon the use and enjoyment of adjacent areas. 
(3)  The nature of adult establishments requires that they not be allowed within certain zoning districts, or within minimum distances from each other or residential and related residential uses. Regulation of adult establishments is necessary to ensure that the adverse secondary effects would not contribute to or enhance criminal activity in the area of residential uses or contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding property and lessening of its value. 
(4)  The planning and zoning commission, following notice thereof, held a public hearing on the ordinance from which this article is derived, and has considered testimony, written comments, and material from the public by and through said hearing, and has recommended approval of the zoning changes for adult uses. 
(5)  This article is consistent with the Downtown Mandan and Memorial Highway Redevelopment Plan, purposes, goals, and policies: 
a.  To establish Downtown Mandan as a progressive pedestrian-oriented district using smart growth initiatives that are responsive to local vernacular design, community values, and adaptable to technological changes. 
b.  To improve image and character through investment, beautification, and heritage. 
c.  To encourage new mixed-use development, including commercial, residential and educational, to maintain a lively, attractive, and safe place to live, work and visit. 
(Code 1994, § 21-11-01; Ord. No. 963, § 2, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 1033, 1-29-2008) 
Sec. 105-5-2. - Construction and definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult cabaret entertainment means: 
(1)  Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in any premises where such exhibition, performance, or dance involves a person who performs in such clothing or sheds clothing to a point where the area below the top to the bottom of the areola of a female breast or any portion of pubic area, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals are covered by opaque material, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; 
(2)  Any exhibition, performance or dance which includes any of the following: 
a.  The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse; 
b.  Masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
c.  The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
d.  The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals, or the nipples of the female; or 
e.  Appearances, entertainment or performances of any type consisting of or containing any nude performer, or topless female dancer; or 
(3)  Any exhibition, performance or dance which is intended to sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the premises activity. This includes, but is not limited to, any such exhibition, performance or dance performed for, arranged with, or engaged in with, fewer than all members of the public on the premises at that time, with separate consideration paid, either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition or dance and which is commonly referred to as table dancing, couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing or straddle dancing. 
    Adult establishments or adult uses includes adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult companionship establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult motion picture rental, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors, adult steamroom/bathhouse/sauna facilities, adult companionship establishments, adult rap/conversation parlors, adult health/sport clubs, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios, and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, which are capable of being seen by members of the public. 
    Adult use - arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited, but from which minors are excluded by reason of age, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to one person per machine, located within individual viewing areas, cubicles or booths and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - body painting studio means an establishment or business which provides the service of applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - bookstore means a building or portion of a building used for the barter, rental or sale of items of printed matter, including publications, books, magazines, and other periodicals, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, CD, DVD, videotape or motion picture film, if such building or portion of a building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age or if such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - cabaret means a building or portion of a building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment or activity as defined in adult cabaret entertainment, if such building or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if such dancing, activity or other live entertainment is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - companionship establishment means a companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to conversation, talk, or discussion between an employee of the establishment and a customer or patron, if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - health/sport club means a health/sport club which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - hotel/motel means an adult hotel or motel from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - massage parlor, health club means a massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of age, and which provides the services of massage if such service is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building or portion of a building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting materials or motion pictures, if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such materials or motion pictures are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section, for observation by patrons of the theater. 
    Adult use - modeling studio means an establishment whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers or patrons and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers or patrons. 
    Adult use - motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled or operated still or motor picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, if such place as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or if the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - motion picture theater means an enclosed building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting materials or motion pictures, if such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or if such material or motion pictures are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons of the theater. 
    Adult use - novelty business means a business which has as a principal activity the sale of devices which stimulate human genitals or devices which are designated for sexual stimulation or the sale of sexually oriented devices. 
    Adult use - sauna means a sauna which excludes minors by reason of age or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of bathing, relaxing, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult use - steam room/bathhouse facility means a building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing, relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult uses - accessory means a use, business, or establishment having 20 percent or less of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to, or 30 percent or less of its gross receipts derived from, movie rentals, novelties or magazine sales, of which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult uses - principal means a use, business, or establishment: 
(1)  Having, as one of its principle business purposes, an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade or floor area allocated to the sale of materials, films, services or activities, of which there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Alcoholic beverage-licensed premises which offer adult cabaret entertainment shall be deemed an adult use - principal, regardless of allocated floor area, and shall comply with all of the requirements for an adult use - principal. 
    Massage means the manipulation of body muscle or tissue by rubbing, stroking, kneading, or tapping by hand or mechanical device. 
    Massage business means any establishment or business wherein massage is practiced, including establishments known as health clubs, physical culture studios, massage studios or massage parlors. 
    Nude performer or nude dancer means any person who performs or appears in attire such that any portion of the pubic area, anus vulva or genitals is exposed to view or not covered with an opaque material. 
    Sexually oriented devices means, without limitation, any artificial or simulated specified anatomical area or any other device or paraphernalia that is designed in whole or in part for specified sexual activities. 
    Specified anatomical areas means: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals and pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty. 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence. 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation. 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
(5)  Situations involving a person, any of whom are nude, clad in undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are engaged in activities involving the flagellation, torture, fettering, binding or other physical restraint of any such persons. 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being. 
(7)  Human erection, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
    Topless female performer or topless female dancer means any female who performs or appears in attire such that any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola is exposed to view or is not covered with an opaque material. 
(Code 1994, § 21-11-02; Ord. No. 963, § 3, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 1033, 1-29-2008) 
Sec. 105-5-3. - Adult uses. 
(a)  General provisions. Adult uses shall be subject to the following general provisions: 
(1)  Activities classified as obscene are not permitted and are prohibited. In no instance shall the application of or interpretation of this article be construed to allow an activity otherwise prohibited by state law or city ordinance. 
(2)  Adult uses, either principal or accessory, shall be prohibited from locating in any building which is also utilized for residential purposes. 
(3)  An adult use which does not qualify as an accessory use pursuant to this section shall be classified as an adult use - principal. 
(b)  Adult use - principal. 
(1)  Adult use - principal shall be a permitted use in the MB, MC and MD Industrial Districts, subject to the regulations, location and separation criteria outlined in this article. 
(2)  Adult use - principal shall be located at least 500 radial feet, as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the property line of the building in which the adult use- principal is located, to the property line of: 
a.  A zoning district in which residential uses are specifically listed as a permitted or conditional use. 
b.  A licensed day care center. 
c.  A public or private educational facility, classified as a kindergarten, elementary, junior high or senior high. 
d.  A public library. 
e.  A public park. 
f.  Any church or church related organization. 
g.  Another adult use - principal. 
(3)  No adult use - principal shall be located in the same building or upon the same property as another adult use - principal. 
(4)  No building, premises, structure or other facility in which sexually oriented devices, as defined in this chapter, are displayed or offered for sale shall contain any other kind of adult establishment or adult use. 
(5)  Adult use - principal shall adhere to the following signing regulations: 
a.  Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only identify the name of the business. 
b.  Signs shall comply with the requirements of size and number for the district in which they are located or as required by the building code. 
(c)  Adult use - accessory. Adult uses - accessory shall be permitted in all commercial districts, provided the accessory use conforms to the provisions of this subdivision. 
(1)  Adult use - accessory shall: 
a.  Comprise no more than 20 percent of the floor area of the establishment in which it is located. 
b.  Comprise no more than 30 percent of the gross receipts of the entire business operation. 
c.  Not involve or include any activity except the sale or rental of merchandise. 
d.  Not be located in any building or portion of a building in which an adult use, either principal or accessory, is located. 
(2)  Adult use - accessory shall be restricted from and prohibit access to minors by physical separation of such items from areas of general public access: 
a.  Movie rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from general view and the access of which shall be in clear view and under the control of persons responsible for operation. 
b.  Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as adult uses shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent display of any material other than the publication title. 
c.  Other uses. All other adult uses - accessory, such as adult use - novelty, shall comply with the intent of this section. 
(3)  Adult use - accessory shall be prohibited from both internal and external advertising and signing of adult materials and products. 
(Code 1994, § 21-11-03; Ord. No. 963, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 1033, 1-29-2008) 
Sec. 105-5-4. - Nonconforming adult uses. 
(a)  Any adult use lawfully operating prior to June 27, 2003, that is in violation of section 105-5-3(b)(2), shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed two years, unless sooner terminated for reason or voluntarily discontinued. In no instance shall a nonconforming use be allowed to structurally expand the use on the lot on which it is located when the use became a nonconforming use, or expand the adult use to include another lot on which the adult use was not located when it became nonconforming, or in any way be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. 
(b)  If the building in which a temporary nonconforming use is located is destroyed by any means to an extent of greater than 50 percent of its market value, or if the building in which the temporary nonconforming use is vacant for more than six months, an adult use shall not be re-established unless it is in conformance with this article. 
(c)  Any adult entertainment establishment or use which is either made nonconforming by this article or which is an existing nonconforming use shall be terminated within the time provided in subsection (a) of this section. However, such termination date may be extended upon approval by the board of an application filed with the city administrator within three months of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, requesting an extension to such amortization period. The board's decision on whether or not to approve any extension and the length of time of such period shall be based upon the applicant clearly demonstrating extreme economic hardship based upon an irreversible financial investment or commitment made prior to June 3, 2003, which precludes reasonable alternative uses of the subject property. The applicant shall also include the request for an extension an amortization schedule demonstrating the financial investment and time period being requested. 
(d)  An adult establishment business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered nonconforming by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of an adult entertainment license, of a use listed in section 105-5-3(b)(2) within 500 feet of the adult establishment. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application is made for a license after the applicant's previous license has expired or been revoked. 
(Code 1994, § 21-11-04; Ord. No. 963, § 5, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 1033, 1-29-2008) 
Sec. 105-5-5. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this article related to adult uses is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to the penalties as prescribed under state law. 
(b)  Any violation of this article related to adult uses shall be a basis for the suspension or revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the property or building in or on which the adult use is located. In the event the board proposes to revoke or suspend a certificate of occupancy, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the basis for such proposed suspension or revocation. The board shall hold a hearing for the purpose of determining whether to revoke or suspend the certificate of occupancy, which hearing shall be within 30 days of the date of the notice. 
(c)  The board shall determine whether to revoke or suspend a certificate of occupancy within 30 days after the close of the hearing or within 60 days of the date of the notice, whichever is sooner, and shall notify the property owner of its decision within that period. 
(Code 1994, § 21-11-05; Ord. No. 963, § 6, 6-17-2003; Ord. No. 1033, 1-29-2008) 
Chapter 107 - DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 107-1-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agricultural land use means the use of land for planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting crops for human or livestock consumption and pasturing or yarding of livestock. 
    Applicant means any person wishing to obtain a building permit, special use permit, zoning or subdivision approval. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (i.e., 100-year flood). The term "base flood" is also referred to as the regional flood. 
    City engineer means the city engineer of the City of Mandan or authorized agent. 
    Control measure means a practice or combination of practices to control erosion and attendant pollution. 
    Conveyance structure means a pipe, open channel or other facility that transports runoff from one location to another. 
    County commission means Morton County or the Board of County Commissioner of Morton County. 
    County engineer means the county engineer of Morton County or authorized agent. 
    Detention facility means a natural or manmade structure, including wetlands, for the temporary storage of runoff which may contain a pool of water, or may be dry during times of no runoff. 
    Developer means a person, firm, corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, federal or state agency, or political subdivision thereof engaged in a land disturbance and/or land development activity. 
    Development properties means lands and properties located within an approved stormwater management permit boundary. 
    E.P.A. means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Erosion means any process that wears away at the surface of the land by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. Erosion can be accelerated by the activities of man and nature. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan means a written description of the number, locations, sizes and other pertinent information about best management practice methods designed to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
    Extraterritorial jurisdiction means the territorial authority of the city, which may extend to all unincorporated land located within four miles of the corporate limits of the city, as authorized by the North Dakota Century Code. 
    Flood fringe means that portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway. 
    Floodplain means the areas adjoining a watercourse or water basin that have been or may be covered by a regional or base flood. 
    Floodplain management means the regulation of the nature and location of construction on, or other occupancy of, lands subject to inundation by floodwaters, so that foreseeable (probable) flooding damages will have an average annual risk smaller than some pre-selected amount. Floodplain management consists of technical and non-technical studies, policies, management strategies, statutes and ordinances that collectively manage floodplains along rivers, streams, major drainageways, outfalls or other conveyances. The federal government normally plays a major role in floodplain planning and management, whereas in urban stormwater management and design, local governments dominate the decision-making process. 
    Floodway means the channel of the watercourse, the bed of water basins, and those portions of the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and discharge and provide water storage during a regional or base flood. 
    Hydric soils means soils that are saturated, flooded or covered by water long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic conditions in the upper part of the soil profile. 
    Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plant life growing in water, soil or on a substrate that is at least periodically deficient in oxygen as a result of excessive water content. 
    Impervious area means impermeable surfaces, such as pavement or rooftops, which prevent the infiltration of water into the soil. 
    Land development activity means the construction or demolition of buildings, roads, parking lots, paved storage areas, and similar facilities. 
    Land disturbing activity means any manmade change of the land surface, including removing vegetative cover, excavating, filling and grading, but not including agricultural land uses, such as planting, growing, cultivating and harvesting of crops; growing and tending of gardens; and harvesting trees. 
    Land user means any person operating, leasing, renting, or having made other arrangements with a landowner by which the landowner authorizes use of his land. 
    Landowner means any person holding title to, or having an interest in, land. 
    Local detention means detention provided to serve only the developing area in question and no areas outside of the development boundaries. The term "local detention" is also known as on-site detention. 
    Local drainage system means the storm drainage system which transports the minor and major stormwater runoff to the major stormwater system, serving only the property within the development boundaries. The term "local drainage system" is also known as the on-site drainage system. 
    Major stormwater system means the portion of the total stormwater system that collects, stores, and conveys runoff that exceeds the capacity of the minor system. The major drainageways are readily recognizable natural or improved channels that convey runoff that exceeds the capacity of the minor drainage system, including emergency overflow facilities. It transports the minor and major stormwater runoff and serves more than the area within the development boundaries. The major system is usually less controlled than the minor system and will function regardless of whether or not it has been deliberately designed and/or protected from encroachment, including when the minor system is blocked or otherwise inoperable. The major stormwater system is usually evaluated for the 100-year runoff event. 
    Management practice means a practice or combination of practices to control erosion and water quality degradation. 
    Minor stormwater system means the portion of the total drainage system that collects, stores and conveys frequently occurring runoff, and provides a relief from nuisance and inconvenience. This system has traditionally been carefully planned and constructed, and normally represents the major portion of the urban drainage infrastructure investment. Minor systems include roof gutters and on-site drainage swales, curbed or side swaled streets, stormwater inlets, underground storm sewers, open channels and street culverts. Generally, the minor stormwater system is designed to accommodate the minor, or ordinary, storm recurring at regular intervals, generally from two to ten years. 
    Multiple-purpose facility means an urban stormwater facility that fulfills multiple functions, such as enhancement of runoff quality, erosion control, wildlife habitat or public recreation, in addition to its primary purpose of conveying or controlling runoff. 
    National pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit means any permit or requirement, enforced by the North Dakota State Department of Health, pursuant to the Clean Water Act, as amended, for the purposes of regulating stormwater discharge. 
    On-site detention means detention provided to serve only the developing area in question and no areas outside of the development boundaries. The term "on-site detention" is also referred to as local detention. 
    Outfall facility means any channel, storm sewer or other conveyance receiving water into which a storm drain or storm drainage system discharges. 
    Outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    Owner or occupant means any person owning or using a lot, parcel of land, or premises, and who pays for, and is legally responsible for, the payment of stormwater rates or charges made against the lot, parcel of land, building or premises, if connected to the stormwater system, or who would pay or be legally responsible for such payment. 
    Permanent development means any buildings, structures, landscaping and related features constructed as part of a development project approved under a stormwater permit. 
    Permanent facilities means those features of a stormwater management plan which are part of any natural or constructed stormwater system that require periodic or minimal maintenance to retain their operational capabilities. The term "permanent facilities" includes, but is not limited to, storm sewers, infiltration areas, detention areas, channels, streets, etc. 
    Permittee means any person who applies for and receives a stormwater permit from the city. 
    Private drainage channel means a drainage channel on privately owned land or easements. 
    Private storm sewer means a storm sewer on privately owned land or easements. 
    Public drainage channel means a drainage channel located entirely within a naturally occurring or constructed watercourse on publicly owned land or easements. 
    Public storm sewer means a storm sewer located entirely within publicly owned land or easements. 
    Regional detention means detention facilities provided to serve an area outside the development boundaries. A regional detention site generally receives runoff from multiple stormwater sources. 
    Regional flood means a flood that is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the state and characteristic of what can be expected to occur on an average frequency in the magnitude of a 100-year recurrence interval. The term "regional flood" is also referred to as the base flood. 
    Retention facility means a natural or manmade structure that provides for the storage of stormwater runoff by means of a pool of water. 
    Runoff means the rainfall, snowmelt, dewatering or irrigation water over the ground surface and into open channels, underground storm sewers, and detention or retention ponds. 
    Rural area means land outside of a defined city or town which is not associated with, or part of, a city or town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
    Sediment means solid material or organic material that is being transported or has been moved by air, water, gravity, or ice, and deposited at another location. 
    Site means the entire area included in the legal description of the parcel or other land division on which the land development or land disturbing activity is proposed in the permit application. 
    Stabilize means to make the site steadfast or firm, minimizing soil movement by mulching and seeding, sodding, landscaping, concrete, gravel or other measures. 
    Storm sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying stormwaters, surface runoff, street and wash waters, and drainage, excluding sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater detention means temporary storage of stormwater runoff in ponds, parking lots, depressed grassy areas, roof tops, buried underground tanks, etc., for future or controlled release that is used to delay and attenuate flow. 
    Stormwater management means the planned set of public policies and activities undertaken to regulate runoff under various specified conditions within various portions of the drainage system. It may establish criteria for controlling peak flows or runoff volumes, for runoff detention and retention, or for pollution control, and may specify criteria for the relative elevations among various elements of the drainage system. Stormwater management is primarily concerned with limiting future flood damages and environmental impacts due to development, whereas flood control aims at reducing the extent of flooding that occurs under current conditions. 
    Stormwater management criteria means specific guidance provided to the engineer/designer to carry out drainage and stormwater management policies. An example might be the specification of local design hydrology, the design storm. 
    Stormwater management system means physical facilities that collect, store, convey and treat stormwater runoff in urban areas. These facilities normally include detention and retention facilities, streets, storm sewers, inlets, open channels and special structures, such as inlets, manholes and energy dissipaters. 
    Stormwater retention means storage designed to eliminate subsequent surface discharge. Wet ponds are the most common type of retention storage, though wet ponds may also be used for detention storage. 
    Structure means anything manufactured, constructed or erected, including portable structures, earthen structures, roads, parking lots and paved storage areas. 
    Unpolluted water means any water of quality equal to, or better than, the effluent criteria in effect. Water that would not cause a violation of receiving water quality standards and would not benefit by discharge into a sanitary sewer and wastewater treatment facilities is considered unpolluted. 
    Urban area means land associated with, or part of, a defined city or town. This chapter applies to urban or urbanizing, rather than rural, areas. 
    User means any person who discharges, causes or permits the discharge of stormwater into the city's stormwater management system. 
    User fee means a fee levied on users of a stormwater management system for the user's proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement, of such works. 
    Watershed master plan means the plan that an engineer/designer formulates to manage urban stormwater runoff for a particular project or drainage area. It typically addresses such subjects as characterization of the site development and grading plan; peak rates of runoff, flow duration, runoff volumes for various return frequencies; locations, criteria and sizes of detention or retention ponds and conveyances; runoff control features; land parcels, easement locations, opinions of probable costs, measures to enhance runoff quality, salient regulations, and how the plan addresses them, and consistency with secondary objectives, such as public recreation, aesthetics, public safety, and groundwater recharge. It is usually submitted to regulatory officials for their review for adoption. 
    Wetlands means lands transitional between terrestrial and aquatic systems where the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by shallow water. For purposes of this chapter, wetlands must have the following three attributes: 
(1)  A predominance of hydric soils; 
(2)  Are inundated or saturated by the surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of hydrophytic vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions; and 
(3)  Under normal circumstances, support the prevalence of such vegetation. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-01-02; Ord. No. 1005, § 2, 2006) 
Sec. 107-1-2. - Purpose and policy. 
    This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for stormwater management systems within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. It is the intent of the board of city commissioners that the requirements and standards contained in this chapter comply with all applicable state and federal laws. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of an erosion control, shoreland protection, floodplain ordinance or other regulations adopted by the city, county, state or federal authorities, the more restrictive standard prevails. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To promote, preserve and enhance the natural resources within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction; 
(2)  To protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the people and property through effective stormwater management practices; 
(3)  To protect the city's natural resources from adverse impacts occasioned by development or other activities; 
(4)  To regulate land development, land disturbing or other activities that may have an adverse and potentially irreversible impact on water quality and environmentally sensitive lands; 
(5)  To minimize conflicts and encourage compatibility between land disturbing and development activities and environmentally sensitive issues (i.e., land, water, habitat, etc.); 
(6)  To require detailed review standards and procedures for land development activities proposed throughout the city, and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, thereby achieving a balance between growth and development, and the protection of water quality; and 
(7)  To provide for adequate stormwater system analysis and appropriate stormwater system design as necessary to protect public and private property, water quality, and existing natural resources. This chapter establishes and provides for the following stormwater management criteria: 
a.  The regulation of development through the issuance of stormwater permits and through the enforcement of general stormwater drainage requirements throughout the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. It also authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities and provides for the setting of applicable fees for the equitable distribution of costs associated with the administration of the stormwater management program established in this chapter. 
b.  The regulation of, and the establishment of criteria for, public underground storm sewers, artificial and natural open channel, drainage systems, stormwater detention and retention ponds, and private stormwater drainage systems discharging into the public system. 
c.  The regulation of development activities as they relate to managing stormwater volumes, rates of runoff, flow duration, and their subsequent impacts to downstream property and stormwater management facilities. 
d.  Provides for a stormwater management system user charge and the method for calculating charges for each user classification. Procedures for rate adjustments and annual review criteria are established. 
e.  Imposes penalties for violating the provisions of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this chapter. 
f.  Applies in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city stormwater management system. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the city engineer shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-01-01; Ord. No. 1005, § 2, 2006) 
Sec. 107-1-3. - Scope. 
(a)  Every applicant for a building permit, subdivision approval or a permit to allow land disturbing activities must submit a stormwater management plan to the city engineer. No building permit, subdivision approval, or permit to allow land disturbing activities shall be issued until approval of the stormwater management plan or a waiver of the approval requirements has been obtained in strict conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Exemptions to the requirements of this section include: 
a.  Any part of a subdivision if a plat of the subdivision has been approved by the board of city commissioners and recorded with the recorder on or before the effective date of this chapter. A stormwater permit for land disturbing activities on such properties may still be required, however, in accordance with this chapter; 
b.  Land disturbing activity involving the construction of a single-family or a two-family dwelling; 
c.  A parcel for which a building permit has been approved on or before the effective date of this chapter; 
d.  Installation of a fence, sign, telephone, and electric poles and other kinds of posts or poles; or 
e.  Emergency work to protect life, limb or property. 
(c)  The city engineer may waive any requirement of this chapter upon making a finding that compliance with the requirement will involve an unnecessary hardship, and the waiver of such requirement will not adversely affect the standards and requirements put forth in article 3 of this chapter. The city engineer may require as a condition of the waiver, such dedication or construction, or agreement to dedicate or construct, as may be necessary to adequately meet the said standards and requirements. At the city engineer's discretion, a waiver request may, or at the request of a city commissioner a waiver request shall, be brought before the board of city commissioners for consideration, and approval or denial. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-01-03; Ord. No. 1005, § 2, 2006) 
ARTICLE 2. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 107-2-1. - Legal action. 
    If any person commences any land disturbing activities which result in increased stormwater quantity or stormwater quality degradation into the city stormwater management system, contrary to the provisions of this chapter, federal or state requirements or any order of the city, the city engineer, building official, code enforcement officer or other designated agent of the city may commence action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief. Actions available to the city include: 
(1)  Issuance of a citation into municipal court for a class B misdemeanor violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Action by the city to correct the problem and billing the property owner or assessing the property for the costs incurred by the city plus legal and administrative overhead. 
(3)  Action by the city to obtain an injunction and court order to cease and desist plus remediate the problem. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-06-05; Ord. No. 1005, § 7, 2006; Ord. No. 1230, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 107-2-2. - Order to remove. 
    The discharge of deposited or eroded materials onto public rights-of-way or public storm sewer systems within the city shall be considered an offense and may result in an order to remove such materials. Removal of such materials shall be at the property owner's expense, based on the properties from which they originated. The property owner shall be given three days after receiving the notice to remove the materials. If such materials are not removed, they may be removed under the city engineer's direction, and any associated costs shall be billed to the property owner. Failure to pay the bill within a specified period of time will result in the property being assessed. 
Sec. 107-2-3. - Penalty. 
    A violation of an order of the city made in accordance with this chapter, or any failure to comply with any provision of this chapter and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued under this article, is an offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-07-01; Ord. No. 1005, § 8, 2006; Ord. No. 1230, 1-5-2016) 
Sec. 107-2-4. - Costs of damage. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or who initiates an activity which causes a deposit, obstruction, or damage or other impairment to the city's stormwater management system is liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by the violation or the discharge. The city may bill the person violating this chapter the costs for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation of stormwater discharge. As long as the bill remains unpaid, the city may refuse to approve any plan or issue any permit for any project for which the person is a participant. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-07-02; Ord. No. 1005, § 8, 2006) 
Sec. 107-2-5. - City attorney's fees and costs. 
    In addition to the civil penalties provided in this article, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporter's fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate action against the person found to have violated this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permit issued under this article. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-07-03; Ord. No. 1005, § 8, 2006) 
Sec. 107-2-6. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any applicable record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or stormwater management permit, or who knowingly falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring devices or method required under this chapter, shall be charged with a class B misdemeanor. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-07-04; Ord. No. 1005, § 8, 2006; Ord. No. 1230, 1-5-2016) 
ARTICLE 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN 

Sec. 107-3-1. - Contents of stormwater management plan. 
    At a minimum, the stormwater management plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Existing site map. A map of existing site conditions showing the site and immediately adjacent areas, including: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant, the section, township and range, and north arrow, date and scale of drawing, and number of sheets; 
b.  The location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to clearly identify the location of the property and giving such information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads, railroads, utilities, subdivisions, towns, and districts or other defining landmarks; 
c.  Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the topography of the land, but in no case having a contour interval greater than two feet; 
d.  A watershed boundary map illustrating the project site location as a sub-watershed within the watershed of the larger or major drainage basin; 
e.  A delineation of streams, rivers, public waters and the presence or absence of wetlands located on and immediately adjacent to the site, including depth of water, a general description of vegetative cover found within the site, a statement of general water quality, and any classification given to the water body by state or federal agencies; 
f.  Location and dimensions of existing stormwater drain systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately adjacent to the site delineating in which direction and at what rate stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving stream, river, public ditch, or wetland, and setting forth those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater collects or passes; 
g.  A description of the soils on the site, including a map indicating soil types of the areas to be disturbed, containing information on the suitability of the soils for the type of development proposed, potential for erosion, the type of stormwater management system proposed, and any remedial steps to be taken by the developer to render the soils suitable; 
h.  Current extent of vegetative cover and a clear delineation of any vegetation proposed for removal; 
i.  The current land use of the area in which the site is located; and 
j.  The 100-year floodplains, flood fringes and floodways. 
(2)  Site construction plan. A site construction plan shall be provided, including: 
a.  Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing activities and any phasing or scheduling of those activities; 
b.  Approximate locations of all temporary soil or dirt stockpile areas; 
c.  Location and description of all construction site erosion control measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter; 
d.  A schedule of anticipated starting and completion dates for each land disturbing activity, including the installation of construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
e.  Provisions for maintaining the construction site erosion control measures prior to, during, and after construction. 
(3)  Plans of final site conditions. A plan of final site conditions on the same scale as the existing site map showing the proposed site changes shall be provided, including: 
a.  The proposed final grading plan shown at contours at the same interval as provided in subsections (1) and (2) of this section or as required to clearly indicate the relationship of the proposed changes to existing topography and remaining features; 
b.  A landscape plan, drawn to an appropriate scale, including dimensions and distances and the location, type, size and description of proposed landscape materials which will be added to the site as part of the development; 
c.  A drainage plan of the developed site delineating the direction and at what rate stormwater runoff will be conveyed from the site and setting forth the areas of the site where stormwater will be collected; 
d.  The proposed size, alignment, and intended use of any structures to be erected on the site; 
e.  A clear delineation and tabulation of all areas which shall be paved or surfaced, including a description of the surfacing material to be used; and 
f.  Any other information pertinent to the particular project which, in the opinion of the applicant, is necessary for the review of the project. 
(4)  Stormwater management plan report. A written report discussing pre- and post-development hydrology and hydraulic analysis, erosion and sedimentation control during and after construction, protective measures for proposed and existing structures and water quality concerns. The contents of the report shall be in accordance with the recommended format in the city's stormwater design standards manual (manual). 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-02-02; Ord. No. 1005, § 3, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-2. - Application. 
(a)  A written application for stormwater management plan approval, along with the proposed stormwater management plan, shall be filed with the city engineer. The application shall include a statement indicating the grounds upon which the approval is requested, that the proposed use is permitted in the underlying zoning district and adequate evidence showing the proposed use will conform to the standards set forth in this chapter. Prior to applying for approval of a stormwater management plan, it is recommended that the applicant have the stormwater management plan reviewed by the affected public agencies. 
(b)  Three sets of legible copies of the drawings and required information shall be submitted to the city engineer and shall be accompanied by a receipt from the city to document the payment of all required fees for processing and approval as set forth in section 107-3-3. Plans shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the site of the project and suitable for the review to be performed. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-02-01; Ord. No. 1005, § 3, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-3. - Fees. 
    All applications for stormwater management plan approval shall be accompanied by a processing and approval fee established by the city engineer and adopted by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-02-03; Ord. No. 1005, § 3, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-4. - Plan review process. 
(a)  Stormwater management plans meeting the requirements of this article shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and compliance with the standards of this article. The city engineer shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the stormwater management plan. If a particular stormwater management plan involves a complex application or has the potential for significant controversy, the city engineer or the applicant may bring the proposed stormwater management plan before the board of city commissioners for consideration and public comment. 
(b)  Any watershed having any portion located within the city limits or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall have any land disturbing activity regulated by the city and this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-03-01; Ord. No. 1005, § 4, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-5. - Duration of plan. 
    Approval of any plan submitted under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one year after the date of approval, unless construction has commenced in accordance with the plan. However, if, prior to the expiration of approval, the applicant makes a written request to the city engineer for an extension of time to commence construction, setting forth the reasons for the requested extension, the city engineer may grant one extension of not greater than one single year. Receipt of any request for an extension shall be acknowledged by the city engineer within 15 days. The city engineer shall make a decision on the extension within 30 days of receipt. Any plan may be revised in the same manner as originally approved. Any denied application may be resubmitted with additional information addressing the concerns contained within the denial. The resubmittal is subject to all applicable fees and shall be considered as a new application. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-03-02; Ord. No. 1005, § 4, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-6. - Conditions placed on approval. 
    A stormwater management plan may be approved, subject to compliance with conditions reasonable and necessary to ensure that the requirements contained in this chapter are met. Such conditions may, among other matters, including the size, kind or character of the proposed development, require the construction of structures, drainage facilities, storage basins and other facilities, require replacement of vegetation, establish required monitoring procedures, stage the work over time, require alteration of the site design to ensure buffering, require the acquisition of certain lands or easements, and require the conveyance to the city or other public entity of certain lands or interests therein. The city engineer may specify special requirements for specific watersheds within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The nature of these requirements will be subject to the unique environmental and natural resource environment of each sub-watershed. Approval of a plan shall bind the applicant to perform all of the conditions and requirements of the plan prior to any land disturbing activities. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-03-03; Ord. No. 1005, § 4, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-7. - Approval standards. 
(a)  This section describes approval standards against which proposed stormwater management plans will be measured. A stormwater management plan which fails to meet the standards contained in this section shall not be approved by the city engineer or the board of city commissioners. Other standards, such as state and federal standards, shall also apply. If two standards of different agencies conflict, the more restrictive standard shall apply. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any required permits from other governmental agencies having jurisdiction over the work to be performed. Typically, such agencies would include the county water resource district, county engineer's office, state water commission and state engineer's office, state department of transportation, state health department, state historical preservation officer, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and possibly others. In addition to this chapter, the applicant is responsible for adhering to the requirements of this Code, including all zoning regulations applicable to development projects and all regulations governing the subdivision of land. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-01; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-8. - Stormwater design standards manual. 
    The stormwater design standards manual (manual), as adopted and amended by the city, contains the principal standards and design criteria for developing an effective and acceptable stormwater management plan. The manual contains an overview of the city's stormwater management policy and design objectives, as well as a detailed discussion of the contents of stormwater management plans submitted to the city engineer for approval. The manual contains detailed criteria for hydrologic evaluations, the design of stormwater management system facility components, water quality protection standards, instructions for the development of an erosion and sedimentation control plan, and requirements for easements and rights-of-way. The manual also contains a discussion of operation and maintenance requirements, standard forms to be used and standard construction details adopted by the city. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-02; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-9. - Models; methodologies; computations. 
    Hydrologic models and design methodologies used to determine runoff conditions and to analyze stormwater management structures and facilities shall be approved in advance by the city engineer. All stormwater management plans, drawings, specifications and computations for stormwater management facilities submitted for review shall contain a validated seal and be signed by a professional engineer registered in the state. This requirement will be met as part of the properly completed stormwater management plan report, as described in the stormwater design standards manual. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-03; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-10. - Construction plans and specifications. 
(a)  The construction plans and specifications prepared for the construction of the stormwater management facilities must: 
(1)  Be consistent with the stormwater management plan approved by the city engineer. 
(2)  Be in conformance with the requirements of the City of Mandan Municipal Specifications and any other necessary permits issued by other governmental agencies. 
(3)  Be sealed and signed by a professional engineer registered in the state. 
(4)  Be submitted to the city engineer for approval. 
(b)  No construction may commence until approval of the construction plans and specifications has been received. 
(c)  The set of construction plans, in a format acceptable to the city engineer, shall contain a drawing delineating the erosion and sedimentation management plan, including details of silt fences, storm drain inlet protection and other construction erosion control facilities. The construction specifications shall contain technical specifications describing erosion, sedimentation, and water control requirements during and after construction operations. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-04; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-11. - Construction activities. 
    Construction operations must at a minimum comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Site dewatering. Water pumped from the site shall be treated by temporary sedimentation basins, grit chambers, sand filters, up flow chambers, hydro-cyclones, soil concentrators or other appropriate controls as deemed necessary. Water may not be discharged in a manner that causes erosion, sedimentation, or flooding on the site, the receiving channels or any wetland. 
(2)  Waste and material disposal. All waste and unused building materials, including garbage, debris, cleaning wastes, wastewater, toxic materials, or hazardous materials, shall be properly disposed of offsite and not allowed to be carried by runoff into a receiving channel, storm sewer system, or wetland. 
(3)  Tracking management. Each site shall have roads, access drives and parking areas of sufficient width, length and surfacing to prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any material reaching or placed on a public or private road shall be removed, not by flushing, before the end of each work day. 
(4)  Water quality protection. The construction contractor shall be required to control oil and fuel spills and the discharge of any chemicals to prevent such spills or discharges from entering any watercourse, sump, sewer system, water body, or wetland. 
(5)  Site erosion and sedimentation control. Construction operations must include erosion and sedimentation control measures meeting accepted design criteria, standards and specifications contained in the stormwater design standards manual. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-05; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-12. - Criteria for permanent facilities. 
    Stormwater control facilities included as part of the final design for a permanent development shall be addressed in the stormwater management plan and shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Pre-construction versus post-construction hydrological response of site. An applicant shall install or construct, on or for the proposed land disturbing or development activity, all stormwater management facilities necessary to manage increased runoff so that the two-year, ten-year and 100-year storm peak discharge rates existing before the proposed development shall not be increased, and accelerated channel erosion will not occur as a result of the proposed land disturbing or development activity. In lieu of the installation or construction of stormwater management facilities, an applicant may make an in-kind or monetary contribution for the development and maintenance of regional stormwater management facilities designed to serve multiple land disturbing and development activities undertaken by one or more persons, including the applicant. The city engineer shall establish this fee based upon an approved master plan and an analysis of drainage and flood protection benefits provided to property directly impacted by the regional stormwater management facilities. 
(2)  Natural features of the site. The applicant shall give consideration to reducing the need for stormwater management facilities by incorporating the use of natural topography and land cover, such as wetlands, ponds, natural swales and depressions as they exist before development to the degree that they can accommodate the additional flow of water without compromising the integrity or quality of these natural features. 
(3)  Stormwater management strategies. 
a.  The following stormwater management practices shall be investigated in developing a stormwater management plan: 
1.  Natural infiltration of precipitation and runoff on site, if suitable soil and geological conditions are available. The purpose of this strategy is to encourage the development of a stormwater management plan that encourages natural infiltration. This includes providing as much natural or vegetated area on the site as possible, minimizing impervious surfaces and directing runoff to vegetated areas rather than to adjoining streets, storm sewers and ditches. 
2.  The flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions. 
3.  Stormwater detention facilities. 
4.  Stormwater retention facilities, on a case-by-case basis. 
b.  A combination of successive practices may be used to achieve the applicable minimum control requirements specified in the four strategies in subsection (3)a. of this section. Justification shall be provided by the applicant for the method selected. 
(4)  Adequacy of outlets. The adequacy of any outlet, used as a discharge point for proposed stormwater management facilities, must be assessed and documented to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The hydraulic capacities of downstream natural channels, reaches, storm sewer systems or streets shall be sufficient to receive post-development runoff discharges and volumes without causing increased property damages or any increase in the established base floodplain elevation. If a floodplain or floodway has not been established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, then the applicant shall provide a documented analysis and estimate of the base flood elevation as certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. In addition, projected velocities in downstream natural or manmade channels shall not exceed that which is reasonably anticipated to cause erosion unless protective measures acceptable to the city engineer are approved and installed as part of the stormwater management plan. The assessment of outlet adequacy shall be included in the stormwater management plan and shall be certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. 
(5)  Stormwater detention/retention facilities. Stormwater detention or retention facilities proposed to be constructed in the stormwater management plan shall be designed according to the most current technology, as reflected in the stormwater design standards manual. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-06; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-13. - Operation, maintenance and inspection. 
    All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to minimize the need for maintenance, to provide access for maintenance purposes and to be structurally sound. All stormwater management facilities shall have a plan of operation and maintenance that ensures continued effective removal of pollutants carried in stormwater runoff. The city engineer may inspect all stormwater management facilities at any time. Inspection records will be kept on file at the city engineering department. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain any necessary easements or other property interests to allow access to the stormwater management facilities for inspection and maintenance purposes. The city engineer shall retain enforcement powers for assuring adequate operation and maintenance activities through permit conditions and penalties for noncompliance orders. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-07; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-14. - Easements and bonds. 
    Easements or performance bonds may be required as conditions to the issuance of a permit. Any required performance bond must equal 110 percent of the estimated project costs. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-08; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-15. - Management of site vegetation. 
    The applicant shall provide for the installation and maintenance of vegetation on development property in accordance with the following criteria: 
(1)  Use of impervious surfaces. No person shall apply fertilizer to or deposit grass clippings, leaves, or other vegetative materials on impervious surfaces, or within stormwater drainage systems with impervious liners or conduits. 
(2)  Unimproved land areas. Except for driveways, sidewalks, patios, areas occupied by structures or areas which have been improved, all areas shall be covered by plants or vegetative growth. 
(3)  Use of pervious surfaces. No person shall deposit grass clippings, leaves or other vegetative materials, with the exception of normal mowing or weed control, within natural or manmade drainageways, wetlands or within wetland buffer areas. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-09; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
Sec. 107-3-16. - Plan applicability. 
    A plan issued under this chapter runs with the land and is a condition of plat approval. Any owner or subsequent owner of any parcel within the plat must comply with the plan or any approval, revision or modification of the plan. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-04-10; Ord. No. 1005, § 5, 2006) 
ARTICLE 4. - LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 107-4-1. - Prohibited activities. 
    It is unlawful to initiate land development, land disturbing or other activities which result in an increase in stormwater quantities, degradation of stormwater quality or restriction of flow in any storm sewer system, open ditch or natural channel, stormwater easement, water body or wetland outlet within the jurisdiction of the city, without having first complied with the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-05-01; Ord. No. 1005, § 6, 2006) 
Sec. 107-4-2. - Permits. 
(a)  Mandatory permits. Any person proposing a development or project which involves land development, land disturbing, or other activities as defined in this chapter, shall obtain a stormwater management permit before initiating those activities. 
(b)  Permit application. All persons subject to meeting the requirements for a mandatory stormwater permit shall complete and file, with the city engineer, an application in the form prescribed by the city engineering department and accompanied by a fee established by the city engineer and adopted by the board of city commissioners. The permit application shall be accompanied by a stormwater management plan as prescribed under article 3 of this chapter. The city engineer will evaluate the data furnished as part of the stormwater management plan and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the stormwater management plan, the city engineer may issue a stormwater management permit, subject to any terms and conditions deemed necessary. 
(c)  Permit conditions. Stormwater management permits are issued subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The user fee for a stormwater outlet utilizing a regional stormwater management facility; 
(2)  Limits on the maximum rate of stormwater discharge; 
(3)  Limits on water quality degradation of stormwater discharge; 
(4)  Requirements for the ownership, installation, operation and maintenance of stormwater detention/retention facilities; 
(5)  Compliance schedule; 
(6)  Requirements for notification to and acceptance by the city engineer of any land disturbing activities which have the potential for increasing the rate of stormwater discharge resulting in degradation of stormwater quality; and 
(7)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city engineer to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Permit duration. Permits must be issued for a time period specified by the city engineer. The applicant shall apply for permit renewal a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the applicant's existing permit. The terms and conditions of a permit are subject to modification by the city engineer during the term of the permit as set forth in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Permit modification. 
(1)  Permits may be modified by the city engineer for just cause upon 30 days' notice. Just cause shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Promulgation of a new applicable nationwide permit standard; 
b.  Changes in the requirements of this chapter; 
c.  Changes in the process used by the permittee or changes in discharge rate, volume, or character; and 
d.  Changes in the design or capability of receiving stormwater facilities. 
(2)  The applicant must be informed of any proposed changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(f)  Permit amendments. Stormwater permits may be amended only by a written request submitted by the permittee to the city engineer. This request shall contain the reason for the change and documentation related to any additional impacts which may result from amendment approval. Amendment requests submitted prior to issuance of a stormwater permit shall be considered part of the original submittal. Amendment requests filed after permit approval shall be considered and reviewed under the same procedures and guidelines as used for the stormwater permit applications under this chapter. 
(g)  Permit transfer. A permit runs with the property it covers and is transferable to new owners in its entirety or by parcel, with each parcel being subject to the permit and any conditions which apply to that parcel. 
(h)  Monitoring facilities. The city engineer may require the applicant to provide and operate, at the applicant's expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of each stormwater facility component. Where at all possible, the monitoring facility shall be located on the property of the applicant, as opposed to on public rights-of-way. Ample room must be allowed for accurate flow measuring and sampling, and the facility shall be kept in a safe and proper operating condition. 
(i)  Inspection. The city engineer may inspect the stormwater management facilities of any permittee to determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter. A permittee shall allow the city engineer to enter upon the premises at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection, sampling or record examination. The city engineer shall be allowed to set up equipment on the permittee's premises as required for the purpose of collecting samples and flow recording. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-05-02; Ord. No. 1005, § 6, 2006) 
Sec. 107-4-3. - Final stormwater management plan. 
    Upon completion of all required construction activities, the permit applicant shall submit to the city engineer the final stormwater management plan to document any change to the original stormwater management concept. The final stormwater management plan shall contain record drawings showing the final configuration for all improvements as constructed. The final stormwater management plan and record drawings shall be certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-05-03; Ord. No. 1005, § 6, 2006) 
Sec. 107-4-4. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the city engineer finds that any person is not in compliance with the stormwater discharge permit and/or its conditions or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, the city engineer shall serve, either in person or by first class mail, a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, unless a shorter time frame is set by the city engineer due to the nature of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof must be submitted to the city engineer. The city engineer in a timely manner shall review the plan submitted and either approve or reject it. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-06-03; Ord. No. 1005, § 7, 2006) 
Sec. 107-4-5. - Emergency suspension of permits. 
(a)  The city engineer may, for cause, order the suspension of the stormwater management permit of a person or parcel owner when it appears to the city engineer that an actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons downstream, substantial danger to the environment, or a violation of any permit conditions imposed by this chapter. If any person is notified of the suspension of a stormwater management permit and/or a person fails to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city engineer shall commence whatever steps are necessary to obtain compliance, including judicial proceedings. If the violation is creating an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the city engineer may order an immediate stop to all work on site and arrange for a contractor hired by the city to effect emergency mitigation efforts. Any cost incurred by the city shall be billed to the owner of the property and assessed to the property if the bill is left unpaid. The city engineer may reinstate the stormwater management permit upon proof of compliance with all permit conditions. 
(b)  Whenever the city engineer orders the suspension of a stormwater management permit pursuant to the emergency provisions of this section, the city engineer shall serve notice on the permittee personally or by first class mail. The permittee has the right to an informal hearing before the city engineer upon request made in writing and filed with the city engineer. The informal hearing must be held within five days of the request. Following the hearing, the city engineer may affirm, modify or rescind the order. 
(c)  Any applicant dissatisfied with an order the city engineer issued pursuant to this section may request a hearing before the board of city commissioners by filing a written request for a hearing with the city engineer within 15 days of receipt of the order, who shall inform city administration. The hearing must be held within 30 days of receipt of the request or as subject to the current meeting schedule, whereupon the board of city commissioners may affirm, modify or rescind the order. A request for a hearing filed pursuant to this section does not stay the order while the hearing is pending. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-06-01; Ord. No. 1005, § 7, 2006) 
Sec. 107-4-6. - Revocation of permit. 
    A stormwater management permit may be revoked following notice and an opportunity for a hearing. The board of city commissioners may revoke a stormwater management permit for cause, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the stormwater management permit; 
(2)  False statements on any required reports; 
(3)  Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts; or 
(4)  Any other violation of this chapter or related ordinance. 
(Code 1994, § 14.1-06-02; Ord. No. 1005, § 7, 2006) 
Chapter 109 - LAND SUBDIVISION 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 109-1-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street. 
    Arterial street means a road intended to move through traffic to and from such major attractors as central business districts, regional shopping centers, colleges and universities, military installations, major industrial areas, and similar traffic generators within the city. The term "arterial street" also means a road intended as a route for traffic between communities or large areas. 
    Block means a tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines or waterways, or boundary lines of cities. 
    Capital improvements program means a proposed schedule of all future projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. All major projects requiring the expenditure of public funds, over and above the annual local government's operating expenses, for the purchase, construction, or replacement of the physical assets for the community, are included. 
    Central sewer system means a private or public sewer system to serve a community or fringe area which includes collection and treatment facilities approved by the city and state health department. 
    Central water system means a private or public water system to serve a community or fringe area which includes water treatment, storage and distribution facilities approved by the city and the state health department. 
    Collector street means a road intended to move traffic from local roads to secondary arterials. Collector streets are usually the principal entrance streets to residential development and the streets for circulation within the development. 
    Comprehensive plan means a long-range guide for the economic, physical and social development of a local government's jurisdiction which identifies local goals, objectives and opportunities and embodies the policies of the local government set forth in planning documents and ordinances adopted by the board. These plans and ordinances are identified by the resolution adopted by the board on November 21, 1978, and hereafter amended. 
    Corner lot means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the interior angle of such intersection not exceeding 110 degrees. 
    Cul-de-sac means a local street with only one outlet and having a circular turnaround and appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    Easement means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of his property. 
    Final plat means the map, plat or record of a subdivision and any accompanying material, as described in this chapter. 
    Local street means a road intended to provide access to other roads from individual properties and to provide right-of-way beneath it for public utilities. 
    Lot means a tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    Major subdivision means all subdivisions or resubdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions. 
    Master land use plan means a land use plan setting forth land use goals and policies for orderly development, adopted by the planning and zoning commission and board of city commissioners. 
    Master street plan means a street plan setting forth goals, policies and standards for orderly street development, adopted by the planning and zoning commission and board of city commissioners. 
    Master subdivision plan means an area plan indicating the general street layout, land use density, existing public improvements, proposals to develop streets and utilities and other such data as required by this chapter, submitted to the planning and zoning commission prior to, or simultaneously with, a preliminary plat. 
    Nonaccess reservation means a line controlling access to major streets or public rights-of-way designated on a final plat. 
    Owner means a person or any other legal entity having legal title to, or sufficient proprietary interest in, the land sought to be subdivided under this chapter. 
    Planning and zoning commission means the local government's commission, established in accordance with law and appointed by the board of city commissioners. 
    Preliminary plat means the preliminary drawings, described in this chapter, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning and zoning commission for approval. 
    Public improvement means any drainage structure, water line, sewer line, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, berm, boulevard, lawn, public off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility. 
    Registered land surveyor means a land surveyor properly licensed and registered in the state. 
    Resubdivision or replats means a change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat if the change affects any street layout on the map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line or if the change affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any regulations controlling subdivisions. 
    Road, dead-end, means a road or a portion of a street with only one vehicular traffic outlet. 
    Road right-of-way width means the distance between property lines, measured at right angles, to the centerline of the street. 
    Roads or streets means and includes streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, lanes, walks, alleys, viaducts, subways, tunnels, bridges, public easements and rights-of-way and other ways. 
    Sale or lease means any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any possessory interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise, intestate succession, or transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part, whether by metes and bounds, deed, contract, plat, map, lease, devise, intestate succession, or other written instrument. 
    Sketch plan means a sketch prepared prior to the submission of the preliminary plat to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the planning and zoning commission as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this chapter. 
    Street and subdivision naming plan means a plan identifying methodology, definitions and criteria for naming subdivisions and streets within the city's jurisdiction, adopted by both the planning and zoning commission and the board. 
    Street grade plan means a plan depicting street grade elevations at various points with the public right-of-way, according to standards established by the city engineer. 
    Subdivider means any person or group of persons who, directly or indirectly, causes land to be subdivided. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development, and any plat or plan which includes the creation of any part of one or more streets, public easements, or other rights-of-way, whether public or private, for access to or from such lots, and the creation of new or enlarged parks, playgrounds, plazas or open spaces. The division of land into parcels larger than 150 acres, not involving any new streets or easements for access or public utilities, shall be exempted from this chapter. Auditor plats (lots), government lots, outlots or other such lots are not considered subdivisions for the purpose of building development. 
    Subdivision grade plan means a plan depicting lot grade elevations at various points throughout the subdivision, as required by standards established by the city engineer. 
    Temporary improvement means a construction project that has been conditionally accepted by the city while the performance bond is in force. 
(Code 1957, § 14-04-04; Code 1994, § 21-09-03; Ord. No. 1192, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 109-1-2. - Requirements. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions of land, located within the corporate limits of the city and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, as determined by state law and the city's ordinances. 
(b)  No land shall be subdivided within the jurisdiction of the city until: 
(1)  The subdivider or his agent has met with the city planner and city engineer to discuss his land development plans. 
(2)  The subdivider has obtained approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission and the board. 
(3)  The final plat and related documents have been signed and recorded with the county recorder. 
(c)  No building permit, excavating permit, grading permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land which was created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in conformity with the provisions of, this chapter. No excavation of land or construction of any private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with this chapter. 
(d)  The planning and zoning commission is authorized and instructed to review and approve or disapprove all proposed subdivisions of land within the city and its adjacent territory. The planning and zoning commission is to be governed in its review of proposed subdivisions by the applicable state laws, city ordinances and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-0401-14-0403; Code 1994, § 21-09-01; Res. of 12-29-1981, §§ 6.1, 6.2) 
Sec. 109-1-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this chapter includes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(2)  To guide the orderly future growth and development of the city, and promote proper land use density. 
(3)  To provide for adequate light, air and privacy, and to secure safety from fire or flood. 
(4)  To protect the character, including social and economic ability, of all parts of the city, and to encourage the orderly, beneficial development of all parts of the city and its extraterritorial area. 
(5)  To protect and conserve the value of land and improvements throughout the city, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings. 
(6)  To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land, the circulation of traffic throughout the city having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways, pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines. 
(7)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land. 
(8)  To ensure orderly growth and orderly extension of both public and private services, such as streets, water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas, electrical and telephone services. The planning and zoning commission shall encourage the coordinated platting of adjacent small land parcels within the developed portion of the city. 
(b)  The following policies will be considered by the planning and zoning commission in its decisions relating to subdivision of land. 
(1)  The subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat shall be considered as part of the planning process for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the city and the extraterritorial jurisdictional area. 
(2)  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for public or private building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or other menace. Land shall not be subdivided until it can be demonstrated that adequate provision can be made for proper facilities and public improvements. 
(3)  The provisions of this chapter shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in the building and housing codes, zoning ordinances, comprehensive plan, official map and capital improvements program of the city. 
(4)  Consideration shall be given to the impact of property values, social and economic impacts on the city and the extraterritorial area. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to discourage the subdividing of lands that: 
a.  Are far in advance of the needs of the community; 
b.  By their locations, cannot be efficiently served by public utilities, fire protection, police protection, major streets, educational facilities or other municipal services; 
c.  Are located in an area subject to flooding or that are topographically unsuitable for development; or 
d.  For any other reason are being unwisely or prematurely subdivided. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-0403, 14-0405; Code 1994, § 21-09-02; Res. of 12-29-1981, §§ 1.2, 1.3) 
Sec. 109-1-4. - Duty to enforce; prohibited acts; enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city planner, city engineer and building inspector to enforce this chapter and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. 
(b)  No building permit, excavating permit, subdivision grading permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any lot or parcel of land in a proposed subdivision before a plat of such subdivision has been approved by the planning and zoning commission and the board and filed with the county recorder. 
(c)  No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to: 
(1)  Prevent any violation of these regulations; 
(2)  Prevent unlawful construction; 
(3)  Recover damages; 
(4)  Restrain, correct or abate a violation; or 
(5)  Prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. 
(Code 1994, § 21-09-19; Res. of 12-29-1981, § 6.9) 
Sec. 109-1-5. - Administrative rules and amendments. 
    The planning and zoning commission may adopt and amend rules and instructions for the administration of this chapter, in order to expedite approval of plats. The provisions of this chapter may be amended by the board of city commissioners, provided that public hearings on all proposed amendments shall be held by both the planning and zoning commission and the board in the manner provided by law. The provisions of this chapter, and any amendments thereto, shall be published and shall be recorded with the county recorder, as provided by law. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0415; Code 1994, § 21-09-20; Res. of 12-29-1981, § 6.5) 
Sec. 109-1-6. - Violations. 
    Any owner, or the agent of any owner, of land located within the territory of a subdivision who transfers, sells, agrees to sell or negotiates to sell any land by reference to, or exhibition of, a plat of a subdivision, or by any other use thereof, before such plat has been approved by the planning and zoning commission and governing body and recorded as approved in the office of the county recorder, shall be guilt of an offense. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalty. The city may enjoin such transfer, sale or agreement by an action for injunction. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0414; Code 1994, § 21-09-18) 
Sec. 109-1-7. - Variances. 
(a)  Generally. The planning and zoning commission and the board may find that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this chapter, and the purpose of this chapter may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal. It may approve variances which vary, modify or waive the provisions of this chapter so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance, modification or waiver shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter or of the master plan. In no event shall any variance, modification or waiver be more than a minimum easing of this chapter, nor shall it be in conflict with existing zoning laws. The planning and zoning commission and the board shall not approve variances unless the evidence presented in each specific case supports the following findings: 
(1)  Strict compliance with the requirements of this chapter would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, because of the particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical conditions of the specific property involved, or because of other conditions not caused by the action of the subdivider; 
(2)  The granting of the variance would not have the effect of reducing the traffic capacity of any major or secondary street; 
(3)  The granting of the variance would be beneficial to the public safety, health or welfare, and not injurious to other property located adjacent to the proposed modification; 
(4)  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not applicable generally to other property; and 
(5)  The variance is consistent with provisions of the zoning ordinance, comprehensive plan and proper development of the area. 
(b)  Variances permitted in large-scale developments. This chapter may be modified by the planning and zoning commission and the board in the case of a plan for a complete community or neighborhood unit, with a building and development program which, in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission and the board, provides and dedicates adequate public open spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, education, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which provides such covenants, financial guaranties, and other legal assurances that the plan will be followed and will be achieved. 
(c)  Conditions. In approving variances, the planning and zoning commission and the board may require such conditions that substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements modified or affected by the variance. 
(d)  Procedures. A petition for any such variance shall be submitted in writing by the subdivider, 21 days prior to the date that the matter will be considered by the planning and zoning commission. The petition shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The planning and zoning commission may approve, approve conditionally or deny the variance. Planning and zoning commission denial is final unless appealed to the board of adjustment. Any variance approved by the planning and zoning commission shall be forwarded to the board of city commissioners for its review at their next scheduled meeting. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-0411, 14-0412; Code 1994, § 21-09-16; Res. of 12-29-1981, §§ 6.7, 6.8) 
ARTICLE 2. - PLATTING 

Sec. 109-2-1. - Preliminary procedures. 
    Prior to submitting any application, the applicant shall meet informally with the city planner and city engineer concerning the relation of their property to existing conditions, future plans, community facilities, utilities and services. At this meeting, the applicant may present a proposed sketch plan depicting the general site layout of this property. The city planner and city engineer will determine if the proposed land division constitutes a major or minor subdivision. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0405; Code 1994, § 21-09-04; Res. of 12-29-1981, § III; Ord. No. 1281, § 1), 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 109-2-2. - Minor subdivision procedures. 
(a)  Minor subdivision criteria. 
(1)  Four acres or less. 
(2)  No new public rights-of-way. 
(3)  No revisions to existing water and sanitary sewer service connections. 
(4)  Creation of no more than two additional lots. 
(b)  Submittal requirements. 
(1)  Three papers and a PDF of the proposed plat. 
(2)  Completed application form. 
(3)  Processing and review fees. 
(c)  Review. 
(1)  City staff will review the submittal and respond in writing to the applicant. The applicant will make any required corrections and resubmit as necessary. 
(2)  Once city staff is satisfied with the submittal, the applicant will be notified to obtain signatures and submit the signed final plat. 
(3)  Once the signed final plat is received, staff will schedule the plat for action by the city commission. 
(4)  Should city staff determine that there is an issue with the proposed plat that should be reviewed and acted on by the planning and zoning commission, the request shall be submitted to the planning and zoning commission before being forwarded to the city commission. 
(d)  Recording. 
(1)  City staff will notify the applicant when favorable action has been taken by the city commission and all required city signatures have been affixed to the plat. 
(2)  The applicant shall pick up the plat from the city and record the plat along with any required documents with Morton County. 
(3)  Once the plat and documents have been recorded at the county, the applicant shall deliver evidence of same to the city. 
(4)  Should the applicant fail to record the plat within six months of city commission action, the action of the city commission is void and a new application will need to be filed. 
(e)  No excavating, grading or building permits shall be issued until all fees are paid and the plat is recorded. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0405; Code 1994, § 21-09-05; Res. of 12-29-1981, § 3.1; Ord. No. 1192, 11-18-2014) 
Sec. 109-2-3. - Major subdivision procedures. 
    There are two subcategories of major subdivision platting: 1) Masterplanned subdivisions and 2) Non-masterplanned subdivisions. Any property for which the applicant owns adjacent property, and it is reasonable to believe it will be developed in phases, is considered a masterplanned subdivision. That applicant shall be required to submit a masterplan for the entire area of ownership. 
(Code 1994, § 21-09-06; Res. of 12-29-1981, § 3.2; Ord. No. 1281, § 2), 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 109-2-4. - Masterplanned subdivision, preliminary plat and final plat procedures. 
(a)  Masterplanned subdivision procedures. 
(1)  The applicant shall provide a minimum of two paper copies and an electronic copy of the masterplan and such other documents as required under section 109-2-6(a) to the city. The city engineer and city planner shall schedule a meeting with the applicant to discuss the masterplan within 15 days of the submittal. 
(3)  Staff shall provide copies of the masterplan to the Mandan Park District, Mandan School District, Morton County planning, if in an extraterritorial zone, as well as all affected city departments, utility companies and other interested parties requesting review. 
(4)  The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the masterplan, the date of said hearing shall be a minimum of 30 days after such time as staff has determined that the masterplan has adequately addressed their questions and concerns. 
Staff shall send notice of the public hearing to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundary of the subject property. The notice sent shall state the name of the applicant, the proposed location of the subdivision, and the date, time, and location of the scheduled public hearing before planning and zoning commission. This notice requirement shall be considered to be met if reasonable effort is made to contact applicable property owners, even if some are inadvertently omitted from notification. 
The planning and zoning commission shall approve or deny the masterplan. If the masterplan is denied, the planning and zoning commission shall provide reasons, in writing, to the applicant, for the denial. The applicant may, at their option, withdraw the application or submit a revised masterplan that adequately addresses the reasons for denial. 
(b)  Preliminary plat procedures. 
(1)  The applicant shall apply in writing for preliminary plat approval, at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which the plat is to be considered, and shall pay the required fee as established by the board. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide a minimum of two paper copies and an electronic copy of the proposed preliminary plat and such other documents as required under section 109-2-6. 
(3)  The planning and zoning commission shall schedule a public hearing to review the preliminary plat application. 
(4)  Staff shall notify by mail at least 14 days prior to the hearing, all property owners within 500 feet of the boundary of the subject property. Said notice shall state the name of the applicant, the proposed location of the subdivision, and the date, time, and location of the scheduled public hearing before planning and zoning commission. This notice requirement shall be considered to be met if reasonable effort is made to contact applicable property owners, even if some are inadvertently omitted from notification. 
(5)  A minimum of 14 days prior to the preliminary plat hearing before planning and zoning commission, staff shall make public, via the city website, the subdivision application documents required under section 109-2-6. 
(6)  At the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall approve (with or without changes) or deny the preliminary plat. If the preliminary plat is approved, the plat shall be forwarded to the city commission for consideration in the form of a public hearing. If the preliminary plat is denied, the planning and zoning commission shall provide reasons, in writing, to the applicant, for the denial. At the option of the applicant, the applicant may revise and resubmit the preliminary plat for re-consideration by the planning and zoning commission or request that the preliminary plat be forwarded to the city commission for consideration. 
(7)  For any preliminary plat approved by the planning and zoning commission or any preliminary plat requested by the applicant to be sent to the city commission subsequent to said plat being denied by the planning and zoning commission, the city commission shall schedule a public hearing to consider the preliminary plat. The hearing before city commission shall take place no sooner than 21 days after the planning and zoning commission hearing for the preliminary plat. 
(8)  At least 14 days before the city commission hearing, staff shall send notices by mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundary of the subject property. Said notice shall state the name of the applicant, the proposed location of the subdivision, and the date, time, and location of the scheduled public hearing before the city commission. This notice requirement shall be considered to be met if reasonable effort is made to contact applicable property owners, even if some are inadvertently omitted from notification. 
(9)  A minimum of 14 days prior to the preliminary plat hearing before city commission, staff shall make public, via the city website, the subdivision application documents required under section 109-2-6. 
(10)  Any preliminary plat approved by the city commission shall be effective for a maximum period of 24 months. If the final plat has not been submitted within the 24-month period, the application will have expired. Any preliminary plat that is submitted after the expiration will be considered a new application, subject to applicable application fees. 
(c)  Final plat procedures. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit the final plat at least 30 days prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which the plat is to be considered, and shall pay the required fee as established by the board. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide a minimum of two paper copies and an electronic copy of the proposed final plat and such other documents as are required under section 109-2-6. 
(3)  Staff shall publish notice in the official city newspaper for two consecutive weeks prior to the meeting of the planning and zoning commission at which the final plat is considered. 
(4)  At least 14 days before the planning and zoning commission hearing, staff shall send notices by mail to all property owners within 500 feet of the boundary of the subject property. Said notice shall state the name of the applicant, the proposed location of the subdivision, and the date, time, and location of the scheduled public hearing before the planning and zoning commission. This notice requirement shall be considered to be met if reasonable effort is made to contact applicable property owners, even if some are inadvertently omitted from notification. 
(5)  A minimum of 14 days prior to the final plat hearing before planning and zoning commission, staff shall make public, via the city website, the subdivision application documents required under section 109-2-6. 
(6)  At the public hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions or denial of the final plat and the recommendation shall be forwarded to the city commission. 
(7)  The city commission shall take action on the final plat at the next regularly scheduled city commission meeting. The city commission shall approve, approve with conditions, deny or return the final plat to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration. Any further review of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission shall take place in the form of a public hearing and shall be noticed according to the provisions of this section (c)(3) through (5). The city commission shall only refer the plat back to planning and zoning commission if it finds there to be substantial additional information relating to the subdivision that was not presented to the planning and zoning commission. 
(8)  If the plat is approved by the city commission, a plat in recordable form shall be furnished to the county recorder within one year of the approval date. If the plat is not furnished to the county recorder within this timeframe, approval of the plat shall be considered void. 
(9)  The applicant shall also provide the digital files for all lot lines, easement boundaries, roadway rights-of-way, and other geographic features recorded on the final plat to city staff in a requested format. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0405; Code 1994, § 21-09-07; Res. of 12-29-1981, §§ 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3; Ord. No. 1281, § 3), 2-6-2018) 
Sec. 109-2-5. - Replats. 
(a)  The planning and zoning commission shall encourage the replatting of lands deemed to be unsatisfactorily subdivided and which are tax delinquent or are underdeveloped and which represent an obstacle to the orderly and efficient growth of the city. 
(b)  For the purpose of defining a subdivision, auditor plats created under the N.D.C.C. § 57-02-39, government lots and outlots are not recognized as platted subdivisions for building purposes. Prior to issuance of a building permit, these lots must be platted in conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Where lots in an existing subdivision are replatted to create additional lots, the following requirements regarding provision of potable water and sanitary sewer service shall apply. 
(1)  Where only a single potable water tap has been provided to the area where two lots are created, a second potable water tap shall be provided. 
a.  The tap shall be made by boring under any pavement that is less than five years old. 
b.  If pavement that is less than five years old must be removed in order to install the new tap, a pavement patch measuring at least 25 feet wide by the full extent of the lane or lanes where pavement was removed must be made once the new tap has been installed. 
c.  Standard width trenching and patching may be employed wherever the pavement is older than five years. 
d.  A pavement patch shall be warranted for two years. 
(2)  Where only a single sanitary sewer tap has been provided to the area where two lots are created and the applicant wishes to not install a second sanitary sewer tap, the existing tap shall be modified. 
a.  A Y and two-way cleanouts shall be installed on the existing sanitary sewer tap. 
1.  The Y and two-way cleanouts may be located either in the public right-of-way or on private property. 
2.  If the Y and two-way cleanouts are located on private property, a minimum three foot square public sanitary sewer easement shall be recorded around the Y and two-way cleanouts. 
b.  If the sewer tap does not line up with the new lot line, a private access and maintenance easement over one lot for the sewer tap for the other lot shall be recorded. The width of the easement shall be a minimum of twice as wide as the depth of the sewer tap. 
c.  A joint maintenance agreement shall be recorded for any portion of the sanitary sewer tap located within a private access and maintenance easement or any shared portion of the sewer tap that is privately owned. The language contained in the joint maintenance agreement shall be reviewed and approved by the city prior to recording. 
(3)  Where a new sanitary sewer tap will be installed, the requirements for installing a new potable water tap shall be followed. 
(4)  The city engineer may modify these requirements on a case by case basis. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0405; Code 1994, § 21-09-08; Res. of 12-29-1981, § 3.3; Ord. No. 1242, § 6, 12-20-2016) 
Sec. 109-2-6. - Plat specifications. 
(a)  Master subdivision plat. A master subdivision plat, encompassing the subdivider's parcel and the abutting 300 feet, shall contain the following: 
(1)  Proposed title and legal description. 
(2)  Vicinity map depicting one-mile radius of the proposed master plan area. 
(3)  Name and address of the property owner and surveyor. 
(4)  Numerical and graphical scale of one inch equals 200 feet or less, north arrow and date located all in the same vicinity on the map. 
(5)  Parcel, approximate acreage of each parcel, boundary lines in solid lines, and parcels within 300 feet shown in dashed lines indicating existing land use. 
(6)  Contours with a maximum contour interval of two feet or as generated by standard mapping practices. 
(7)  Proposed street configuration showing all existing street pavement and rights-of-way width. 
(8)  Zoning classification of the proposed subdivision and its adjacent tracts. 
(9)  When available from public records, location, type and size of all existing water mains, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, culverts, bridges, and other public and private utility structures within the tract. 
(10)  General location of all existing public and private facilities, such as buildings, cemeteries, schools, parks, utility stations and vegetative cover. 
(11)  Illustration or statement of how the area will be serviced with major utilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, gas and electric. 
(12)  Evidence that the Mandan Park District and Mandan School District have been advised of the development concerning their land needs. 
(b)  Preliminary plat. 
(1)  The preliminary plat shall contain the following: 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision in accordance with the city's subdivision naming policy. 
b.  Legal description of property. 
c.  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner and surveyor. 
d.  Numerical and graphical scale of one inch equals 200 feet or less, north arrow and date located all in the same vicinity on the plat. 
e.  Boundary line of proposed subdivision indicated by solid heavy line and block and lot lines indicated by less heavy lines. 
f.  Boundary lines of adjacent tracts, their owners and existing buildings within 100 feet of the proposed subdivision shown by dashed lines. 
g.  Lot and blocks numbered in numerical order. 
h.  Exact location of existing utilities and utility easements for water mains, fire hydrants, storm sewers, bridges, culverts, sanitary sewers, gas lines, telephone lines, electrical lines, cable television, utility substations; indicating pipe or line dimensions, sizes, grades, when necessary, and type of material when available. 
i.  Proposed zoning of the subdivision. 
j.  Approximate location of all proposed utility lines and rights-of-way. 
k.  Location, area and dimension of all existing and proposed land parcels to be dedicated for public use, other than streets. 
l.  When appropriate, names, locations, rights-of-way width, grades and pavement widths of all existing transportation systems. 
m.  Proposed preliminary street grades, as required by the city engineer, which should be submitted as a separate document after preliminary plat approval but before submission of the final plat. 
n.  Identification and location of existing vegetative cover, historical and cultural features. 
o.  Contours with a maximum interval of two feet; and in areas less than three percent grade, spot elevations shall be provided according to standard mapping practices. 
p.  Proposed preliminary subdivision grade plan depicting cuts and fills as required by the city engineer to be submitted after preliminary plat approval but before final plat submittal. 
q.  Location and dimension of existing building and encroachments. 
r.  Proposed street names in accordance with the city's street naming policy. 
s.  Location and elevation of lakes, rivers, creeks, indicating the approximate high and low water elevations and identification of area within the 100-year floodplain. 
t.  Vicinity map depicting one-mile radius of the parcel. 
(2)  If appropriate, the subdivider shall provide additional preliminary plat information within the extraterritorial jurisdiction as follows: 
a.  Soil report indicating suitability for septic tanks and building development. 
b.  Capability of solid waste disposal. 
c.  Plan to convert large residential lots, over 20,000 square feet, to average city size lots upon annexation. 
d.  Statement of available water supply acceptable under state health department regulations. 
e.  Assurance that the subdivision utility systems, including water, sewer, storm sewer and streets can be integrated into the city's system upon annexation and meet all standards. 
f.  Statement from the owner assuring maintenance of all constructed improvements. 
g.  Statement from the appropriate police and fire departments concerning the availability of services. 
(c)  Final plat. The final plat shall be submitted on good quality reproducible Mylar or linen on a sheet no larger than 25 inches by 13.5 inches, provided that when more than one sheet is required, there shall be filed an index sheet on Mylar or linen of the same dimensions showing the entire subdivision and giving block and lot numbers and street names. 
(1)  The final plat shall contain the following: 
a.  Title block with the name of subdivision, including underlying lots if replat, section, township, range and political subdivision and notation if within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
b.  Legal description of subdivision's external boundary by metes and bounds indicating section, township, range and political subdivision with point of beginning referenced to a recorded section or quarter section corner according to the North Dakota Recordation Act and corner number referenced as assigned by the county recorder; with all dimensions shown to the nearest hundredth of a foot. 
c.  A scale of one inch equals 100 feet or less and shall be shown numerically and graphically. 
d.  North arrow and date. 
e.  Boundary line of subdivision indicated by a solid line, block and lot lines in regressive solid lines, and abutting property lines within 100 feet shown as dotted lines labeling lots, blocks and subdivisions. 
f.  Final plat shall designate all the streets, alleys and public grounds and all outlots or fractional lots within or adjoining the subdivision, together with the names, widths, courses, boundaries and dimensions of all lots, blocks, streets, alleys, and public grounds. 
g.  All lots and blocks, however designated, shall be numbered in progressive numbers and their precise length and width shall be indicated. The streets, alleys or roads which divide or border the lots shall be shown on the final plat. 
h.  The plat shall depict monuments to be placed in all lot and block corners and at each change of direction in the boundary line of the subdivision. There shall be shown on the plat all survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon. The outside boundary lines of the plat shall be correctly designated on the plat and shall show bearings on all straight lines, or angles at all angle points, and central angle, radius and arc length for all curves. All distances shall be shown between all monuments as measured to the hundredth of a foot. All curved lines within the plat shall show central angles, radii and arc distances. If a curved line constitutes the line of more than one lot in any block of a plat, the central angle for that part of each lot on the curve shall be shown. Ditto marks shall not be used on the plat for any purposes. 
i.  In any instance where a river, stream, creek, lake or pond constitutes a boundary line of or within the plat, a survey line shall be shown with bearings or angles and distances between all angle points and their relation to a water line, and all distances measured on the survey line between lot lines shall be shown, and the survey line shall be shown as a dashed line. 
j.  Table indicating exact area in square footage and percentage of land in lots, blocks, streets and public land. 
k.  The outside boundary lines of the plat shall close by latitude and departure with an error not to exceed one foot in 10,000 feet. 
l.  All rivers, streams, creeks, lakes, ponds, swamps, and all public highways, streets and alleys laid out, opened or traveled, existing before the platting, shall be correctly located and plainly shown and designated on the plat. 
m.  All final drawings shall be of India ink and Leroy lettered on Mylar or linen or of an acceptable method to the secretary. The narrative and legal certificates shall be of an acceptable manuscript to the secretary. 
n.  The purpose of any easement shown on the plat must be clearly stated and defined and shall be confined to only those that deal with public utilities, and such drainage easements as deemed necessary for the orderly development of the land encompassed within the plat. Building setbacks shall be shown on the plat. All easements created or dedicated by such plat must be approved by the governing or jurisdictional body or its agent prior to recording the final plat. 
o.  Any such plat which includes lands abutting upon any lake or stream shall show a contour line denoting the present shoreline, water elevation and the date of survey. If any portion of a plat lies within the intermediate regional floodplain (100-year floodplain) or a river or stream, as designated by the North Dakota Water Commission and Federal Emergency Management Agency, the mean sea level elevation of the intermediate regional flood (100-year flood) shall be denoted on the plat by numerical figures. Topographic contours at a one-foot contour interval referenced to mean sea level shall be shown for the portion of the plat lying within said floodplain. All elevations shall be referenced to a durable benchmark described on the plat, together with its location and elevation to the nearest hundredth of a foot, which shall be given in mean sea level datum if such benchmark with known sea level datum is available within one-half of a mile or such longer distance as may be practicable. 
p.  Notarized certification by the owner of the land of the plat adoption. The instrument shall contain a full and accurate description of the land platted and set forth what part of land is dedicated, and also to whom, and for what purpose these parts are dedicated. The respective receiver shall provide a ratification of acceptance of the dedicated land. When subdivision lots are owned by more than one person the certificate shall indicate both the old and new legal description of each owner. 
q.  Certification by a registered surveyor that the plat is a correct representation of the survey, that all distances, bearings and angles are correct and all monuments are placed as shown, and that the subdivision, block and lot lines are correctly designated on the plat. 
r.  Proper form for approval of the planning and zoning commission, city engineer and acceptance of the board. 
s.  Title opinion covering the real property within the subdivision shall be submitted. 
(2)  If appropriate, the final plat application shall also be accompanied by the following information and/or certification: 
a.  Specific studies by a professional engineer will be conducted and minimum storm drainage facilities designed to accommodate runoff according to standards established by the city engineer and adopted by the city. 
b.  A preliminary subdivision grade plan shall be furnished to the city engineering office. This plan should indicate proposed lot grades plus or minus one foot, drainage easements and methods to control erosion during the development of the plat, as shown in section 109-3-1, and should be submitted after final plat approval by the board but before any building permits are issued. 
c.  A copy of finalized protective covenants and party wall agreements as will be recorded with the county recorder. 
d.  Street grades, as required by the city engineer, shall be submitted after the final plat is approved by the board but before signatures. 
(Code 1957, §§ 14-0408, 14-0409; Code 1994, § 21-09-11; Ord. No. 532, §§ 1, 2, 1976; Res. of 12-29-1981, § IV) 
Sec. 109-2-7. - Protective covenants. 
    Any proposed protective covenants that are to run with the land will be submitted with the final plat. These covenants may be shown upon the final plat, but if they are not so shown, they shall be submitted with the final plat in a form proper for recording and shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder at the same time the final plat is recorded. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0410; Code 1994, § 21-09-14) 
Sec. 109-2-8. - Conditions. 
    Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is a valid exercise of police power delegated by the state to the city. The subdivider or owner has the duty to comply with any conditions laid down by the board for design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the land so as to conform to the physical and economical development of the city and to the safety and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(Code 1994, § 21-09-15; Res. of 12-29-1981, § 6.6) 
Sec. 109-2-9. - Fees. 
    The subdivider shall pay to the secretary of the planning and zoning commission a fee to be determined from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0413; Code 1994, § 21-09-17; Ord. No. 532, § 3, 1976; Res. of 12-29-1981, § 6.10) 
ARTICLE 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS, REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES 

Sec. 109-3-1. - Guarantee of completion and maintenance of required improvements. 
(a)  Improvements. Public improvements, as required by the board, shall be made according to standard specifications or requirements established by the city engineer and approved by the board. 
(b)  Guarantee of completion; collateral in lieu of completion. Prior to construction of public improvements, the contractor shall post a corporate performance bond or certified check for the project amount with conditions substantially in accordance with the provisions of N.D.C.C. ch. 40-22, acceptable to the city attorney and approved by the board. The performance bond shall extend through the contract period and one year after final acceptance of the work by the board. The developer is responsible to ensure all contract work is completed and the city engineer shall determine if the quality of work is acceptable. 
(c)  Failure to complete improvements. In cases where a bond or suitable collateral has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms specified in the performance bond, the city may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default. 
(d)  Inspection of improvements. The subdivider shall provide for the inspection of required improvements during construction and ensure their satisfactory completion. The subdivider shall pay to the city an inspection fee as established by the board. If the city engineer finds, upon inspection, that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with this chapter, the subdivider shall be responsible for completing said improvements in the proper manner. Whenever costs of improvement are covered by suitable collateral or a bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be severely and jointly liable for completing said improvements. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0407; Code 1994, § 21-09-12; Res. of 12-29-1981, § 4.4) 
Sec. 109-3-2. - Design standards and required improvements. 
    The following standards shall be observed in preparing a subdivision plat within the city's jurisdiction. 
(1)  General improvement. 
a.  Compliance with the city's comprehensive plan and other applicable plans and policies is required of all subdivisions of land. 
b.  The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required. 
1.  The external boundaries of a subdivision, all block corners, end of all curves, all lot corners where there is a change in direction, shall be monumented by a durable ferromagnetic monument not less than 18 inches in length and not less than 0.5 inches in section dimension. Any monument or permanent evidence of the survey shall have inscribed thereon the registration number of the land surveyor making the survey. 
2.  All monuments shall be set in such a manner that they will not be disturbed by frost or normal maintenance activity within the subdivision. 
3.  No public or private improvements shall be placed on section or quarter corners unless reference corners are set from which the section or quarter corner can be relocated according to standard land surveying practices established by the North Dakota Survey and Corner Recordation Act and the North Dakota Society of Professional Land Surveyors. 
(2)  Lot improvement. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area for the zoning district, the planning and zoning commission may require that such lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve such potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and this chapter. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines, or radial to curving street lines, unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the front yard setback from both street exposures. 
(3)  Double frontage lots and access to lots. 
a.  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall be avoided, except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages created by topography, drainageways and railroad lines. 
b.  Access from major or secondary arterials. Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from a major or secondary street. Where driveway access from a major or secondary arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the planning and zoning commission may recommend that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazard on such street. Driveways shall be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on major or secondary arterials. 
(4)  Street grades. No building permits shall be issued until the street grades have been approved by the city engineer. 
(5)  Lot drainage. Drainage shall be designed according to the preliminary subdivision grade plan, as approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
(6)  Zoning screening. The planning and zoning commission may require a screening between residential and commercial or industrial lots. Suggestions for said screening methods shall be as follows: 
a.  Plantings intended to buffer adjacent land uses from unsuitable noise, odor, dust, glare and vibration as recommended by the city forester. 
b.  Fencing of material acceptable to both parties abutting the property line. 
c.  Earth berms which do not create drainage, erosion, utility or maintenance problems. 
d.  Nonaccess control lines. 
e.  Increased lot depth and yard setbacks. 
f.  Aesthetic controls on building material. 
(7)  Appropriate access. All lots shall abut a public street or be approved by the planning and zoning commission as part of a planned development with appropriate access provisions. 
(8)  Lot corner establishment. Wherever possible, lot corners shall not be closer than two feet. 
(9)  Residential lot size. 
a.  Within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, and where the waterworks and wastewater facilities of the city or other state health department systems are not available to the subdivision, residential lot sizes shall be determined based upon the soil limitations, as defined by the Soil Survey of Morton County, completed by the Soil Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture, as follows: 
Soil Limitations Minimum Width Minimum Lot Size Slight 100 feet 40,000 sq. ft. Moderate 150 feet 65,000 sq. ft. Severe 200 feet 85,000 sq. ft.  
b.  However, the lot area may be adjusted in size when the soil at the building site can be proven to be other than that shown in the Soil Survey, Morton County, United States Department of Agriculture. Proof of such different classification shall be furnished by a qualified soil scientist, who has taken soil samples on the site in question. The subdivider shall also submit a plan showing the conversion of large residential lots to normal residential lots, when city water and wastewater facilities become available. Industrial and commercial lot sizes shall be recommended by the planning and zoning commission based upon the proposed land use of each lot. Awareness of the proposed land use is necessary to determine potential impact in the extraterritorial area where improved streets and city water and sewer are not available. 
(10)  Roads. 
a.  Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing public street. 
b.  If possible, street grade plans submitted with the plat shall be used for road improvement design as approved by the city engineer. 
c.  All street names shall conform to the city's street naming plan. 
(11)  Blocks. 
a.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this shall be in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroad lines, waterways and unusual topography. 
b.  The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the city and type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 1,320 feet nor be less than 300 feet in length, unless a specific topographic or traffic condition warrants. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and collector streets shall not be less than 1,000 feet in length. 
c.  The planning and zoning commission may require the reservation of an easement through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed essential to provide access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. Blocks designed for industrial and commercial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the planning and zoning commission for prospective use. 
d.  A nonaccess control line may be required on lots abutting major or secondary arterial streets, railroad rights-of-way, parking lots, and other parcels which the planning and zoning commission deems need access protection. 
e.  Blocks and lots intended for business and industrial use should be specifically designated for such purpose with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities. 
(12)  Access to major arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed major arterial street, railroad right-of-way or drainageway, the planning and zoning commission may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
a.  The subdivision of lots places the rear lot line bordering the major arterial and the front lot line bordering a parallel local street. No access shall be provided from the major arterial and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
b.  A series of cul-de-sac, U-shaped streets or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the major arterial. 
c.  A marginal access or service road, separated from the major arterial by a planting or grass strip, at least ten feet wide and having access thereto at suitable points. The access road shall be platted and designed so as not to interfere with traffic flow on the intersecting arterial street. 
(13)  Construction of roads and dead-end roads. 
a.  Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, efficient provision of utilities and where such continuation is in accordance with the master street plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary easement may be required on the lots abutting the dead-end street for the purpose of a turnaround until said street continues intersecting with another street. The planning and zoning commission may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of these regulations. 
b.  Permanent dead-end roads. Where a road does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the planning and zoning commission for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the planning and zoning commission may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with construction standards and specifications. 
(14)  Design standards for roads. 
a.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the master street plan and other city standards and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions and to the proposed uses of land to be served thereby. 
b.  As shown on the master street plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
1.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing arterial and collector streets in surrounding areas; or 
2.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning and zoning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance of, or conformance to, existing streets impractical. 
c.  Minor streets shall be laid out so that their use by through-traffic is discouraged. 
d.  Nonaccess reservation controlling access to streets shall be permitted if approved by the planning and zoning commission and under control of the city. 
e.  Street right-of-way widths shall be dedicated as designated by the master street plan according to standards as follows: 
Classification Right-of-Way Width Arterials 100 feet Collectors 80 feet to 100 feet Local road 66 feet to 80 feet Cul-de-sac 120 feet diameter Alley 20 feet  
f.  The cul-de-sac shall not extend 500 feet in length for a permanent dead-end street. Maximum length of a temporary dead-end street shall not exceed 1,000 feet. 
g.  No street grade shall be less than 0.3 percent. 
h.  The platting of half-streets shall be prohibited except where the planning and zoning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Whenever there exists a half-street adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half shall be platted within such tract. 
i.  Dead-end alleys shall be prohibited. 
(15)  Intersections. 
a.  Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than 200 feet shall be discouraged. 
b.  Intersecting streets shall be laid out as close to right angles as possible, and no such angle of the intersection shall be less than 70 degrees. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. 
c.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade, wherever practical. 
d.  Where any street intersection will involve earth banks, existing vegetation or manmade barriers inside any lot corner that may create a traffic hazard, these objects shall be removed to provide adequate sight distance as required by the city. 
(16)  Storm drainage. 
a.  An adequate drainage system shall include all necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersection drains, drop inlets and bridges, for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow and they shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadways and required slopes. 
b.  Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within the road right-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road lines and with satisfactory access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. 
c.  If recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved by the board, the subdivider shall obtain storm drainage easements from the affected property owners submitted separately or as part of the final plat. 
d.  Area lying within a designated floodway shall be preserved and retained as a drainageway. Such land shall not be computed in determining the number of lots for average density. 
e.  All subdivisions within the 100-year floodplain and public improvements therein shall be consistent with the city's floodplain ordinance. 
(17)  Soil erosion control. In all zoning districts, the following regulations shall apply: 
a.  Before any developer or other person changes or alters the contour of any land proposed to be subdivided, developed or changed in use by grading, excavating or the removal of natural topsoil, trees, or other vegetation thereon, he shall submit to the city engineer a plan to control erosion and sedimentation which can be expected to occur if appropriate precautions are not taken to arrest such waste and soil depletion. No such grading, excavating or removal of trees and related vegetation shall be undertaken until a permit for such work shall have been issued by the city engineer. 
b.  The city engineer shall review the erosion control plans as submitted, make suggestions and changes necessary to reasonably control soil erosion, and shall take the necessary steps to ensure compliance by the developer with the erosion control plans as finally approved. Erosion and sedimentation control shall be exercised throughout the time of excavation, land fill, and construction. No such work shall be given final approval until after appropriate seeding, sodding, plantings, mulching or other appropriate erosion-control measures have been taken. Approval of plans by the city engineer shall not make the city or its officers, employees or agents liable for any damages to any person or property that may arise out of such soil erosion-control measures. 
c.  The city engineer is granted authority to require the posting of a performance bond and a liability insurance policy by any person who desires to change the contour of the land. Such bond shall be in the amount as the city engineer reasonably expects the cost would be to the city to enter upon the property for the purpose of completing the work or correcting improper work where such developer or other person has failed to satisfactorily control either erosion or sedimentation. The city engineer shall also require the developer to secure personal injury and property damage liability insurance in such amounts as the city engineer may deem sufficient to protect the city, its officers, employees and agents against any claim arising out of such work. 
d.  The following soil-control measures shall be observed during development of property or when changing the contour of the land: 
1.  The smallest practical area of land will be exposed at any time during development. 
2.  When land is exposed during development, the exposure will be kept to the shortest practical period of time. 
3.  Where necessary, temporary vegetation or mulching will be used to protect areas exposed during development. 
4.  Where necessary, sediment basins will be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development or substantial change of grade. 
5.  Provisions will be made to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
6.  Permanent final vegetation and structural development will be installed as soon as practical in the development. 
7.  The development plan will be adapted to the topography and soil so as to create the least erosion potential. 
8.  Wherever feasible, trees, shrubs and natural vegetation will be retained and protected to control erosion. 
(18)  Water and sewerage facilities. 
a.  Within the city limits, the developer shall show evidence of potable water to each subdivision lot, in accordance with specifications established by the state health department and in cases when city water supply is not available, wells should comply with well driller standards. 
b.  Within the city limits, the developer shall provide sanitary sewer facilities, in accordance with the standards and specifications established by the city and state health department. 
c.  Within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the placement of all individual septic systems and wells shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications established by the city, state health department and well driller standards. 
(19)  Pedestrian walkway easements. Pedestrian walkway easements with a right-of-way of not less than ten feet in width shall be required where deemed essential to provide access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities as shall be determined by the city. 
(20)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpavement right-of-way of all roads and constructed in accordance with standards and specifications of the city. 
(21)  Easements. 
a.  All new utility facilities, including, but not limited to, gas, electric power, telephone and cable television, shall, whenever practical, be located underground throughout the subdivision. Whenever possible, all existing utilities shall be removed and placed underground. 
b.  Easements free and clear of surface obstacles shall be provided for private and public utilities on side and rear lot lines. The easements may be centered or offset on property lines. If centered, the easement width shall be at least 14 feet and, if offset, shall be at least ten feet for electrical power, gas, telephone and cable television. Proper coordination shall be established between the subdivider and applicable utility company in locating existing and establishing new utility easements. Easements shall be indicated on the final plat. 
c.  Easements for storm sewer, sanitary sewer and water mains shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width. 
d.  Utility companies are encouraged to provide to the city a copy of all easements negotiated separately from the plat which may affect the city. 
(22)  Parks. 
a.  The purpose of this subsection is to provide equitable and effective standards for parks, playgrounds and recreational areas in residential subdivisions throughout the city or in areas which are rezoned residential increasing the density. To aid the planning and zoning commission in this endeavor, the Mandan Park District shall generate a master plan within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction identifying the specific locations and areas it deems necessary to adequately serve the needs of the citizens of the city. A current copy of this plan is to be provided to the planning and zoning commission for its use. 
b.  The fee per dwelling unit shall be established by resolution of the board. 
c.  The dwelling unit fee shall be paid before the building permit is issued by either the subdivider or the party requesting the building permit. The fees shall be placed in a special fund to be used for park land acquisition or development. 
d.  When a parcel of land or part has been designated in the master plan, and prior to the approval of the final plat by the planning and zoning commission, the property owner shall make that designated parcel of land available for sale to the Mandan Park District at its present market value within the area. If the subdivider or owner desires to grant to the park district any property, including designated property, the park district may accept or reject the offer, which will have no consequences or effect on this chapter. 
e.  Any proposed plat of a planned unit development residential area, or any petition for rezoning from an existing classification to a planned unit development, shall be submitted to the park board, which shall have a reasonable opportunity to review the same and submit to the planning and zoning commission their recommendations regarding such project. The planning and zoning commission shall consider the recommendations of the park board and shall determine whether the owners or developers of the planned unit development shall privately provide and maintain the proposed parks, playgrounds, or recreational areas. The planning and zoning commission may consider any other reasonable recommendations submitted by the park board. 
(Code 1957, § 14-0406; Code 1994, § 21-09-13; Res. of 12-29-1981, § V; Ord. No. 902, § 3(22 (a)), 10-21-2003) 
ARTICLE 4. - STREET NAMING AND VACATION 

Sec. 109-4-1. - Vacation of streets. 
    The vacating of any street or alley within the city shall proceed as prescribed by state statute, and upon the vacating of any street or alley, the city administrator shall cause notice thereof to be given to the city planner, city engineer, city assessor and the public works director. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-24; Code 1994, § 10-03-07) 
Sec. 109-4-2. - Responsibility for street naming. 
    The streets and avenues of the city shall be named by the building official in coordination with the county. 
(Code 1979, § 8-04-01; Code 1994, § 10-09-01) 
Sec. 109-4-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Avenue means a public way that extends in a general north and south direction. 
    Base lines means the imaginary lines dividing the city into four quadrants and providing a point of origin for the grid system of naming streets and avenues, i.e., Main Street and Collins Avenue. 
    Bend means a southwest or northeast winding, irregular public way that does not lend itself to any other definition. 
    Circle means a public way that extends in a general north or south circular direction. 
    Court means a short public way that terminates in an east or west cul-de-sac. 
    Designating official means the city employee authorized by the board of city commissioners to perform the duties as prescribed in this article. 
    Drive means a public way that extends in a general southwest or northeast diagonal direction. 
    Lane means a short public way that terminates in a north or south dead end. 
    Loop means a public way that extends in a general east or west circular direction. 
    Official map means the map used by the designating official in assigning numbers to streets and avenues which illustrates the grid system. 
    Place means a short public way that terminates in a north or south cul-de-sac. 
    Public way means a public thoroughfare which affords principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Road means a public way that extends in a general southeast or northwest diagonal direction. 
    Street means a public way that extends in a general east and west direction. 
    Trail means a southeast or northwest winding irregular public way that does not lend itself to any other definition. 
    Way means a short public way that terminates in an east or west dead end. 
(Code 1979, § 8-04-02; Code 1994, § 10-09-02) 
Sec. 109-4-4. - Quadrants established. 
    For the purpose of establishing the city into zones, a suggestive quadrant shall be used in numbering streets and avenues, using Collins Avenue and any projections thereof as one base line and Main Street and any projections thereof as the other base line. 
(1)  Main Street east of the centerline of Collins Avenue shall have east (E) added to its name, and that portion of Main Street lying west of the centerline of Collins Avenue shall have west (W) added to its name. 
(2)  All streets and avenues lying east of Collins Avenue and north of Main Street shall have northeast (NE) added to their names. 
(3)  All streets and avenues lying west of Collins Avenue and north of Main Street shall have northwest (NW) added to their names. 
(4)  All streets and avenues lying east of the southerly projected centerline of Collins Avenue and south of Main Street shall have southeast (SE) added to their names. 
(5)  All streets and avenues lying west of the southerly projected centerline of Collins Avenue and south of Main Street shall have southwest (SW) added to their names. 
(Code 1979, § 8-04-03; Code 1994, § 10-09-03) 
Sec. 109-4-5. - Grid system established. 
    For the purpose of providing a uniform system of numbering streets and avenues, a grid system is established. 
(1)  The grid shall consist of a network of vertical lines running in a north-south direction, uniformly spaced to scale 330 feet apart, superimposed on a network of horizontal lines, running in an east-west direction, uniformly spaced to scale at 330 feet apart. Each vertical line on the grid will be deemed to be an avenue and each horizontal line on the grid will be deemed to be a street. 
(2)  Each successive street or avenue, and the structures on any lots platted, based on the standard of 330 feet between any such street or avenue, and generally parallel to, and radiating outwardly from, Main Street and Collins Avenue as the base lines, shall be numbered according to the grid system as described in this section. For the purpose of numbering such streets and the numbering of the structures on any lot abutting thereto, there shall be deemed to be 16 streets per mile. Notwithstanding the fact that a platted block may exceed or be less than 330 feet, structures and streets or avenues shall be numbered consecutively, outwardly from the base lines, as if a street at such intervals of 330 feet did, in fact, exist. 
(Code 1979, § 8-04-04; Code 1994, § 10-09-04) 
Sec. 109-4-6. - Enforcement. 
    The designating official shall issue address numbers to each new structure requiring a means of identification at the time of issuing a building permit therefor. The designating official shall also be responsible for maintaining the official maps and shall make the final determination as to the proposed names and numbers of public ways in order to ensure conformance with the system described in this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 8-04-05; Code 1994, § 10-09-05) 
Chapter 111 - REGULATION OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, N.D.C.C. § 54-21.3-01; general authority relative to buildings, N.D.C.C. §§ 40-05-01(25), (34), (35), 40-05-02(6), (7), (23). 

ARTICLE 1. - ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW 

Sec. 111-1-1. - Legislative intent. 
    It is found, determined and declared that there exist in the city conditions which promote disharmony and reduce land values, and that the lack of appropriate guidelines for the design of new and renovated buildings and structures within the city contributes to these conditions. It is further found that, in order to protect and promote the general welfare of this community, and to protect, maintain and enhance the historical, traditional, social and economic values created by the past, present and future investments of this community, that all future land development, buildings and structures shall be required to promote and enhance a harmonious, complementary and aesthetic environment with respect to land forms and exterior characteristics of buildings or structures so as to be a compatible part of the local neighborhood and the total community environment, and to that end it is necessary and desirable to establish appropriate guidelines for the development of land and the design of new and the renovation of old buildings and structures within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 5-07-01; Code 1994, § 14-01-01) 
Sec. 111-1-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article shall be: 
(1)  To recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and to provide a means by which the city may implement this interdependence to its benefit. 
(2)  To encourage development of private property in harmony with the desired character of the city and in conformance with the guidelines provided with due regard to the public and private interests involved. 
(3)  To foster the attainment of a master plan that will preserve and enhance the character of this city and permit its harmonious development, by encouraging private and public interests to assist in the implementation. 
(4)  To ensure that the public benefits to be derived from the expenditure of public funds for improvement and beautification of the streets, public structures and spaces shall be protected by the exercise of reasonable controls over the character and design of private buildings, structures and open spaces. 
(Code 1979, § 5-07-02; Code 1994, § 14-01-02) 
Sec. 111-1-3. - Generally. 
    Standards for the requirements of architectural review, procedures for architectural review and guidelines for the architectural review commission shall be as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 5-07-04; Code 1994, § 14-01-03; Ord. No. 1003, § 2, 4-4-2006) 
Sec. 111-1-4. - Required. 
    Before any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, remodeled or repainted a color different than that existing on any street, area or sites, or for any purpose, in the following areas, an application for architectural approval shall be submitted as prescribed in this section: 
(1)  Areas zoned for, and/or used for, industrial or commercial purposes. 
(2)  Governmental, educational, commercial and professional buildings. 
(3)  Hotels and motels. 
(4)  Apartments with more than four units. 
(5)  Hospitals, clinics and health facilities, including nursing homes and homes for the aged. 
(6)  Service stations. 
(7)  Parking lots and facilities. 
(8)  Churches. 
(9)  Utility substations. 
(10)  Mobile home parks. Architectural approval shall be required to the exterior boundaries, common recreational areas, and permanent structure only; architectural approval shall not be required for individual mobile home sites. 
(11)  Parks and recreational sites. 
(12)  Such other streets and areas as may be designated by resolution adopted by the planning commission. 
(Code 1979, § 11-10-01; Code 1994, § 14-01-04) 
Sec. 111-1-5. - Procedure. 
(a)  An application for architectural approval shall be submitted to the building official no later than five working days prior to a scheduled meeting on forms approved by the architectural review commission. Said application shall include such plans, drawings, elevations and designs with respect to proposed materials and colors to be used and signs to be displayed as may be required by the architectural review commission. 
(b)  The building official shall submit said application to the architectural review commission within three days after receipt thereof, and the commission shall approve, conditionally approve, deny or make such recommendations on each application as it may deem appropriate. The action of the architectural review commission shall be in writing and shall be final unless appealed. 
(c)  The approval, with or without conditions, or denial of the application shall be final unless within ten days from the date of notification by the building official, the applicant or any other person aggrieved shall appeal therefrom in writing in care of the city administrator, and shall indicate where, in the opinion of the appellant, the architectural review commission was in error. The city administrator shall schedule the appeal for the board of city commissioner's agenda, and the board, at its meeting, shall uphold, modify or overrule the decision of the architectural review commission. The decision of the board of city commissioners shall be final. 
(d)  Before an occupancy permit is issued, there must be full compliance with all requirements of the architectural review commission. If, for any valid reason, full compliance cannot be made, a cash bond shall be posted for the work to be completed within a reasonable period of time as determined by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1979, § 11-10-02; Code 1994, § 14-01-05; Ord. No. 1003, § 3, 4-4-2006) 
Sec. 111-1-6. - Guidelines for approval. 
    The architectural review commission shall examine the materials submitted with the architectural approval application, and specific aspects of design shall be examined to determine whether the proposed development shall provide desirable environment for its occupants as well as be compatible with the character of adjacent and surrounding developments, and whether aesthetically is of good composition, materials, textures and colors. Conformance shall be evaluated and based on consideration of the following: 
(1)  Site layout, orientation, location and structures in relationship to one another and to open spaces and topography. Definition of pedestrian and vehicular areas (i.e., sidewalks as distinct from parking lot areas). 
(2)  Harmonious relationship with existing and proposed adjoining developments, avoiding both excessive variety and monotonous repetition, but allowing similarity of style if warranted. 
(3)  Maximum height, area, setbacks and overall mass, as well as parts of any structure (i.e., buildings, walls, screens, towers or signs) and effective concealment of all mechanical equipment. 
(4)  Building design, materials and colors to be sympathetic with surroundings. 
(5)  Harmony of materials, colors and composition of all sides of the structure which are visible simultaneously. 
(6)  Consistency of composition and treatment. 
(7)  Location and type of planting, with due regard for climatic conditions. Preservation of specimen and landmark trees upon the site with proper irrigation and pruning to ensure maintenance of all plant materials. 
(8)  Design and appropriateness of signs, as well as interior and exterior lighting. 
(9)  Graphics, as understood in architectural design. 
(Code 1979, § 11-10-03; Code 1994, § 14-01-06; Ord. No. 1003, § 4, 4-4-2006) 
ARTICLE 2. - BUILDING CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, N.D.C.C. § 54-21.3-01. 

Sec. 111-2-1. - Adoption of code. 
    There is adopted by reference that certain building code known as the state building code, as developed by the state, as now or hereafter amended. The purpose of the building code is to establish rules and regulations of erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, uses, height, area, and maintenance of buildings and structures. A copy of the current edition of the State Building Code shall be kept on file in the offices of the building official. The State Building Code, adopted by the provisions of this chapter, and all subsequent editions, is amended, changed and altered as follows: 
(1)  IRC Section 108.2 Schedule of Permit Fees, is amended by adding the following sentence to the end of the paragraph; 
The fees for any building permit, amendments to permits or required inspections shall be established by resolution of the Board of City Commissioners. 
(2)  IBC Section 1603.1.3 Roof snow load is amended to insert a minimum snow load design requirement of thirty pounds per square foot. 
(3)  Section 1807 Footings and Foundations of the International Building Code, as adopted by the State Building Code, is amended by adding the following requirements relating to Minimum Requirements for Foundations for Stud Bearing Walls (as depicted in the table below), which shall supersede any of the alternate foundation provisions of Section 1807 of the International Building Code. Those provisions of Section 1807 of the International Building Code which conflict with the minimum requirements established herein by the City may apply, provided the building official approves their application due to unique soil conditions or building materials and provides a written statement verifying the applicable section. 
TABLE NO. 1807.1.6.2(1) 
FOUNDATIONS FOR STUD BEARING WALLS 
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS 
Number of 
Stories Thickness of Foundation Wall 
(Inches) Width of 
Footings 
(Inches) Thickness of Footings 
(Inches) Depth of Foundation Below Grade 
(Feet) Concrete Unit Masonry 1 8 8 16 8 4 2 8 8 16 8 4 3 10 10 18 10 4  
(4)  Foundation walls up to four feet high shall be eight inches wide and reinforced with (2) No. 4 rebar. 
(5)  Foundation walls over four feet high up to 10 feet high shall be reinforced as follows: horizontal rebar-two No. 4 rebar within twelve inches of top of foundation, two No. 4 rebar in the lowest twelve inches of the wall, one No. 4 rebar in the middle one-third of the wall height. Any foundation wall that exceeds 10 foot in height needs plans stamped by an engineer. 
(6)  All footings shall bear on undisturbed soil or engineered fill and be designed to distribute sufficiently the super-imposed loads to the particular type of soil upon which they bear and shall be reinforced with a minimum of (2) No. 4 rebar continuous. 
(7)  Detached garage foundations may be constructed on concrete slabs, providing such slabs are at least four inches thick and thickened to at least twelve inches at all edges, and such thickened edges having a horizontal width of at least eight inches at their bottom and shall be reinforced with a minimum of (2) No. 4 rebar. 
(8)  In addition to all other requirements, each building permit shall require that off-street parking areas and the driveways leading from the street thereto shall be graded and drained to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area and paved with Portland cement, concrete or plant-mixed bituminous surface in accordance with the specifications therefore promulgated by the city engineer. 
(9)  For determining value of a construction job for purposes of calculating a permit fee, the most current chart from the "International Code Council Building Valuation Data" shall be used with the following additions to the chart: 
a.  U Utility: Carports, Decks, Pole Barns, Sheds, Misc. = 1/2 value of Utility line. 
b.  Crawl Space = $15.00 per sq. ft. 
c.  Finished Basement = $30.00 per sq. ft. 
d.  Single and Two Family second story = 1/2 value of main cost per sq. ft. 
e.  Manufactured Home: 
i.  New on owned lot - Actual cost of home value. 
ii.  Used - under 10 yrs. old = $50.00 per sq. ft. 
iii.  Used - over 10 yrs. old = $25.00 per sq. ft. 
iv.  MH Court - set permit fee by resolution. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-01; Code 1994, § 14-02-01; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 853, § 1, 1997; Ord. No. 952, § 1, 2002; Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 111-2-2. - Conflicts. 
    In the event of any conflicts between the provisions of the state building code adopted by this article and applicable provisions of state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. In the event of any conflicts between the applicable provisions of state law and the provisions of city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of city ordinances shall prevail and be controlling, except in the event that the provisions of state law are more restrictive; then, the provisions of state law shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-03; Code 1994, § 14-02-03; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 952, § 3, 2002) 
Sec. 111-2-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building code means those portions of the state building code and uniform adopted or amended by the city, as well as those applicable sections which comprise this article. 
    Building official means that department head appointed by the city as responsible for enforcement of the codes and standards approved under this article related to the construction and remodeling of buildings and structures, or a person designated by the department head to carry out the duties assigned under the code or standards. The term "building official" as referenced in this chapter 111 shall also mean the city code enforcement officer appointed pursuant to Mandan Code of Ordinances chapter 26. 
    Jurisdiction means the corporate limits of the city and the area within the extraterritorial jurisdiction, as provided in N.D.C.C. § 40-47-01.1. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-04; Code 1994, § 14-02-04; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 843, § 2, 1997; Ord. No. 952, § 4, 2002; Ord. No. 1284, 4-3-2018) 
Sec. 111-2-4. - Issuance of permit not a waiver of violation. 
    The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and/or specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of the building code. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the building code shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful. The issuance of a permit upon plans and specifications does not prevent the building official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications, or from preventing building operations from being carried on thereunder when in violation of the building code or any other provision of this Code or city ordinance. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-05; Code 1994, § 14-02-05; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 952, § 15, 2002) 
Sec. 111-2-5. - Instituting action to restrain, correct or abate violations. 
    If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of the building code or city ordinances, then the city, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to: 
(1)  Prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; 
(2)  Restrain, correct or abate such violation; 
(3)  Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land; or 
(4)  Prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-06; Code 1994, § 14-02-06; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 111-2-6. - Permit requirements; exceptions. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. In order to provide for adequate ingress and egress to streets, provide open spaces for light and air, avoid congestion of population, provide for traffic, utilities, access of firefighting apparatus, and improve public health, safety, and general welfare of the city, it is declared necessary to require certain requisites for the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Requirement for building permit; exceptions. 
(1)  No permit for the erection of any building may be issued unless such building is to be located in a platted subdivision of the city and a plat has been approved and filed with the county recorder. If the board grants a variance to this requirement, it must be conditioned upon the completion of the platting process and the filing of adequate financial security with the city administrator, which may be a performance bond or other satisfactory assurance in an amount equal to ten percent of the cost of construction. In the event the platting process is not completed, the financial security shall be forfeited to the city and the building official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  No permit for erection of any building shall be issued unless such building is to be located in a platted subdivision of the city, except in the event such building is situated outside of the city limits but within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, as established pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 30-47-01, then such building shall be located in a platted subdivision or on a parcel of land of 150 acres or more. 
(3)  Auditor plats (lots), government lots, outlets or other such lots are not considered subdivisions for the purposes of this section, and no building permit may be issued unless the planning and zoning commission determines that the proposed development satisfies the requirements for development of a subdivision as set forth in this Code and the board grants the building permit based on the recommendation of the planning and zoning commission. 
(4)  No permit for the erection of any building may be issued if the proposed building is located on or encroaches upon the easements for municipal and public utilities, any drainage structure, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume responsibility. For purposes of this section, the term "municipal and public utilities" includes public and private water, sewer and stormwater services, and electrical, gas, and communications services which have been granted a franchise to operate within the city. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-07; Code 1994, § 14-02-07; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 828, 10-18-1994; Ord. No. 952, § 6, 2002) 
Sec. 111-2-7. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  To erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, remove, improve, convert or demolish, equip, occupy, use, or maintain any building or structure in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the building code; 
(2)  To permit or maintain such a violation; 
(3)  To violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder: 
(4)  To build in violation of any details, statements, specifications or plans submitted or approved thereunder; 
(5)  To operate not in accordance with the provisions of any certificate, permit, or approval issued thereunder; or 
(6)  To fail or refuse to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the building official within the time fixed by said order. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the act deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this article, or in violation of a certificate, permit or approval issued under the provisions of this article. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(c)  Prosecution of violation. If the notice of violation is not complied with promptly, the building official is authorized to request the legal counsel of the jurisdiction to institute the appropriate proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this article or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
(d)  Violation; penalties. Any person who violates this article or any provisions of the building code, as adopted by the city, shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner or other person in control of the premises. Prosecution or lack thereof of the owner, occupant, or the person in charge shall not be deemed to excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects. Prosecution under this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-08; Code 1994, § 14-02-13; Ord. No. 758, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 853, § 3, 1997; Ord. No. 952, 2002) 
Sec. 111-2-8. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the building official shall disapprove of an application or refuse to issue a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the state building code or this article do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of this article has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the building official to the board of appeals within 30 days from the date of the building official's written decision. 
(Code 1994, § 14-02-14; Ord. No. 952, § 12, 2002) 
Sec. 111-2-9. - Electric handicap accessible doors. 
(a)  Restatement. Every building open to public use that has received the benefit of public funds from the city shall provide for the installation of an automatic door for at least one main entrance to the building. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automatic door means a door equipped with a power-operated mechanism and controls that open and close the door automatically upon receipt of a momentary actuating signal. The switch that begins the automatic cycle may be a photoelectric device, floor mat or manual switch. 
    Public funds means as defined in N.D.C.C. § 21-04-01(5). 
    Public use means interior or exterior rooms or spaces that are regularly made available to the general public. 
(c)  Use groups. This article shall only apply to buildings or businesses that are used for the purposes described in section 103-174(2), (3), (4), (6), (7), (9), and (10). 
(d)  Waiver. Automatic doors are not required if the installation of an automatic door would be technically infeasible, if there exists other preexisting accessibility barriers that cannot be reasonably remedied or readily achievable at reasonable cost or if the installation of an automatic door would create an undue burden on the applicant as defined in 28 CFR 36.104. 
(e)  Noncompliance. In the event it is determined by the city that a business or building has received public funds and has not complied with this article, the city may revoke or rescind the granting of or receipt of the public funds or take such further action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(f)  Application. This article shall apply to building projects or renovations that have applied for and received public funds subsequent to November 14, 2008. 
(Code 1994, § 14-02-15; Ord. No. 1048, § 2, 3-3-2009; Ord. No. 1052, 4-21-2009) 
Sec. 111-2-10. - Building construction rules. 
    In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the following provisions shall apply to all work in connection with the erection, alteration, removal or demolition of buildings or structures and shall supersede any conflicting provisions of the State Building Code, as adopted by this chapter. 
(1)  A Storm water management plan must be approved by the engineering and planning department before any land development or land disturbing is done. 
(2)  A building permit will not be issued until street curb and gutter and a street surface approved by the city engineering and planning department is in place. 
(3)  Temporary street signs, approved by the fire chief, shall be installed to identify all streets for emergency services before a building permit is issued. 
(4)  All individual construction sites shall be required to have construction garbage containers or dumpsters on site to keep materials and garbage from blowing off site. On windy days garbage containers shall be tarped. 
(5)  All fire hydrants shall be in working order. 
(6)  No certificate of occupancy will be issued until completion of at least the first lift of asphalt pavement or concrete street and concrete driveway apron. 
(7)  All construction sites shall have the building permit displayed at all times. Address numbers shall be painted on wall sheathing after the building is framed. 
(8)  Suitable toilet facilities shall be provided for the use of workers during the construction of any building. These toilet facilities shall be maintained in sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 1207, § 1(App. A), 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 3. - MANUFACTURED HOUSING 

Sec. 111-3-1. - Adoption of code. 
    There is adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing the installation of mobile homes of the standards promulgated pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 54-21.3-08, as such standards are now or hereafter amended. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-11; Code 1994, § 14-03-01; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1984) 
Sec. 111-3-2. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the standards adopted by this article, shall fail to comply therewith, shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, shall build in violation of any details, statements, specifications or plans submitted or approved thereunder, shall operate not in accordance with the provisions of any certificate, permit or approval issued thereunder or who shall fail to comply with an order as affirmed or modified by the building official or a court of competent jurisdiction shall severally for each and every violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of an offense. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation, nor shall the violation be permitted to continue. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the application of the penalty in this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1979, § 11-01-16; Code 1994, § 14-03-07; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1984) 
ARTICLE 4. - DWELLING CONSTRUCTION CODE 

Sec. 111-4-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish and enforce minimum standards of design, materials and workmanship for all residential structures hereafter erected, altered, repaired or moved within the limits of this municipality. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term "structure" means any assembly of material erected in a more or less permanent location and described by the use for which it is intended. The requirements of this article shall be deemed to supplement the laws of this state and all ordinances, rules and regulations for the regulation of use, occupancy, fire hazard, safety and sanitation. 
(Code 1979, § 11-07-02; Code 1994, § 14-04-04) 
Sec. 111-4-2. - Occupancy and zoning requirements applicable. 
    Structures shall conform to all requirements restricting use, occupancy and class of construction as established by the city's zoning and other ordinances. 
(Code 1979, § 11-07-03; Code 1994, § 14-04-05) 
Sec. 111-4-3. - Conflicts. 
    Whenever the provisions in this article shall conflict with the zoning ordinance of this city, the zoning ordinance shall govern. 
(Code 1979, § 11-07-04; Code 1994, § 14-04-06) 
Sec. 111-4-4. - Architectural design. 
    It is unlawful for any person to erect any building or structure of an architectural design which does not harmonize with, or is inconsistent with, existing standards or the general designs and appearance of other buildings in the district in which it is proposed to be erected. The city building official, upon receipt of application for a building or moving permit for a building or structure of a design which, in his opinion, does not harmonize with the general design of other buildings or structures in the district in which it is proposed to be erected, may, without issuing such permit, refer the application to the board of adjustment. The board of adjustment shall thereupon examine the plans and other materials accompanying said application and shall decide whether or not such a building permit shall be issued. Such decisions shall be made without delay and shall be final. 
(Code 1979, § 11-07-05; Code 1994, § 14-04-07) 
Sec. 111-4-5. - Plumbing requirements. 
    All plumbing work shall comply with all applicable state laws and ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. All pipes located in exterior walls shall be thoroughly insulated against freezing. When dry wells are provided for downspout drainage they shall be located at least eight feet from the building wall. 
(Code 1979, § 11-07-16; Code 1994, § 14-04-08) 
Sec. 111-4-6. - Electrical service requirements. 
    The installation of all electrical work, including equipment, shall comply with all city and state laws and ordinances applying to electrical installations in effect. 
(Code 1979, § 11-07-18; Code 1994, § 14-04-09) 
Sec. 111-4-7. - Display of permit placard. 
    Construction or alteration of any commercial, industrial or residential structure shall not be commenced until the permit holder or his agent shall have posted a placard issued by the city building official, showing permit number, owner and an address of the structure or proposed structure, on the front of the building or premises. This placard shall remain posted until the certificate of completion has been issued. 
(Code 1979, § 11-07-06; Code 1994, § 14-04-10) 
ARTICLE 5. - ELECTRICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- State electrical code, N.D.C.C. § 43-09-21. 

Sec. 111-5-1. - Adoption of code. 
    There is adopted by the city and incorporated, by reference, in this article, the state laws, regulations and wiring standards adopted by the state electrical board, as now or hereafter amended. These standards shall be applicable to all electrical installations now existing or hereinafter made, altered or repaired in or upon any building, structure or premises in the city. A copy of these standards must be filed in the office of the city building official. 
(Code 1979, § 11-02-01; Code 1994, § 14-05-01) 
Sec. 111-5-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of these standards, as adopted by the state electrical board, is to provide a practical safeguarding of persons and of buildings and their contents, from electrical hazards arising from the use of electricity for light, heat and power. 
(Code 1979, § 11-02-02; Code 1994, § 14-05-03) 
Sec. 111-5-3. - Conflicts. 
    In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the standards adopted by this article and applicable provisions of city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1979, § 11-02-03; Code 1994, § 14-05-04) 
ARTICLE 6. - PLUMBING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- State plumbing code, N.D.C.C. § 43-18-09; general authority relative to plumbing, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(25). 

Sec. 111-6-1. - Adoption of code. 
    There is adopted, by reference, the state plumbing code, and any subsequent additions or revisions, as adopted by the state plumbing board and approved by the state department of health. A copy of the latest edition of the state plumbing code shall be maintained on file in the city building official's office. All plumbing work performed in the city shall conform to the provisions of the state plumbing code and this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-03-01; Code 1994, § 14-06-01) 
Sec. 111-6-2. - Definitions. 
    Whenever the term "administrative authority" is used in the state plumbing code, it shall include the city engineer and the building official, or any assistants. 
(Code 1979, § 11-03-02; Code 1994, § 14-06-03) 
Sec. 111-6-3. - Purpose. 
    The state plumbing code, as adopted by the state plumbing board, is promulgated for the purpose of providing practices and performance criteria for the protection of health and safety through the proper design of plumbing systems. 
(Code 1979, § 11-03-03; Code 1994, § 14-06-04) 
Sec. 111-6-4. - Conflicts. 
    In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the state plumbing code as adopted by this article and applicable provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this Code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1979, § 11-03-04; Code 1994, § 14-06-05) 
Sec. 111-6-5. - Permit required. 
    Whenever any master plumber licensed by the city to engage in the work covered by this article shall desire to commence plumbing any building or grounds for the purpose of introducing water from the water main to any house or other place, or to make new attachments in the place of old ones, or make any change or extension in the water service, he shall first procure a permit to do so from the city building official for all such work and for each and every connection to be made with the service pipe put in by the city, to a point near the curbline adjoining the property. 
(Code 1979, § 11-03-08; Code 1994, § 14-06-06) 
Sec. 111-6-6. - Application for permit. 
(a)  All applications for permits under the provisions of this article shall be made in writing, upon forms furnished by the city either in paper form or electronically, in the office of the city building official or on a city sponsored web site. Said application shall be made at least five business days prior to the connection of such water unless a shorter time is allowed by the building official for good cause. 
(b)  Subsequent to the issuance of said permit for the plumbing of any premises, the city engineer shall, when requested to do so by the licensed plumber to whom such permit has been granted, within reasonable time, not exceeding 24 hours, locate the "Y" and allow the necessary sewer and water connections to be made, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-03-09; Code 1994, § 14-06-07) 
Sec. 111-6-7. - Inspections required. 
    Every plumbing and drainage system, and every addition, alteration or reconstruction of any system for which a permit is required under the provisions of this article, shall be subject to inspection and testing as provided in this article. Inspections and tests shall be under the supervision of either the city engineer or building official. Inspections by the city shall be limited to confirmation that all tests required by the plumbing code have been satisfactorily completed. When deemed necessary, the city engineer, building official or assistants may perform additional pressure tests to confirm the absence of leaks within the system. 
(Code 1994, § 14-06-08) 
Sec. 111-6-8. - Right to enter premises; stop work order. 
    The city engineer, building official or their assistants may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter any building or premises for the purpose of inspection or to prevent any violation of this article. If any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this article, or in an unsafe or dangerous manner, the work may be ordered stopped, by service of a written notice upon any person doing or causing the work to be done. Upon service of the notice to stop work, all persons shall forthwith discontinue the work until authorized by the city to recommit and proceed with the work. 
(Code 1979, § 11-03-07; Code 1994, § 14-06-09) 
Sec. 111-6-9. - Grease traps required. 
    The wastes from all kitchens in eating places, hotels and restaurants shall be discharged into a suitable grease trap. 
(Code 1979, § 11-03-15; Code 1994, § 14-06-10) 
ARTICLE 7. - GAS, HEATING AND MECHANICAL CODES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, N.D.C.C. § 54-2.3-01. 

Sec. 111-7-1. - Adoption of code. 
    There is adopted, and by reference made a part of this article, the International Mechanical Code, as amended and adopted by the state as part of the state building code. 
(Code 1979, § 11-04-02; Code 1994, § 14-07-01; Ord. No. 761, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 111-7-2. - Application of permit. 
    Any erection, installation, alteration, extension, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of gas piping, heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators, or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances in the city shall conform to the requirements of the uniform code, as adopted by the state. The quality of materials and gas piping shall also conform to the provisions of the code. 
(Code 1979, § 11-04-01; Code 1994, § 14-07-02) 
Sec. 111-7-3. - License required. 
    The piping of gas and all other work performed in connection with the installation, alteration, extension, location and replacement of gas piping, fixtures and equipment shall be done only by or under the supervision of a licensed plumber or licensed gas fitter. 
(Code 1979, § 11-04-04; Code 1994, § 14-07-03) 
Sec. 111-7-4. - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to install, alter or extend any mechanical system or any system of gas piping for the conveyance, distribution or use of illuminating or fuel gas in any building or structure within the city without first having obtained a permit authorizing the work from the building official. Meter installations by employees of the gas company do not require a permit. 
(Code 1979, § 11-04-05; Code 1994, § 14-07-04) 
Sec. 111-7-5. - Permit application. 
    Application for a permit to install, alter or extend any gas piping or mechanical system shall be made in writing to the building official on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by the required fee. A permit shall be issued by the building official when it is determined that all required information has been provided, a properly licensed person will perform the work and the permit fee has been paid. 
(Code 1979, § 11-04-06; Code 1994, § 14-07-05) 
Sec. 111-7-6. - Permit fee. 
    Application for a permit to install, alter, repair or extend any gas piping or mechanical system shall be accompanied by a fee to cover the costs of issuing the permit and the required inspections. The amount of the permit fees shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1979, § 11-04-07; Code 1994, § 14-07-06) 
Sec. 111-7-7. - Inspection of installations, alterations or extensions. 
(a)  Before any permitted work may be covered from sight, notification shall be given to the building official who shall, within 48 hours, inspect the installation, alteration, repair or extension. The inspection performed by the building official is limited to confirmation that all system tests required under the code have been performed. The building official may, when conditions require, perform an additional pressure or tightness test to confirm the absence of leaks within the gas piping or mechanical system. 
(b)  Any concealed area of the gas supply system up to and including the service meter, when installed by a licensed plumber or gas fitter on the premises of a customer, shall be reported to and inspected by the gas company before it may be concealed, either within the building or underground, and before it is connected with the main or service pipe which contains gas. 
(Code 1979, §§ 11-04-03, 11-04-19; Code 1994, § 14-07-07) 
Sec. 111-7-8. - Standards governing piping installation and appliances. 
    Except as otherwise set forth in this article or as required by state laws, the minimum standards of all gas installations, apparatus or appliances, which shall be installed within the corporate limits of the city, shall conform to the most recent provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as amended and adopted as a part of the state building code. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of the standards adopted in this article, in all interior gas piping installations, only steel or metal pipe, commonly known as black pipe, may be used. 
(Code 1979, § 11-04-02; Code 1994, § 14-07-08; Ord. No. 761, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 111-7-9. - Gas company to perform work between main and gas meter. 
    No licensed plumber or gas fitter, unless in the employ of the gas company or having a permit from the gas company, may repair, alter or open the service pipe, or set or remove the surface meter, or perform any other work on the gas supply system up to and including the meter. However, should gas be leaking from any part of the gas supply system, a licensed plumber or gas fitter, not in the employ of the gas company, may make necessary temporary repairs and shall notify the gas company to make permanent repairs and report the same to the building official. 
(Code 1979, § 11-04-08; Code 1994, § 14-07-09) 
ARTICLE 8. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 111-8-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Whenever the terms "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words, "or any part of." 
    Basement means a story of a building located partly underground, but having less than two-thirds of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below outside grade. 
    Ceiling means the interior overhead surface of a room. 
    Cellar means a story of a building located partly or wholly underground and having more than two-thirds of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below outside grade. 
    Dwelling means any building, structure or parts thereof used and occupied for human habitation, or intended to be so used, and includes appurtenances and utilities belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms, located within a building, and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by: 
(1)  Eliminating their harborage places; 
(2)  Depriving or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; 
(3)  Poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or 
(4)  Any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the city. 
    Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling or dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit unit. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable wastes resulting from handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
    Multiple dwelling means any structure or building containing more than one dwelling unit. 
    Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling or dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building or parts thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Owner means any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of owner, as an executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Plumbing means all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines. 
    Repair means to restore to good condition. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible materials, except garbage. The term "rubbish" includes the residue from the burning of wood, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, glass, crockery and dust. 
    Substandard means any dwelling, dwelling unit or premises violating any provision of this article. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utility system and located on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-01; Code 1994, § 14-08-01) 
Sec. 111-8-2. - Inspections authorized. 
    The building official is authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within the city in order that he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants of such dwellings and of the general public. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-02; Code 1994, § 14-08-02) 
Sec. 111-8-3. - Right of entry of building official for inspection. 
(a)  For the purpose of making inspections, the building official is authorized to enter, examine and survey, at reasonable times, all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the building official access to such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit and its premises, at reasonable times, for the purpose of inspection. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-03; Code 1994, § 14-08-03) 
Sec. 111-8-4. - Right of entry of owner for repair. 
    Each occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employees, access to any part of such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit or its premises, at reasonable times, for the purpose of making such repairs and/or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or any law or order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-04; Code 1994, § 14-08-04) 
Sec. 111-8-5. - Responsibilities of owners and occupants. 
(a)  Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining, in a clean and sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the dwellings and premises. 
(b)  Every occupant of a dwelling or building shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he occupies and controls. 
(c)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner as required by the provisions of this article. 
(d)  No owner shall occupy or let any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it shall be clean, sanitary, fit for human habitation and not in violation of this article. 
(e)  Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all garbage and any other organic waste, which might be food for rodents, in a sanitary manner as required by the provisions of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than two dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on the premises where more than two dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases, it shall be the responsibility of the occupants to furnish such facilities or containers. 
(f)  Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on his premises. Every owner of a dwelling or building containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever a dwelling unit within such building shall become infested. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-05; Code 1994, § 14-08-05) 
Sec. 111-8-6. - Duties of occupants. 
    It shall be the duty of every occupant of a dwelling to: 
(1)  Keep the dwelling unit, and grounds pertaining to it, in a clean and sanitary condition, free from fire hazards, free from rodents, household pests and vermin harborage. 
(2)  Keep all plumbing in reasonably good working order and free of obstructions. 
(3)  Provide sound and tight garbage, rubbish and ash containers when the same are not supplied by the owner, and keep all containers, by whoever supplied, in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(4)  Comply with the requirements of this article when the duties mentioned therein fall upon the occupant. 
(5)  Comply with the occupancy for overcrowding requirements and limitations of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-06; Code 1994, § 14-08-06) 
Sec. 111-8-7. - Applicability of code. 
    Whenever the provisions of this article require the construction, installation, alteration, repair of a dwelling or dwelling unit, or its facilities, utilities or equipment, the required work shall be done in full compliance with the applicable provisions of the city building code. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-07; Code 1994, § 14-08-07) 
Sec. 111-8-8. - Occupancy restricted. 
    No person shall occupy, as an owner or occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping or eating therein which does not comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-08; Code 1994, § 14-08-08) 
Sec. 111-8-9. - Conditions determining dwelling unit for human habitation. 
    The building official shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation or a building is substandard if he finds that a violation of the standards in subsections (1) or (3) through (6) of this section exist or if he finds that a violation of subsection (2) of this section exists. 
(1)  General conditions. 
a.  Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably weather tight, rodent proof, and shall be capable of affording privacy and shall be kept in good repair. 
b.  Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weather tight, watertight and rodent proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
c.  Yard adjacent to any dwelling shall be graded to drain water off the lot or into a drainage system on the lot. No standing or stagnant pools of water shall be permitted on any yard or lot. 
d.  Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in a satisfactory working condition. 
e.  No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service facility, equipment or utility which is required under this article to be removed from, shut off, or disconnected in any occupied building or dwelling unit, except for such temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in the process or during temporary emergencies. 
f.  Porches, exterior stairways, steps, walkways and sidewalks shall be in good repair and free from hazards. 
g.  Outbuildings, retaining walls, fences and accessory buildings shall comply with the provisions of this article regarding repair, maintenance and usage. 
(2)  Construction and maintenance. 
a.  Building-supporting members that show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration. 
b.  Buildings that have interior or outside walls or coverings which show 50 percent or more damage or deterioration. 
c.  Buildings which have floors or roofs with improperly distributed loads, which are overloaded or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used or such framing members deflect over 1/360 of the span. 
d.  Buildings which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes that endanger the lives, safety or welfare of the occupants or other people of the city. 
e.  Buildings which are dilapidated, decayed, unsanitary or in disrepair, which are likely to cause sickness or disease, or to cause injury to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or to other people of the city. 
f.  Buildings in which each living unit does not have safe and unobstructed means of egress leading to a safe and open space at ground level, as required by the city building code. 
g.  Buildings which have defects therein, increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, such as lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary facilities as endangering the health, safety or general welfare of the occupants or other residents of the city. 
h.  Buildings which are in violation of any provisions of the building regulations, fire prevention code or city ordinances. 
i.  Buildings in which the interior walls, ceilings and floors of all habitable rooms are not of durable material, in good repair and well painted. 
j.  Buildings in which the exterior walls are not covered with an approved type of sheathing, stucco, brick or other recognized material in good repair. 
k.  Buildings or premises that violate any ordinance of the city relative to sanitation and safety. 
l.  Dwelling units in which the bedrooms or bathrooms are not available through hallways or other means to ensure the privacy of the occupants. 
(3)  Lighting and ventilation. 
a.  Each habitable room, including toilets and bathrooms, shall have not less than one window. The window area in each of the said rooms shall have not less than ten percent of the floor in glass, and at least one-half of the minimum allowable window area shall be designed, built and maintained so that it may be opened for the admission of outside air. 
b.  Every public hall and stairway in every two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling and rooming house shall be adequately ventilated. 
c.  The city building official, upon presentation of plans and specifications for a mechanical ventilation showing that the same provides fresh air equivalent to or better than would be provided by a window installation provided in subsection (1) of this section, may authorize the use of such mechanical ventilation system in lieu thereof. Any such mechanical ventilation system shall be maintained in good working order and operating condition at all times. 
d.  The windows in all habitable rooms shall open directly upon a yard, alley, street or court. In case of windows on courts, there shall not be less than three feet of clear space between the outside of the window and the property line. 
e.  All windows, doors and other apertures opening to outside or to other unscreened areas shall be equipped with screens of No. 16 mesh or finer, and the screens shall be installed and maintained with no loose frames or edges and free from breaks and tears. During the fly season, such screens shall be installed from May 1 to October 1 of each year. 
(4)  Electrical facilities. 
a.  Electrical lighting fixtures. Every public hall and stairway in every two-family dwelling, multifamily dwelling and rooming house shall be adequately lighted at all times, except that such lighting system shall be turned off by conveniently located switches during the daylight hours. 
b.  Every dwelling within 300 feet of a power line shall be supplied with electricity. 
c.  Every existing habitable room shall contain at least two separate floor- or wall-type electrical convenience outlets and one ceiling-type electrical light fixture. Every kitchen shall contain two 20-amp outlets. 
d.  Every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electrical light fixture. 
e.  Every outlet and fixture shall be properly installed and maintained in a good working condition. 
(5)  Plumbing and sewage. 
a.  Each dwelling unit shall be provided with not less than one kitchen sink. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with at least one full bathroom. A full bathroom shall consist of at least one stool, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower. Such bathroom shall be enclosed by walls, ceilings and a door to afford privacy and be available without going through a bedroom. 
b.  All joints, pipes, valves and connections of all plumbing and sewers shall be installed in accordance with the city plumbing code and be maintained in good working condition. 
c.  The sink, bathtub or shower bath and flush-type water closet required in this article shall be accessible without leaving the shelter of the roof of the building in which the dwelling unit is located and without passing through any other dwelling unit. 
d.  Floors and walls in any room where the required sink, bathtub or shower bath and flush-type water closet are installed shall be built and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water. 
e.  Every kitchen sink, lavatory, shower or bathtub and basin shall be connected to both hot and cold running water, and the hot water heating facilities shall be capable of providing hot water at least 120 degrees Fahrenheit at each required hot water faucet. 
(6)  Heating. Every dwelling or dwelling unit shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, maintained, safe and in good working conditions, and be capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments located therein to a temperature of at least 68 degrees Fahrenheit at a distance of three feet above the floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-09; Code 1994, § 14-08-09) 
Sec. 111-8-10. - Rooming houses and units regulation. 
    No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit at any rooming house which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  At least one flush water closet, lavatory, basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the building official and in good working condition, shall be supplied for eight persons or a fraction thereof residing within a rooming house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of said facilities, provided that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half of the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be located within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No such facility shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the building official. 
(2)  The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(3)  Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
(4)  Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by laws of this state and this city. 
(5)  The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for maintenance of sanitary conditions in every other part of the rooming house. He shall further be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(6)  Every provision of this article which applies to rooming houses shall also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency. 
(7)  The rooming house shall otherwise comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-10; Code 1994, § 14-08-10) 
Sec. 111-8-11. - Basement and cellar requirements for dwelling unit or habitable room. 
    No basement or cellar space shall be used for a dwelling unit or habitable room unless: 
(1)  The floors and walls are damp-proofed and impervious to the leakage of underground or surface moisture and insulated against dampness. 
(2)  The total of the window area in each room is equivalent to ten percent of the floor space of such room or no less than that considered adequate and reasonable as compared to the floor space of such room. 
(3)  The total openable window area for ventilating each room is equivalent to at least five percent of the floor space of such room or where there is supplied some other device affording equivalent ventilation and approved by the city building official. 
(4)  Every window which is below the grade of the ground adjoining such window shall have light wells or area ways extending at least 20 inches out from said window throughout the entire width of the window. 
(5)  Walls, ceilings and floors of basement rooms shall comply with section 111-8-9. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-11; Code 1994, § 14-08-11) 
Sec. 111-8-12. - Occupancy and overcrowding. 
    No owner or occupant shall permit overcrowding in any dwelling unit or portion thereof as determined and measured by the following standards: 
(1)  Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 160 square feet of space for the first occupant and at least 100 square feet for each additional occupant. 
(2)  No sleeping room shall have a floor area of less than 80 square feet. 
(3)  The total of all habitable rooms in a dwelling unit shall be such as to provide at least 100 square feet of floor area per person of the family over 12 years of age and at least 50 square feet of floor area per person of the family 12 years of age and under. 
(4)  In computing the floor area under this section, only those portions of the floor having a ceiling height of at least seven feet, six inches shall be included. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-12; Code 1994, § 14-08-12) 
Sec. 111-8-13. - Declaration of nuisance. 
    Any buildings or dwelling units which violate the terms of this article are declared a public nuisance and dangerous to public health and shall be repaired, vacated, demolished, or said violations discontinued as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-13; Code 1994, § 14-08-13) 
Sec. 111-8-14. - Issuance and contents of notice and order. 
(a)  Whenever the building official determines there has been a violation of any provisions of this article, he shall notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee and all other persons having an interest in said building or dwelling as shown by the records of the recorder of this county, and any dwelling, dwelling unit or building found by him to be substandard as set forth in this article, that: 
(1)  The owner must vacate, repair or demolish said building within the terms of the notice and order. 
(2)  The owner or occupant must vacate said building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and order and remain in possession. 
(b)  Set forth in the notice and order shall be a description of the building or structure deemed substandard, a standard of particulars which makes the building or structure a substandard building and an order requiring same to be put in such condition with the terms of this article and within such time as specified but not to exceed 90 days. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-14; Code 1994, § 14-08-14) 
Sec. 111-8-15. - Reasonable time for compliance. 
    Any person notified under this article to repair, vacate or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or acts required by the notice and order provided in this article, and, in the case such building must be vacated, such vacation shall be complied with within 30 days and such repair or demolition order shall be complied with within 90 days. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-15; Code 1994, § 14-08-15) 
Sec. 111-8-16. - Report of noncompliance. 
    The building official shall report to the board of city commissioners any noncompliance with the notice and order provided for in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-16; Code 1994, § 14-08-16) 
Sec. 111-8-17. - Placard. 
    The building official shall place a notice and order on all substandard buildings reading as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a substandard building by the City Building Official. This Notice and Order is to remain on this building until such time as this building is repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the Notice and Order which has been given to the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee of this building and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the records of the Recorder of Morton County. It shall be unlawful to remove this Notice and Order until such Notice and Order is complied with." 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-17; Code 1994, § 14-08-17) 
Sec. 111-8-18. - Hearing by board. 
(a)  The board of city commissioners shall, upon receipt of a report to the building official as provided for in this article, give written notice to the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee and all other persons having an interest in said buildings as shown by the records of the recorder of this county, to appear before it on the date specified in the notice and order and to show cause why the building or dwelling unit reported to be a substandard building or substandard dwelling unit should not be repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the city building official's notice and order. 
(b)  The board shall hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building official or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having an interest in said building as shown by the records of the recorder of the county shall offer relative to the substandard building or dwelling unit. 
(c)  After such hearing, the board shall make written findings of fact from the testimony offered as to whether or not the building in question is a substandard building or dwelling unit within the terms of this article. 
(d)  The board of city commissioners shall issue an order based upon the findings of fact commanding the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the county records of the recorder to repair, vacate or demolish any building found to be a substandard building within the terms of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-18; Code 1994, § 14-08-18) 
Sec. 111-8-19. - Building official to appear at hearing. 
    The building official shall appear at all hearings conducted by the board of city commissioners held pursuant to the provisions of this article and testify as to the conditions of the substandard building. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-19; Code 1994, § 14-08-19) 
Sec. 111-8-20. - Appeal. 
(a)  The board of city commissioners shall serve upon the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee and all other persons having an interest in such buildings so ordered repaired, vacated or demolished a copy of its order, such order to be served upon such owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee within ten days after the issuance of such order. Such owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee shall thereafter have 30 days from the date of service of such order served upon him which to appeal from such order to the district court of the county to take such other legal steps to enjoin the enforcement of such order as he may deem proper. 
(b)  Any person desiring to appeal any order issued by the board of city commissioners under and by virtue of this section, shall file an undertaking in the sum of at least $500.00 to be approved by the city finance director, and conditioned that the appellant will prosecute the appeal without delay and will pay all costs that may be adjudged against him in the district court, such undertaking to be payable to the city. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-20; Code 1994, § 14-08-20) 
Sec. 111-8-21. - Failure to comply. 
    Should the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fail to comply with the order of the board of city commissioners, or fail to appeal to the district court within 30 days as provided in this article, the city, through its officers and employees, shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated or demolished as ordered by the board of city commissioners and shall cause the cost of such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against the land on which the building exists by special assessment, or as a municipal lien, or shall cause the cost of removal to be levied as a special tax against the land upon which said building stands or did stand or to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-21; Code 1994, § 14-08-21) 
Sec. 111-8-22. - Emergency action by building official. 
    Whenever the building official finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but, upon petition to the board of city commissioners, shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible, in the manner provided in this article. After such hearing, depending upon the findings as to whether the provisions of this article have been complied with, the board of city commissioners shall continue such order in effect, modify it or revoke it. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-22; Code 1994, § 14-08-22) 
Sec. 111-8-23. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The owner of any substandard building or dwelling unit who shall fail to comply with any notice and order to repair, vacate or demolish the building or structure given by any person authorized by this article to give such notice and order shall be guilty of an offense. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession of any substandard building or dwelling unit who fails to comply with the notice and order to vacate and who fails to repair said building in accordance with any notice and order given as provided for in this article shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not exceeding $100.00 for each offense and every day subsequent to such notice in which the occupant or lessee shall fail to comply with the notice and order as stated in subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed a separate offense. Any person removing the notice and order provided for in this article shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-23; Code 1994, § 14-08-23) 
Sec. 111-8-24. - Duties of city attorney. 
    The city attorney shall: 
(1)  Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notice and order and findings of fact order provided for by this article. 
(2)  Appear at all hearings before the board of city commissioners in regard to substandard buildings. 
(3)  Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-24; Code 1994, § 14-08-24) 
Sec. 111-8-25. - Where owner absent from city. 
    In cases except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee is absent from the city, all notices and orders provided for in this article shall be sent by first class mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the county recorder to the last known address of each, and a copy of such notice and order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the substandard building to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service. 
(Code 1979, § 11-05-25; Code 1994, § 14-08-25) 
ARTICLE 9. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 111-9-1. - Definitions. 
    All buildings or structures exhibiting any or all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings: 
(1)  Those whose interior walls are of a vertical structure of members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members, or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or people of the city. 
(5)  Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living within. 
(6)  Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or other means of communication. 
(7)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(8)  Those which, because of their condition, are unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city. 
(9)  Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the building code of this city, or any provision of the fire prevention code, or other city ordinances. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-01; Code 1994, § 14-09-01) 
Sec. 111-9-2. - Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
    The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building official and the board of city commissioners in ordering repair, vacation, removal or demolition: 
(1)  If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired. 
(2)  If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
(3)  In any case, where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged or decayed, or deteriorated from its original value or structure, or where the cost of reconstruction or restoration shall be in excess of 50 percent of the value of the building, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this article or any ordinance of the city or statute of the state, it shall be demolished or removed from the city. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-02; Code 1994, § 14-09-02) 
Sec. 111-9-3. - Declared nuisances. 
    All dangerous buildings, within the terms of this article, are declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be repaired, vacated, removed or demolished as provided in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-03; Code 1994, § 14-09-03) 
Sec. 111-9-4. - Duties of building official. 
    The building official shall: 
(1)  Inspect or cause to be inspected semiannually all public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theatres, hotels, tenements, commercial, manufacturing or loft buildings for the purpose of determining whether conditions exist which would render such places dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. 
(2)  Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be in violation of this article. 
(3)  Inspect any building, wall or structure reported, as provided for in this article, by the fire or police department of this city as probably existing in violation of the terms of this article. 
(4)  Inspect annually all buildings which have been abandoned, allowed to deteriorate or which have been improperly maintained to determine whether they are dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. 
(5)  Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the records of the recorder of the county of any buildings found by him to be a dangerous building within the standards set forth in this article, that: 
a.  The owner must vacate, or repair, or remove, or demolish said building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this article. 
b.  The occupant or lessee must vacate said premises or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession. 
c.  The mortgagee, agent or other person having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the recorder of the county may, at his own risk, repair, vacate, remove or demolish said building or have such work or act done, provided that any person notified under this subsection to repair, vacate, remove or demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, as may be necessary to do, or have done, the work or acts required by the notice provided for in this article. 
(6)  Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (5) of this section, a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building, and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms of this article and within such length of time, not exceeding 30 days, as is reasonable. 
(7)  Report to the board of city commissioners any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections (5) and (6) of this section. 
(8)  Appear at all hearings conducted by the board of city commissioners and testify as to the conditions of dangerous buildings reading as follows: 
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the building official. This notice shall remain on this building until such time as said building is repaired, vacated, removed or demolished in accordance with the notice which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent of this building as shown by the land records of the recorder of the county. It shall be unlawful to remove this notice until such notice is complied with." 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-04; Code 1994, § 14-09-04) 
Sec. 111-9-5. - Duties of the board of city commissioners. 
    The board of city commissioners shall: 
(1)  Upon receipt of the report of the building official, as provided for in this article, give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building shown by the land records of the recorder of the county, to appear before it on the date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated, removed or demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building official's notice. 
(2)  Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the building official and the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other person having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the recorder of the county shall offer relative to the dangerous building. 
(3)  Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to subsection (2) of this section as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building as defined by this article. 
(4)  Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to subsection (3) of this section commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the recorder of the county, to repair, vacate, remove or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this article and provided that any person so notified, except the owners, shall have the privilege of either vacating or repairing said dangerous building; or any person not the owner of said dangerous building but having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the recorder of the county, may remove or demolish said dangerous building at his own risk in order to prevent the assessment of the cost of such removal, or demolition against the land upon which said dangerous building stands by the city, as provided for in this article. 
(5)  Serve such order upon the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee of such building. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-05; Code 1994, § 14-09-05) 
Sec. 111-9-6. - Failure to comply. 
(a)  If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the order provided for in this article, or to the district court from such order, within 30 days from the service of such order, the board of city commissioners shall cause the building or structure to be repaired, vacated, removed or demolished as the facts may warrant, under the standards provided in this article and shall, with the assistance of the city attorney, cause the cost of such repair, vacation, removal or demolition to be levied against the land upon which the building stands or did stand as an assessment to be collected as sidewalk special assessments are levied and collected, or to be recovered in a suit at law against the owner. 
(b)  The repair, removal or demolition of any such building shall be carried out by the building official in the manner deemed by him to be most economical and considered by him to best preserve property interests therein for the owner. He shall have the authority to take bids for the removal or demolition thereof, and to sell the salvaged materials in such manner as he shall deem proper, subject to the approval of the board of city commissioners, and to apply all proceeds from such sale against the cost of removing or demolishing such building. All moneys received by him and all expenses incurred shall be strictly accounted for and a statement of such receipts and expenditures shall be mailed to the persons having an interest in such building. After the payment of all such costs, the building official shall pay the balance on hand to the persons having an interest in said building, as their interests may appear. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-06; Code 1994, § 14-09-06) 
Sec. 111-9-7. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate, remove or demolish said building given by any person authorized by this article to give such notice or order shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(b)  The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with any notice to vacate and who fails to repair said building in accordance with any notice given as provided for in this article shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to remove the notice provided for in section 111-9-4(8). 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-07; Code 1994, § 14-09-07) 
Sec. 111-9-8. - Duties of city attorney. 
    The city attorney shall: 
(1)  Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notice and order provided for in this article. 
(2)  Appear at all hearings before the board of city commissioners in regard to dangerous buildings. 
(3)  Bring suit to collect all municipal assessments, or costs, incurred by the board of city commissioners in repairing or causing to be vacated or demolished any dangerous buildings. 
(4)  Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-08; Code 1994, § 14-09-08) 
Sec. 111-9-9. - Emergency conditions. 
    In the case that there is immediate danger to life or safety of any person unless said dangerous building is immediately repaired, vacated, removed or demolished, the building official shall report such facts to the board of city commissioners and the board shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the manner provided by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-09; Code 1994, § 14-09-09) 
Sec. 111-9-10. - Service of notice and order. 
    All notice and orders provided for in this article, except in emergency cases, shall be served upon the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the recorder of the county, either by serving the same personally or by sending the same to the last known address of each, by first class mail, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Service by first class mail shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing thereof. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-10; Code 1994, § 14-09-10) 
Sec. 111-9-11. - Duties of the fire and police departments. 
    Employees of the fire department and police department shall make a report in writing to the building official of all buildings or structures which are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this article. Such report shall be delivered to the building official within 24 hours of the discovery of any such buildings by any employee of said departments. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-11; Code 1994, § 14-09-11) 
Sec. 111-9-12. - Administrative liability. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings therein. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-12; Code 1994, § 14-09-12) 
Sec. 111-9-13. - Appeals. 
    An appeal to the district court from any order of the board of city commissioners made pursuant to the provisions of this article may be taken, within 30 days after service of such order upon him, by any person aggrieved by said order. 
(Code 1979, § 11-06-13; Code 1994, § 14-09-13) 
ARTICLE 10. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 

Sec. 111-10-1. - Permit and license required. 
    No person shall move any building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city without first being licensed as a house mover by the city and obtaining a permit for house moving from the building official. However, the provisions of this article shall not apply to a person moving a mobile home which is required to be licensed by the state, upon any street in the city, unless the mobile home exceeds the height of the electrical, telephone, telegraph wires or cables situated along or across any such street. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-01; Code 1994, § 14-10-01) 
Sec. 111-10-2. - Application for permit; fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit authorizing the moving of a building over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the city shall make application therefor to the building official, upon the form provided by him. The applicant must furnish the following information: 
(1)  A description of the building proposed to be moved, including street number, construction, materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of exterior and interior. 
(2)  Proof of ownership and a legal description of the lot from which the building is to be removed, including the lot, block and tract number if located within the city. 
(3)  Proof of ownership and a legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building be moved, including lot, block and tract number, if located within the city. 
(4)  A description of the portion of the lot to be occupied by the building once moved. 
(5)  A listing of the highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved, the route and timing of the proposed move is to be approved by the city engineer. 
(6)  The proposed moving date and hours. 
(7)  Sufficient evidence to show that the building and lots from which it is to be removed are free of entanglements and that all taxes, special assessments and city charges against the same have been paid in full. 
(8)  Should the applicant be other than the owner, a written statement or bill of sale signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence, that he is entitled to move the building, and a copy of the building permit authorizing the removal of the building to a new location is required. 
(9)  Proof that the house mover has liability insurance in the following amounts: 
a.  For injury or death to one person, not less than $250,000.00. 
b.  Subject to the limit for one person, not less than $500,000.00 for injury or death to more than one person. 
c.  For property damage, not less than $50,000.00. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in such amount as may be from time to time established by resolution of the board of city commissioners and which shall be nonrefundable. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-02; Code 1994, § 14-10-02; Ord. No. 760, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 111-10-3. - Cost of inspection outside city. 
    Should any house or building to be moved be located outside the city, the owner shall deposit sufficient money with the city building official in order to cover the cost of the city for conducting an inspection of such building to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Such costs shall include mileage, meals and inspector's salary. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-03; Code 1994, § 14-10-03) 
Sec. 111-10-4. - House mover's bond required. 
    Before the issuance of the house mover permit, the house mover shall be required to file with the city building official a bond in the sum of not less than $5,000.00, with the form thereof to be approved by the city attorney and the surety by the board of city commissioners, said bond to run to the city and conditioned on the following: 
(1)  The person seeking such permit will pay all damages which may result to the city or to any person residing within the city, or lawfully upon the streets or alleys of the city, as the result of the moving of such house or building, irrespective of whether such damage is to either person or property of any person or to the street, alley or other public property of the city, and whether such damage is caused by the person seeking such permit or his employees. 
(2)  The moving of such structure and the construction, improvement and alterations thereof required for compliance with this article shall be completed within 30 days of the date the house moving permit is issued. For good cause shown, an extension for an additional 30 days may be granted by the board of city commissioners. 
(3)  The person seeking the permit shall keep the city harmless against all liability, judgments, costs and expenses which may accrue against the city as a consequence of acts done by the person in such moving. 
(4)  The person seeking the permit shall meet the conditions of the permit issued to him and the applicable state laws, the provisions of this Code and city ordinances. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-04; Code 1994, § 14-10-04; Ord. No. 760, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 111-10-5. - Expense deposit required. 
    Before any house or building is moved as provided in this article, the owner shall supply and furnish to the city a deposit in the amount of not less than $1,000.00, which deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified check or bank money order. The deposit shall cover any expenses incurred by the city to facilitate the move, including, but not limited to, the costs of police escort, tree trimming, movement of municipal utilities and building inspections. Any remaining balance of the deposit after all expenses have been paid will be returned to the owner, provided that the movement, construction, alteration or improvement of the house or building is completed within three months after the permit is issued. If the work is not completed within the required period of time, the balance of the deposit will be paid to the city as liquidated damages, and not by way of penalty. The board of city commissioners shall, by resolution, set the fee schedule for the services required of the city during the moving of any house or building. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-05; Code 1994, § 14-10-05; Ord. No. 760, § 3, 1989) 
Sec. 111-10-6. - Performance bond required. 
    Prior to the moving of any house or building under the provisions of this article, a performance bond shall be posted with the city building official in the amount to be decided by the board of city commissioners to ensure compliance with all city building codes. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-06; Code 1994, § 14-10-06) 
Sec. 111-10-7. - Standards of issuance for permit. 
    The building official shall inspect the building and the applicant's equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance of a permit have been met. The building official shall refuse to issue a permit to move a building in the case that the requirements of this article have not been met or in the case that he shall determine the following: 
(1)  That the building to be moved is too large or is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property within the city. 
(2)  That the building to be moved is structurally unsafe and unfit for the purpose for which it is to be moved, if the removal location is within the city. 
(3)  That applicant's equipment is unsafe so that persons and property within the city would be endangered by its use. 
(4)  That zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the locating of the building in its new position. 
(5)  That the moving of said building will obstruct the orderly flow of traffic. 
(6)  That the axle loading of the moving equipment will be over the legal limit prescribed by the city engineer for the streets over which such moving equipment will pass. 
(7)  That the moving of said house or building will require the trimming of any trees in the public boulevard or on the route designated. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-07; Code 1994, § 14-10-07) 
Sec. 111-10-8. - Waiver required. 
    Before a house mover's permit shall be issued under the provisions of this article, a petition must be submitted to be signed by 75 percent of the property owners within 300 feet of the proposed building site, should such site be within the city, waiving objection to said structure. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-08; Code 1994, § 14-10-08) 
Sec. 111-10-9. - House moving agreement. 
    An application for a permit to be issued under the provisions of this article must be accompanied by an agreement to be signed by the owner, under the terms of which the owner promises the following: 
(1)  The house or building will be altered and rebuilt to conform to the requirements of the city building codes, zoning ordinance and other city ordinances. 
(2)  All rubbish and materials will be removed; all excavations will be filled to the existing grade at the original building site, the sewer line will be plugged at the property line and the water service shut off and disconnected at the city water main, all within the time required and performed to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(3)  The building official will be notified prior to moving such house or building and prior to any construction or alteration thereon and inspections requested as required by the building code. 
(4)  The moving of the house or other building will not obstruct the orderly flow of traffic, and the route and timing of the move will be subject to the approval of the city engineer. 
(5)  The house or building will not be moved onto a public right-of-way without providing barricades and signing as required and approved by the city engineer. 
(6)  A police escort will be required for a house or building exceeding 12 feet in width and 13.5 feet in loaded height or as required by the city engineer due to route and timing of move considerations. 
(7)  The moving of the house or building will not damage any trees within a public right-of-way. The owner or his agent shall pay for any necessary tree trimming. All tree trimming shall be performed by a licensed tree trimmer who shall be available at the time of moving. 
(8)  All agencies needed for moving of overhead wires and cables and electricians needed for moving of traffic signals and streetlights shall be available at the time of the moving of the structure. 
(9)  The liability bond, damage deposit and performance bond have been filed with the city prior to the move. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-09; Code 1994, § 14-10-09; Ord. No. 760, § 4, 1989) 
Sec. 111-10-10. - House moving regulations. 
    Every permittee to move a building under this article shall comply with the following: 
(1)  In the case that the height of the building to be moved exceeds the height of any electric, telephone or telegraph wires or cables strung along or across said street or highway for the purpose of furnishing the inhabitants thereof with lights, heat, power, telephone or telegraph service: 
a.  The person so obtaining said permit for such removal of said building or other structure shall notify the person owning or operating said wires or cables to provide a passageway for said building or structure through said wires or cables at a certain designated time. 
b.  Such notice shall be in writing and shall describe the location of the wires or cables through which the structure is to be moved and shall be served upon said person owning or operating said wires or cables at least 24 hours before said structure is to be removed through said wires or cables. 
c.  The person owning or operating said wires or cables shall upon receiving said notice estimate as near as possible the actual expense for labor and materials in cutting, removing or adjusting said wires or cables, in order to properly allow the passage of said structure and shall notify the parties serving said notice of said required expense, and the party requesting said wires or cables to be cut, removed or adjusted shall deposit with said firm, person or corporation owning or operating said wires or cables the amount required, which shall be in no event more than the actual expense for removing or adjusting said wires or cables 
(2)  Notify the building official in writing of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application. 
(3)  Notify the chief of police of the proposed time of moving at least 12 hours before the time set for such moving. 
(4)  Move a building only over such streets as have been designated for such use in the written permit issued by the building official. A list of designated streets over which the building may be moved shall be procured by the building official from the city engineer and approved by the chief of police in order to ensure maximum safety to persons and property in the city and to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets, and shall be reproduced upon the permit in writing. 
(5)  Notify the building official in writing of any and all damage done to property belonging to the city within 24 hours after the damage or injury has occurred. 
(6)  Cause red lights to be displayed during the nighttime on every side of the building while standing on a street in such manner as to warn the public of the obstruction and, at all times, maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of removal of the building. 
(7)  Remove the building from city streets after one day of such occupancy, unless an extension be granted by the board of city commissioners. 
(8)  Comply with the building code, the fire code, the zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and laws upon relocating the building in the city. 
(9)  Pay the expense of a traffic officer ordered by the building official to accompany the movement of the building in order to protect the public from injury. 
(10)  Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site in order that the premises be left in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(11)  See that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper, the water shut off, the meter returned to the city water office and that the gas and electric service companies have been notified to remove their services. 
(Code 1979, § 11-08-10; Code 1994, § 14-10-10) 
ARTICLE 11. - BUILDING DEMOLITION 

Sec. 111-11-1. - Permit required. 
    No person shall begin demolition of any building within the corporate limits of the city and the one-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction as provided for in N.D.C.C. § 40-47-01.1, without first having applied for and obtained a permit to do so from the building official. 
(Code 1979, § 11-09-01; Code 1994, § 14-11-01; Ord. No. 759, § 1, 1989) 
Sec. 111-11-2. - Application for permit; fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit authorizing the demolition of any building or structure shall make application therefor to the building official upon the form provided. The applicant must furnish the following information: 
(1)  A description of the building proposed to be demolished, including street number, construction, materials, dimensions, and such other information relating to the structure as required by the building official. 
(2)  Proof of ownership and a legal description of the lot on which the building is to be demolished, including the lot, block and tract number if located within the city. 
(3)  Sufficient evidence to show that the building and lots on which the building or structure is to be demolished are free of entanglements and that all taxes, special assessments and city charges against the same have been paid in full. 
(4)  The proposed date and times of the demolition. 
(5)  Proof that the person who proposes to demolish the building has liability in the following amounts: 
a.  For injury or death to one person, not less than $250,000.00. 
b.  Subject to the limit for one person, not less than $500,000.00 for injury to more than one person. 
c.  For property damage, not less than $50,000.00. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in such amount as may be from time to time established by resolution of the board of city commissioners and which shall be nonrefundable. 
(Code 1979, § 11-09-02; Code 1994, § 14-11-02; Ord. No. 759, § 2, 1989) 
Sec. 111-11-3. - Bond required. 
    Before the issuance of a permit authorizing the demolition of any building or structure, the person who is responsible for the demolition shall be required to file with the city building official a bond in the sum of not less than $5,000.00, with the form thereof to be approved by the city attorney and the surety by the board of city commissioners, said bond to run to the city and conditioned on the following: 
(1)  The permit applicant will pay all damages which may result to the city or to any person residing within the city, or lawfully upon the streets or alleys of the city, as a result of the demolition of the building, irrespective of whether such damage is to either person or property of any person or to any public property of the city, including streets, alleys and rights-of-way and whether such damage is caused by the applicant or his agent or employee. 
(2)  The demolition of such structure or building, the removal of all debris, the fill and leveling of the lot to grade, and any other work required for compliance with this article or the conditions of the permit must be completed within 30 days of the date the building demolition permit is issued, unless an extension for 30 days is approved by the building official or an extension for a greater period is approved by the board of city commissioners. 
(3)  The person seeking the permit shall keep the city harmless against all liability, judgments, costs and expenses which may accrue against the city as a consequence of acts done by or on behalf of the person in the demolition of the building. 
(4)  The person seeking the permit shall meet all the conditions of the permit and the applicable state laws, the provisions of this Code and city ordinances. 
(Code 1979, § 11-09-03; Code 1994, § 14-11-03; Ord. No. 759, § 3, 1989) 
Sec. 111-11-4. - Expense deposit required. 
    Before any building or structure is demolished as provided in this article, the owner shall supply and furnish to the city a deposit in the amount of not less than $1,000.00, which deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified check or bank money order. The deposit shall cover any expenses incurred by the city to facilitate the demolition, including, but not limited to, the costs of police barricades, tree trimming, movement or disconnection of utilities and building inspections. Any remaining balance of the deposit after all expenses have been paid will be returned to the owner, provided that the demolition, removal of debris and fill and leveling of the lot to grade is completed within 30 days after the permit is issued. If the work is not completed within the period of time required under the permit or any extensions, the balance of the deposit will be paid to the city as liquidated damages, and not by way of penalty. The board of city commissioners shall, by resolution, set the fee schedule for the services required of the city during the demolition of any building or structure. 
(Code 1979, § 11-09-04; Code 1994, § 14-11-04; Ord. No. 759, § 4, 1989) 
Sec. 111-11-5. - Conditions of permit. 
    Demolition permits shall be issued only on the following conditions: 
(1)  Prior to the demolition, the sewer line shall be plugged at the property line and the water service shut off and disconnected at the city water main, within the time required, and performed to the satisfaction of the building official. 
(2)  The structural element shall be taken down one story at a time, beginning with the top floor. All material shall be lowered in chutes or other means to prevent injury to the public. 
(3)  Adjacent streets, alleys and sidewalks shall be protected and pedestrian traffic re-routed, as required by the building official. 
(4)  All debris, rubbish and combustible materials shall be removed from the premises upon completion of the demolition, except the foundation need not be removed if at least 12 inches below finished grade. Upon completion of the demolition, the site shall be filled and leveled with earth to conform to the grade of the adjacent properties and compacted in conformance with the requirements of the building official. 
(5)  The liability bond and damage deposit shall be filed with the city prior to the demolition. 
(6)  The demolition, cleanup and site grading shall all be completed within 30 days of the date the permit was issued. For good cause shown, the building official may extend the period of the permit up to an additional 30 days; however, any requested extension beyond 60 days of the issuance of the permit must be approved by the board of city commissioners. 
(7)  The requirements of this article are deemed to supplement and not replace state laws and all ordinances, rules and regulations for use, occupancy, safety and sanitation. The applicant or person demolishing the building or structure shall comply with all applicable provisions of the fire prevention code and building code. 
(Code 1979, § 11-09-05; Code 1994, § 14-11-05; Ord. No. 759, § 5, 1989) 
ARTICLE 12. - BUILDING AND LOT NUMBERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate numbering of houses and lots, N.D.C.C. § 40-05-01(19). 

Sec. 111-12-1. - Building numbering. 
    Building numbering shall conform to the requirements of the state building code as augmented herein. 
(1)  Each public entrance to a building shall have the building number affixed in a conspicuous place near the entrance. 
(2)  Entrance numbers shall be a minimum of four inches in height with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch. 
(3)  Entrance numbers shall contrast with their background. 
(4)  Where a building is addressed off a private street or is accessed by means of a private driveway and the building address cannot be viewed from a public street, additional signage must be provided by means of one of the following: 
a.  A monument pole located adjacent to the public street; 
b.  A building number and street name on the wall of the building of a size readable by someone of normal vision from the travel lane of the public street that contrasts with the background surrounding the number and name and is either reflective or illuminated; or 
c.  Any other style of signage acceptable to the fire chief. 
(Code 1979, § 8-05-02; Code 1994, § 10-01-01; Ord. No. 1240, § 1, 6-21-2016) 
Sec. 111-12-2. - Lot numbering. 
(a)  Lot numbering shall conform to the number grid established for emergency response purposes by the County of Morton and approved by the City of Mandan. 
(b)  The building official is responsible for assigning the building number at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(Code 1979, § 8-05-01; Code 1994, § 10-01-02; Ord. No. 1240, § 1, 6-21-2016) 
ARTICLE 13. - OCCUPATION OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES OR CAMPERS 

Sec. 111-13-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Camper vehicle means a vehicle, whether factory- or home-built, whether on- or off-wheels, whether towed or carried on a motor vehicle or self-propelled, including, but not limited to, recreational vehicles, hitch-mount, pull-behind trailers, pop-up tent trailers, campers meant to be affixed to the bed of trucks and converted vehicles, such as buses, trucks, or trailers. Such vehicles may be with or without complete kitchen and toilet facilities, self-container water and sewage systems and designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, or vacation use. The term "camper vehicle" does not include mobile homes, manufactured homes and park models. 
    Occupy means to take residence in. 
    Other form of nonpermanent structure includes, but is not limited to, mobile homes, manufactured homes and park models. 
    Park models are recreational homes primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or seasonal use. These homes are built on a single chassis and mounted on wheels. Each park model home is certified by the Recreational Park Trailer Industry Association member manufacturer as complying with ANSI A119.5, a recreational vehicle building code. 
    Person means natural person, partnerships, associations, and all other bodies, corporate or public. 
    Within the City of Mandan or within the city includes, but is not limited to, city streets, commercial/industrial sites, private property, established residential neighborhoods and construction sites. 
(Code 1994, § 14-12-01; Ord. No. 1132, 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 111-13-2. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to limit the use of camper vehicles and other nonpermanent structures for permanent human habitation, because it is the determination of the city commission that their use in the city for permanent human habitation is deleterious to the health, safety and welfare, not only of the persons residing therein but additionally, of the public at large. Portable heating devices, nonstandard electrical connections, a lack of approved sanitary facilities, including, but not limited to, bathrooms with toilets, sinks or showers or bathtubs and standard kitchen facilities, among other facilities associated with safe places of permanent human habitation, all lend themselves to unhealthful, unsanitary and hazardous living conditions, if utilized for extended periods of time, occasioned in part because camper vehicles and other nonpermanent structures are not intended for use as places of permanent human habitation and to not adequately provide for the needs associated with human habitation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, this article shall make allowance for safe, comfortable and sanitary use of camper vehicles and other nonpermanent structures for short-term, temporary use for human habitation purposes so as to facilitate enjoyment of camping, hunting, bird watching, silviculture and other outdoor pursuits. 
(Code 1994, § 14-12-02; Ord. No. 1132, 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 111-13-3. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The use of any camper vehicle or other form of nonpermanent structure for human habitation purposes within any zoning district of the city, with the exception of those in construction sites described in this article, in violation of this article, shall result in the issuance by the city of a warning directed to the owner of the camper vehicle or other nonpermanent structure used for human habitation purposes, if ascertainable, or, if the owner cannot be identified, to the owner of the parcel of real estate upon which it is situated, informing that person of the need to cease and desist from make use of the camper vehicle or other nonpermanent structure used for human habitation purposes. 
(b)  Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits, tries willfully to circumvent the intent of this article, refuses to comply with this article, or resists enforcement of any of its provisions shall be guilty of an infraction, unless that person has met the approved guidelines set in this subsection for construction sites, as set by the planning and zoning department of the city. 
(1)  The allowance is for recreational vehicles only. 
(2)  There will be a maximum of ten units allowed unless otherwise approved by the city building official. The following are the number of units allowed, per site, up to ten units. 
a.  Single-family residential projects: One unit per 6,000 square feet of lot area. (No permit required by property owner, but must comply with subsection (b)(4) of this section.) 
b.  Multifamily residential projects: One unit per six apartment units. 
c.  Commercial projects: One unit per 10,000 square feet of lot area. 
d.  Industrial projects: One unit per 10,000 square feet of lot area. 
(3)  The occupants of the recreational vehicle must obtain a permit issued by the building department every 30 days. Each permit is valid for a calendar month and must be renewed at the end of each month. Each permit must provide the make and model of the recreational vehicle, the license plate number and the legal description of the property the recreational vehicle is to be located on at the time of issuance of the permit. The cost of the monthly permit shall be as established by resolution. The application for the permit must be approved by the city building official. 
(4)  The holder of the permit shall abide by the following rules, or the holder will be found in violation of this article: 
a.  Portable restroom facilities must be provided on site. 
b.  Sites must be kept clean of trash and litter. Wastewater, including all liquid wastes, gray water, black water and mop water must be discharged into the city wastewater sewer system, into an approved on-site sewage disposal or holding system or other approved disposal site. Dumping or disposal of waste at other than approved specific sites shall result in fines or removal of the facility. 
c.  The location of the recreational vehicles on-site must be approved by the city building department, with screening if required by the building official. 
d.  The occupants of the recreational vehicles must be construction workers or homeowners for that particular site. 
e.  The units must be removed if legitimate written complaints are received by the city building department. If the units are not removed when requested, the city building department will have them removed and the cost to be assessed to the property. 
f.  Recreational vehicles must be removed and the site must be cleaned up before a certificate of occupancy for the property will be issued by the city building department. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided, a violation of this article is an infraction. 
(Code 1994, § 14-12-03; Ord. No. 1132, 11-20-2012) 
Sec. 111-13-4. - Exceptions. 
    Residents and family or friends who come to visit may temporarily occupy a camper vehicle on developed property but may only do so for a period of seven days without a permit. Every person residing in a camper under this exception cannot exceed a total of 28 days of occupancy in a calendar year. 
(Code 1994, § 14-12-04; Ord. No. 1132, 11-20-2012) 
Chapter 113 - REMEDIATION 

Sec. 113-1. - Legislative intent. 
    The board of city commissioners declares that it is in the public interest to ensure that environmental remediation of the petroleum hydrocarbon contamination of the soil and groundwater in a 30-acre area of the city be carried out and completed, in accordance with the remedial action plan approved by the North Dakota Department of Health, so as to protect human health and the environment to the extent practicable. The board finds that, when environmental remediation is completed, to the extent practicable, there may necessarily be residual contamination. The board finds that, in such cases, it is necessary to provide an effective and enforceable means of ensuring the conduct of any maintenance, monitoring or operation of remediation systems, of restricting certain uses of, and including placing restrictions on drilling for or pumping groundwater, and of providing certain limitations on the development or improvement of properties as long as any residual contamination remains, as required by the remedial action plan approved by the North Dakota Department of Health. The board, therefore, declares that it is in the public interest to create the Environmental Institutional Control Zoning District to define the area of Downtown Mandan impacted by the contamination and to establish the institutional controls set forth in this chapter for the protection of human health and the environment. As it relates to the institutional controls specifically designated by this chapter, the applicable provisions of this chapter establish the uses, regulations, subdivision, development and administration of land within the district. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-01; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved remedial action plan or approved plan means the remediation and/or monitoring plan approved and required by the North Dakota Department of Health. 
    Approved remediation system means the treatment infrastructure within the district consisting of the wells, piping and treatment facilities as shown on the approved plan. 
    Corporate counsel or city attorney means the city attorney of the City of Mandan, North Dakota. 
    Department or NDDH means the North Dakota Department of Health, an administrative agency of the State of North Dakota. 
    District means the 30-acre area of the city comprising the environmental institutional control district defined in Ordinance No. 1002. 
    Financial assurance means the insurance coverage or other financial assurance required by the department for any environmental monitoring or remediation that may become necessary on properties within the district notwithstanding the institutional controls established by this chapter and/or responsibility exemptions established by the department. 
    Health and safety plan means the site-specific health and safety plan, approved by the department, for the protection of public health, during the construction and implementation of the approved remedial action plan at the site. 
    Institutional controls are restrictions on the use and management of real property within the district, including use and management of buildings or fixtures that contain or prevent migration of petroleum contamination, or protect receptors from exposure or the threat of exposure to petroleum contamination. Institutional controls may apply during environmental remediation activities or may apply to residual petroleum contamination or their byproducts that may remain on property within the district after active environmental remediation activities are concluded or while natural attenuation of petroleum contamination is occurring. 
    On-site health and safety officer means the person responsible, under the health and safety plan, for enforcing its provisions, communicating hazards, providing access to safety equipment, air monitoring and directing emergency situations. 
    Petroleum contamination means the soil and groundwater contamination in the district resulting from releases of petroleum hydrocarbons at and from railroad storage, fueling and operating activities as defined in Appendix C to Ordinance No. 1002. 
    Responsible party means a person who caused or contributed to the releases of petroleum hydrocarbons at and from railroad storage, fueling and operating activities, as described in Appendix C to Ordinance No. 1002. 
    Responsibility exemption means and includes letters of no action, letters of no further action and letters of no further remediation issued by the department to the owner of a property located within the district. The term "responsibility exemption" also means and includes fetters of regulatory assurance issued to a lender, with respect to a property within the district pursuant to the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 23-20.3-03.1. 
    State means the State of North Dakota, including the NDDH, the attorney general, and all other agencies and executive officers. 
    Trustees means and includes the Trustees of the Mandan Remediation Trust created under the laws of the State of North Dakota by Declaration dated July 30, 2004, registered with the District Court of Morton County, North Dakota pursuant to N.D.C.C. ch. 30.1-32 on August 19, 2004, and the Trustees of the Mandan Supplemental Environmental Projects Trust created under the laws of the State of North Dakota by Declaration dated July 30, 2004, registered with the District Court of Morton County, North Dakota pursuant to N.D.C.C. ch. 30.1-32 on August 23, 2004, to remediate the petroleum contamination; protect the environment and public health through the implementation of remediation technology and institutional controls; and to alleviate the environmental, economic and other impacts of the petroleum contamination. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-02; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-3. - Delineation of environmental institutional control zoning district. 
    The location and boundaries of the district are shown on Appendix A (map) to Ordinance No. 1002, and the properties included within the district are: Lots 4 to 18, inclusive, Block 6; Lots 1 to 18, inclusive, Block 7; Lots 1 to 18, inclusive, Block 8; Lots 1 to 15, inclusive, Block 9; Lots 3 to 6, inclusive, Block 20; Lots 1 to 12, inclusive, Block 21; and Lots 5 to 12, inclusive, Block 22; all in the Original Plat of the City of Mandan, Morton County, ND; plus those properties between Main Street and the BNSF rail yard beginning just east of 3rd Ave. NW and extending east to 1st Ave. NE. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-03; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-4. - Institutional controls applicable within zoning district. 
(a)  Water well restrictions. Except for such uses or methods in existence before the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the use or attempt to use groundwater from within the area of the district by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Management of petroleum-impacted vapors, soils and groundwater. Any person proposing redevelopment, demolition, excavation, grading or construction activities at properties within the district shall submit to the city administrator or their appointee a contingency plan, approved by the NDDH, to evaluate and manage any petroleum-contaminated soils or groundwater and any potential petroleum vapor impacts. The contingency plan must be prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state (hereinafter P.E.) and shall have experience in the environmental field. The contingency plan shall protect the public health and the environment by considering, at a minimum, historic water/product intrusion, historic petroleum vapor/odor issues, potential future water/product intrusion, and potential future petroleum vapor/intrusion. The contingency plan shall, at a minimum, also consider the following: 
(1)  Excavation and management of petroleum-impacted soil at a NDDH-approved off-site facility if the concentrations of petroleum in the soils are greater than the concentration deemed by the P.E. to be injurious to human health and/or the utilization of the property; 
(2)  Use of petroleum-contaminated soils encountered at the property as controlled fill under newly constructed parking and roadway surfaces if the concentrations of petroleum in the soils are less than the concentration deemed by the P.E. to be injurious to human health and/or the utilization of the property; 
(3)  Excavation of petroleum-contaminated soils in the building footprints/foundations and management of such soil on site as a part of a project if the concentrations of petroleum in the soils are at or greater than the concentration deemed by the P.E. to be injurious to human health and/or the habitation of the structure; and 
(4)  Evaluate and obtain appropriate permits for the discharge and treatment of petroleum-contaminated groundwater resulting from construction activities. 
(c)  Restrictions on construction of new structures within the district. Any person proposing to construct a new structure within the district shall submit a design for that structure that incorporates engineered controls to mitigate the effects of the potential presence of petroleum in the subsurface to the city administrator or their appointee. The design must be prepared by a P.E., and the design must be approved by the NDDH and must meet additional applicable codes and standards relative to the presence of petroleum. The design shall protect the public health and the environment by considering, at a minimum, historic water/product intrusion, historic petroleum vapor/odor issues, potential future water/product intrusion, and potential future petroleum vapor/intrusion. The design shall incorporate vapor barriers, venting system, groundwater suppression/collection and specialized HVAC as determined appropriate by a P.E. In no case shall any structure or any portion of any structure within the district intended for habitation be located below the ground surface. 
(d)  Health and safety. During construction and implementation of the approved plan, the city manager may designate a health and safety officer to implement and enforce the provisions of the health and safety plan approved by the department for the protection of public health and the environment. A copy of the health and safety plan, as approved by the department, and any amendments or modifications made by the department, shall be filed with the office of the city engineer. 
(e)  Non-interference with approved remediation system. The approved plan provides for the treatment and extraction of petroleum-contaminated groundwater and soil vapor utilizing multi-phase extraction, area-specific soil vapor extraction and bioventing. The approved plan further provides for the installation and operation of the treatment infrastructure within the district consisting of the wells, piping and treatment facilities as shown on the approved plan on file with the city engineer which is incorporated in this chapter as though fully set forth. There shall be no interference with, or disturbance of, the approved treatment system installed in accordance with the approved plan. 
(f)  Access by city or NDDH. The city and the department shall have a right of access to the approved remediation system on properties within the district as necessary and convenient to: 
(1)  Inspect and operate the approved remediation system; 
(2)  To sample petroleum-contaminated soil, groundwater and vapors; 
(3)  To verify compliance with this chapter; and 
(4)  To enforce this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-04; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-5. - Regulatory status of owners within zoning district. 
    The department and the city have entered into a joint agreement, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city administrator, wherein the department has determined that this chapter is an institutional control meeting the requirements of N.D.C.C. § 23-20.3-03.1 applicable to the properties within the district with respect to the petroleum contamination, approving the remedial action plan and determining that owners of properties within the district, as listed on Appendix B to Ordinance No. 1002, are not responsible parties and further determining that the department intends to take no further enforcement action with respect to the petroleum contamination within the district. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-05; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-6. - Financial assurance required by N.D.C.C. § 23-20.3-03.1. 
    The department has determined, as required by N.D.C.C. § 23-20.3-03.1(7), that the potential costs of monitoring and/or remediation which may become necessary to address the petroleum contamination in the district after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, require a financial assurance in an amount to be determined by the North Dakota Department of Health on a case-by-case basis. The city and the department have entered into a joint agreement concerning payment for or funding of such financial assurance. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-06; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-7. - Coordination. 
    The provisions of this Code regulating land use, planning, zoning, development, subdivision, construction, plumbing, electrical work and architecture, including the following chapters: 
(1)  Architectural Review; 
(2)  Building Code; 
(3)  Building Regulations for Manufactured Housing Installations; 
(4)  Dwelling Construction Code; 
(5)  Electrical Code; 
(6)  Plumbing Code; 
(7)  Gas, Heating and Mechanical Regulations; 
(8)  Housing Code; 
(9)  Substandard Structures; 
(10)  Moving Building; 
(11)  Building Demolition; 
(12)  Planning and Zoning Commission; 
(13)  General Provisions and Definitions; 
(14)  Districts and Uses; 
(15)  District Regulations; 
(16)  Enforcement; 
(17)  Board of Adjustment; 
(18)  Amendments; 
(19)  Master Plan; and 
(20)  Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land; 
apply to the properties within the district, subject only to the provisions of this chapter providing for the creation of environmental institutional controls, their application, administration and enforcement. Whenever the city receives an application affecting land use or development within the district that may significantly affect an institutional control created by this chapter, the city shall notify the department, and the department shall evaluate whether the application is consistent with the institutional control and shall notify the city in a timely fashion, considering the time frame of the city's review under the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-07; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-8. - Recording. 
    This chapter and any amendments thereto shall, upon adoption by the board of city commissioners of the city, be recorded in the office of the county recorder and indexed against the real properties described in Appendix B to Ordinance No. 1002. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-08; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-9. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The use, development or redevelopment of any land, and the demolition, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance of any building or structure within the district in violation of this chapter shall constitute the maintenance of a public nuisance and any appropriate action or proceeding may be instituted by the city, through any appropriate administrative official, department, board or bureau charged with the enforcement of this chapter: 
(1)  To prevent such unlawful use, development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or maintenance; or 
(2)  To restrain, correct or abate such violation. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this chapter, or a failure to comply with any regulation, order, requirement, decision or determination made under authority conferred by this chapter, shall be punishable as an offense as provided in chapter 1. Each day any such violation, failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-09; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-10. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No permit, license or approval authorized under the provisions of this Code regulating land use, planning, zoning, development subdivision, construction, plumbing, electrical work and architecture, including the provisions cited in section 113-7, shall be issued for any parcel of land, lot, building or structure before the city engineer, building inspector or other responsible city official certifies that the parcel of land, lot, building or structure is in compliance with any applicable controls or limitations required by this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city engineer and the city building inspector to enforce this chapter and to bring to the attention of the city attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. In the event of any such notice to the city attorney, notice shall also be given to the department. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-10; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-11. - Amendment. 
    The provisions of this chapter, including the institutional controls described in section 113-4, may be amended by the board of city commissioners, provided that public hearings, official notice, and publication of such proposed amendments is given according to the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 40-47-04, and also provided that notice is provided to the department of all proposed amendments and a determination is received from the department that such proposed amendments are protective of the environment and public health. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-11; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Sec. 113-12. - Legislative authority. 
    This chapter is adopted and established by the city pursuant to the authority of N.D.C.C. § 40-47-01 and provides for the establishment of institutional controls that address environmental concerns with the department of health, as provided in N.D.C.C. § 23-20.3-03.1. 
(Code 1994, § 21-10-12; Ord. No. 1002, § 1, 5-19-2006) 
Chapter 115 - STREETS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- General authority relative to streets and sidewalks, N.D.C.C. §§ 40-05-01(8), (10), (12)-(17), (20), 40-05-14; other provisions relative to streets and sidewalks, N.D.C.C. chs. 40-29-40-32; municipal utilities generally, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-33; sewage and garbage disposal, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-34; solid waste management and land protection, N.D.C.C. ch. 23-29. 

ARTICLE 1. - FRANCHISES 

Sec. 115-1-1. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
    All companies granted the rights of franchise by the city shall, at all times during the life of said franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police powers by the city and to such reasonable regulation as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide. 
(Code 1979, § 7-01-01; Code 1994, § 3-04-01) 
Sec. 115-1-2. - City rights in franchise. 
    The right is reserved to the city to adopt, in addition to the provisions contained in this article and existing applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of police power, provided that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable, shall not be in conflict with the rights granted in this section and shall not be in conflict with state laws. 
(Code 1979, § 7-01-02; Code 1994, § 3-04-02) 
Sec. 115-1-3. - Company liability; indemnification. 
    All companies granted the rights of franchise by the city shall indemnify and save the city and its agents and employees harmless from all and any claims for personal injuries or property damages and any other claims, costs, including attorney's fees, expenses of investigation in litigation of claims and suits thereon which may arise from the installation and/or operation of said system. 
(Code 1979, § 7-01-03; Code 1994, § 3-04-03) 
Sec. 115-1-4. - Service standards. 
    All companies granted the rights of franchise by the city shall maintain and operate their systems and render efficient service in accordance with the rules and regulations as are, or may be, set forth by the board of city commissioners or by the public service commission of the state. 
(Code 1979, § 7-01-04; Code 1994, § 3-04-04) 
Sec. 115-1-5. - Discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    No company which has been granted the right of franchise by the city shall, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any persons to any prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled. 
(Code 1979, § 7-01-05; Code 1994, § 3-04-05) 
Sec. 115-1-6. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by any company granted the right of franchise by the city, within the city, shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalks, driveway or other surfacing, any company granted the right of franchise by the city shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalks, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good a condition as before said work was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in an approved condition for a period of three years. 
(c)  Relocation. In the event that, at any time during the period of franchise, the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, any company granted the right of franchise by the city, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, re-lay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduit, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(Code 1979, § 7-01-06; Code 1994, § 3-04-06) 
ARTICLE 2. - STREET LIGHTS 

Sec. 115-2-1. - Street lighting system declared. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of N.D.C.C. ch. 40-35, all lands, easements, rights in land, facilities, poles, wires, cables, conduits and other electrical fixtures and equipment necessary or proper for the maintenance and operation thereof heretofore or hereafter acquired by purchase, lease or otherwise and set aside by the board of city commissioners of the city for a municipal street lighting system are declared to be and shall henceforth constitute, be held, operated, maintained, improved, enlarged and administered as a single undertaking to be known as the municipal street lighting system. 
(Code 1994, § 9-05-01; Ord. No. 650, § 1, 1981) 
Sec. 115-2-2. - Under control of board of city commissioners. 
    All properties and other assets set aside or held by the board of city commissioners for such undertaking, and all moneys to be derived from operation of said undertaking shall, at all times, be under the management and control of said board and shall be operated under such rules, regulations, terms and conditions as said board may from time to time establish. 
(Code 1994, § 9-05-02; Ord. No. 650, § 2, 1981) 
Sec. 115-2-3. - Rates and charges established. 
    The board, in order to provide funds to defray the construction, maintenance and repair of the street lighting system, may from time to time, by resolution, establish, maintain and change a schedule of rates, charges and fees for all the services, facilities and benefits furnished by the system and may impose and collect the same monthly at the time and in the manner said board may provide. 
(Code 1994, § 9-05-03; Ord. No. 650, § 3, 1981) 
Sec. 115-2-4. - Rates and charges billed and collected. 
    The rates and charges shall be billed and collected in the manner and time as water, sewer and garbage charges are billed and collected. The rates and charges shall be charged against both the owner of property deemed to be benefited by services of the system and his lessee or agent and shall be a personal liability on the part of each and both and may be collected from either. 
(Code 1994, § 9-05-04; Ord. No. 650, § 4, 1981) 
Sec. 115-2-5. - Self-supporting. 
    Said undertaking shall be so operated and maintained, and the rates and charges for use of its facilities shall be such as to make the undertaking self-supporting and self-perpetuating and adequate to pay all costs of operation and maintenance of said undertaking and to establish and maintain reasonable operating reserves, and to pay all obligations of the city incurred in establishing, improving and extending the undertaking; provided, however, nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to preclude the city from defraying any part of the expense of the operation or of any improvement or extension of the undertaking by the levy of special assessments or taxes or the issue of general obligation bonds, whenever and to the extent that such action is authorized in the manner provided by law and is deemed fair and equitable by the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1994, § 9-05-05; Ord. No. 650, § 5, 1981) 
Sec. 115-2-6. - Municipal street lighting system fund created. 
    All moneys received by the city in respect of the service and facilities furnished and made available by said undertaking shall be paid into the treasury of the city and kept in a special fund which shall be permanently maintained on the books of the city, separate and distinct from all other funds, and designated as the municipal lighting system fund, in the records of which fund, all receipts and disbursements of money on account of or in connection with the undertaking shall be deposited, administered and accounted for, and their safekeeping secured, like other city funds. 
(Code 1994, § 9-05-06; Ord. No. 650, § 6, 1981) 
Sec. 115-2-7. - Installation of street lights. 
    The public works director is responsible for operations and maintenance of street lights. The city engineer is responsible for establishing design criteria and approving installation. 
(Code 1994, § 9-05-07; Ord. No. 650, § 7, 1981) 
ARTICLE 3. - DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF STREETS 

Sec. 115-3-1. - Movement of vehicles over curbs prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  Moving vehicle across curb prohibited; exceptions. No person shall move or cause to be moved over any curb within the city any engine, tractor, wagon, motor vehicle, truck or other vehicle, object or thing unless the curb over which the same is to be moved shall be protected by wooden planks or dirt placed or laid in such a manner so as not to cause damage or settling to such curb or any portion thereof when such vehicle, object or thing is moved across such curb; provided, however, that dirt fill shall not be placed within a travel lane of any paved street within the city. 
(b)  Duty to remove fill from curb. It shall be the duty of the owner of the premises abutting such curb and the person placing or constructing such fill to remove the same immediately after such vehicle, object or thing has been moved across such curb. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-30; Code 1994, § 10-04-09) 
Sec. 115-3-2. - Responsibility for streets. 
    The city engineer is responsible for the design and construction of streets. The public works department is responsible for maintenance of streets. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-01; Code 1994, § 10-03-01) 
Sec. 115-3-3. - Street specifications. 
    All construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys and other public ways shall be made in conformity with specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-03; Code 1994, § 10-03-02) 
Sec. 115-3-4. - Petition by property owners for street improvement; bond required. 
(a)  The owners of at least 50 percent of the property adjacent to any street, alley or public place may file a written petition to the board of city commissioners to have any such street, alley or public place opened, laid out, widened or enlarged. 
(b)  Such petition shall be filed in the office of the city administrator and shall be accompanied by a cash deposit or bond to be approved by the city commission and in an amount equal to the estimated cost of surveying and platting the proposed improvement as determined by the city engineer, guaranteeing the payment of such costs to the city in the event such improvement is not undertaken. 
(c)  Upon city acceptance of the cash deposit or bond submitted by petitioners, the board of city commissioners shall order the city engineer to make an accurate survey, plat and estimate of probable cost of the proposed improvement. 
(d)  Upon completion of the survey and estimate of probable cost, the city engineer shall notify the applicant and gain written approval to proceed with the project. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-20; Code 1994, § 10-03-03) 
Sec. 115-3-5. - Initiation of street improvement by board. 
    Whenever the board of city commissioners shall determine it necessary to open, lay out, widen or enlarge any street, alley or public place within the city, it shall cause an accurate survey and plat thereof, together with an estimate of the probable cost of the improvement to be made by the city engineer and filed in the office of the city engineer. Should the board of city commissioners determine subsequent to the filing of the same, that the cost of such improvement will not exceed the benefit to the property affected thereby and that such improvement is necessary, the board of city commissioners may order the improvements to be done, the costs thereof to be assessed in the manner provided by state statute. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-21; Code 1994, § 10-03-04) 
Sec. 115-3-6. - Order and assessment. 
    Upon receipt of survey, plat and estimate of cost of the proposed improvement and finding that such improvement is necessary and that the cost of such improvement will not exceed the benefits to accrue to the properties affected thereby, the board of city commissioners may order such improvement to be made by the city's employees or by a contractor, employed for such purposes, and the cost thereof to be assessed, certified and levied by the city in the manner provided by state statute. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-23; Code 1994, § 10-03-05) 
Sec. 115-3-7. - Construction bids. 
    Upon ordering the construction or improvement of streets, the board of city commissioners shall direct the city engineer to advertise for bids in the manner prescribed by state statute. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-23; Code 1994, § 10-03-06) 
Sec. 115-3-8. - Use of streets, alleys and public rights-of-way or easements. 
(a)  Obstructions . No person shall re-grade or place any object in a street, alley, public right-of-way or public easement that restricts the public's use of the street, alley, public right-of-way or public easement unless authorized to do so by the city. No person shall deposit on any street, alley, public right-of-way or public easement any material, either solid or liquid, which may be harmful to the pavement or vegetation thereof or which may do injury to or render unclean any person, animal or property including oil or other chemicals, snow, dirt, rubbish or garbage and grass cuttings or tree limbs. 
(b)  Wires and poles . No person shall erect any pole or install any wire within the right-of-way of any street or alley, any public right-of-way or any public easement without first obtaining permission and any required permit from the city. No person shall remove any wire crossing or running along any street or alley right-of-way, public right-of-way or public easement or any pole within the right-of-way of any street or alley, any public right-of-way or any public easement without first obtaining permission from the owner of the wire or pole, notifying the city of the intended removal and obtaining any required permit from the city for working within the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Building materials . The unpaved boulevard area of a public right-of-way adjacent to a private lot where construction activity authorized by a valid current building permit is in progress may be used to store construction equipment and materials. The paved portion of the public right-of-way may not be used unless written permission is granted by the city. Once seasonal weather conditions prevent continuation of construction activity, the construction equipment and materials must be removed from the boulevard. 
(d)  Sidewalks and street gutters . It is the responsibility of every property owner to maintain the sidewalk and street gutter areas adjacent to their private property free and clear of any obstructions. 
(Ord. No. 1222, § 1b, 11-3-2015) 
ARTICLE 4. - VEGETATION ON BOULEVARDS 

Sec. 115-4-1. - Plantings in boulevards. 
    No person shall plant any vegetable or other plant intended to provide food for human or animal consumption in any boulevard within the city. No person shall plant any bush, shrub or tree in any boulevard without first having obtained a permit from the city forester or other city official authorized to issue such permit. 
(Code 1979, §§ 8-03-01, 8-03-02; Code 1994, §§ 10-10-01, 10-10-02) 
Sec. 115-4-2. - List of approved plants for use in boulevards. 
    The city forester shall create and maintain a list of plants that are approved for use in boulevards within the city. Accompanying the list shall be placement requirements including the mixing of species within a boulevard area, spacing between plants and locations within a boulevard where plantings are not permitted. 
Sec. 115-4-3. - Application for permit. 
    Application for the permit required by this article shall be submitted to the city engineer who shall forward the application to the city forester for review and approval. The city engineer shall then issue the permit after determining that there are no issues related to public water and sewer service. 
(Code 1979, § 8-03-03; Code 1994, § 10-10-03) 
Sec. 115-4-4. - Conditions for issuance of permit. 
(a)  The city forester shall not approve any permit required by the provisions of this article unless the following provisions have been met: 
(1)  The boulevards to be planted have been brought to the final grade as established by the city engineer; 
(2)  In new plantings, the trees shall be planted in a row parallel with and five feet from the property line side of the boulevard. In old plantings, the trees shall be planted in a line with the existing old trees situated in the block; 
(3)  In new subdivisions, where boulevards are over ten feet in width, the subdivider has designated the type of trees to be planted in each block, and such species has been approved by the architectural review commission; and 
(4)  The trees to be planted are not less than 25 feet apart. 
(b)  The city engineer shall not approve any permit required by the provisions of this article unless the following provisions are met: 
(1)  The locations of proposed trees or bushes will be no closer than 10 feet to a water line or water service line; and 
(2)  The locations of proposed trees or bushes will be no closer than 35 feet to a property corner at a street intersection and no closer than 20 feet to an alley. 
(Code 1979, § 8-03-04; Code 1994, § 10-10-04) 
Sec. 115-4-5. - Tree trimming regulations. 
    It is unlawful for any utility company, property owner, tenant or commercial trimmer to trim trees in any public boulevard unless the following regulations are met: 
(1)  All cuts shall be made with a saw or pruner and only at the nodes or crotches. No stubs shall be left. 
(2)  All dead or rotten limbs in the area shall be removed. 
(3)  All old or new wounds over one inch in diameter shall be treated with a good quality of tree wound dressing. 
(4)  All trees and shrubs shall be trimmed neatly and uniformly around their entire circumference so as to effect a pleasant symmetry. 
(Code 1979, § 8-03-05; Code 1994, § 10-10-05) 
Sec. 115-4-6. - Permit and insurance for commercial tree trimmers required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to do commercial tree trimming in any public boulevard in the city without having obtained a permit therefor from the city, the fee therefor to be determined by resolution of the board of city commissioners. The applicant for said permit shall furnish evidence of liability insurance in amounts specified by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1979, § 8-03-06; Code 1994, § 10-10-06) 
Sec. 115-4-7. - Cause for removal of trees and shrubs; notice; action by city. 
(a)  Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other public place in the city in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic or travel, or within 14 feet of a street or ten feet of a sidewalk level, measured vertically, shall be trimmed by the owner of the premises abutting or of the premises on which such tree or shrub grows so that the obstruction shall cease. Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such tree grows or stands. 
(b)  Whenever any knowledge or notice is given by the police or any employee of the city to the city forester that any tree or shrub or hedge is kept or maintained in violation of the provisions of this section, the city forester shall cause written notice to be given to the owner or occupant of the property upon which said tree, shrub or hedge is so located, to cut and trim the same in accordance with the provisions of this section, and, within ten days after the serving of such notice, a summons shall be served on the owner or occupant in the manner provided for by law for the service of summons in civil action in the state courts. 
(c)  If, after the serving of the notice provided for by this section, the owner or occupant fails or neglects to cut or trim said tree, shrubbery or hedge within ten days after the service of such notice, the same shall be trimmed in conformity with the provisions of this section by the city forester or under his direction, the cost thereof to be assessed against the abutting property. 
(Code 1979, § 8-03-07; Code 1994, § 10-10-07) 
Sec. 115-4-8. - Wires near trees regulated. 
    It is unlawful for any person to attach any wire or rope to any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without the permission of the city engineer. Any person or company maintaining poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other public places, shall, in the absence of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any trees and shrubs in such places as far as may be possible, and keep all such trees and shrubs near such wires and poles properly and uniformly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the city engineer, so that no injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs and trees by their contact. The location of such poles and wires shall be approved by the city engineer prior to installation of the same. 
(Code 1979, § 8-03-08; Code 1994, § 10-10-08) 
ARTICLE 5. - DRIVEWAYS 

Sec. 115-5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driveway means a privately maintained access within a property from a public right-of-way to a building or vehicle parking area that is owned and maintained by the property owner 
    Driveway apron means the area from the public street to a driveway 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-14; Code 1994, § 10-05-01; Ord. No. 773, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 1060, 8-4-2009; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-05-01), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-5-2. - Permit required to construct, repair, alter or widen a driveway apron. 
    Unless performed by a city contractor, a permit is required to construct, repair, alter or widen a driveway apron within any public right-of-way. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-14; Code 1994, § 10-05-02; Ord. No. 773, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-05-02), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-5-3. - Permit application and issuance. 
(a)  Permit application. Permit applications for the construction, repair, alteration or widening of any driveway shall be submitted to the city engineer and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and contact information of the property owner or agent in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area; 
(2)  Name, address, contact information, state license number and expiration date, insurance carrier and amount, and bonding company and amount of the contractor doing the work; 
(3)  Estimated cost and location of work; 
(4)  Plans or sufficient sketches showing the details of the proposed work; and 
(5)  Such other information as the city engineer finds reasonably necessary to determine whether or not a permit may be issued hereunder. 
(b)  Application fee. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as determined from time to time by resolution of the board. 
(c)  Application issuance. The city engineer shall issue a permit if a determination is made that: 
(1)  The work will be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
(2)  The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the means of ingress and egress to and from the property affected and adjacent properties; and 
(3)  The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-14; Code 1994, § 10-05-03; Ord. No. 773, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-05-03), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-5-4. - Driveway apron construction standards. 
    All driveways aprons, including existing driveway aprons for which a permit to repair, alter or widen is sought, must be constructed to meet the following standards: 
(1)  Conflict with nonaccess lines prohibited. A driveway or driveway apron may not be constructed so as to be in conflict with the nonaccess lines shown on the plat or the street right-of-way plan on which the proposed driveway or driveway apron is to be located. 
(2)  Connection to paved roadway. All driveway aprons which connect to a paved roadway must also be paved. 
(3)  Fire hydrant. A driveway apron may not be built closer than four feet to a fire hydrant. 
(4)  Removal of existing curb and gutter. Whenever any driveway apron is constructed to connect with the roadway of any street on which curb or curb and gutter is already in place, the curb or curb and gutter must be removed to the first construction joint past the limits of the driveway apron flare. As an alternate, the curb portion of a curb and gutter section may be removed with appropriate concrete sawing equipment leaving the gutter section intact. A triangular-shaped wedge of concrete must be constructed on both sides of the driveway measuring four feet along the curbline and extending to a maximum of eight and one half feet along the driveway apron between the roadway and the sidewalk or sidewalk line, and varying in slope from curb height to sidewalk height as further detailed in the standard specifications at the office of the city engineer. Such work must be done at the owner's expense. 
(5)  Residential lots. Each lot may have one or two driveways. The combined total width of the driveway or driveways shall be no greater than 36 feet, plus any required flares, measured at the curb line. If there are two driveways, they must be separated by a distance of at least twenty-four feet measured at the curb line. If there is a fire hydrant located between the driveways, the twenty-four feet shall be measured from the fire hydrant to the edge of a driveway apron not counting any required apron flare. Except for properties with adjoining driveways that are built up to the property line, the driveway apron must be placed a distance from the property line sufficient to allow for construction of a flare. 
(6)  Nonresidential lots. Any lot not used for residential purposes may have a maximum of two driveways, each not to exceed 40 feet in width, separated by a distance of not less than 24 feet measured at the curbline of each side of the lot that fronts upon a public street. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-14; Code 1994, § 10-05-05; Ord. No. 773, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-05-04), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-5-5. - Removal or relocation of public utilities at owner's expense. 
    If the repair, alteration or widening of a driveway apron will necessitate the removal or relocation of public utilities, street lights or fire hydrants, or the adjustment of manhole castings or valve boxes, such work must be done at the property owner's expense, and the work must conform to standard specifications of the city for public work of like character. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-14; Code 1994, § 10-05-05; Ord. No. 773, § 1, 1990; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-05-05), 2-3-2015) 
ARTICLE 6. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 115-6-1. - Duty of property owner to construct sidewalk. 
    It shall be the duty of property owners within the city to construct a sidewalk in the public right-of-way adjacent to their property, unless there is an approved plan or agreement that specifies that no sidewalk is required. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-12; Code 1994, § 10-02-01; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-01), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-2. - Duty of property owner to maintain sidewalk. 
    It shall be the duty of the property owner, of any property along which a sidewalk has been constructed, to maintain the same in good repair and safe condition. Should any such property owner fail to maintain such sidewalk, the city engineer shall direct the property owner to make repairs as may be necessary to restore such sidewalk to a safe condition. Should the property owner fail, in a reasonable time, to follow these directions, the city engineer shall report the facts to the board of city commissioners who shall then proceed, as authorized by state law, to make such sidewalk safe. Any costs incurred by the city in repairing the sidewalk may be assessed to the property. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-04; Code 1994, § 10-02-02; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-02), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-3. - Building official to require property owner to construct sidewalk. 
    Unless the city engineer has granted a waiver in writing for good cause to allow a specified time delay in installing a sidewalk, the sidewalk shall be completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer prior to issuance of an occupancy permit. Before issuing any occupancy permit, the building official shall verify that a sidewalk has been constructed adjoining the property for which an occupancy permit has been applied for and that the same is in a state of good repair. If the building official shall find there is no sidewalk adjacent to such property, or if the sidewalk is not in a state of good repair, the building official shall issue a written order to the property owner that requires a sidewalk be constructed or repaired by the property owner. If the building official, for any valid reason, feels that the property owner cannot or will not comply in a reasonable period of time, the building official may arrange to have the work done by a contractor hired by the city. The city may assess that work under a one-time full cost assessment to the property. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-13; Code 1994, § 10-02-03; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-03), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-4. - City engineer's responsibility for sidewalks. 
    All construction, maintenance and repair of sidewalks within the public rights-of-way shall be under the supervision of the city engineer. The city engineer shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to such activities and is authorized to enforce such ordinances. If the city engineer determines that not installing sidewalk adjacent to a property is detrimental to public safety, the city engineer may order the property owner to construct a sidewalk within a specified period of time. If the property owner does not comply, the city engineer may order the work done by a contractor hired by the city. The city may assess that work under a one-time full cost assessment to the property. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-01; Code 1994, § 10-02-04; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-04), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-5. - Permits required for construction and repair of sidewalks. 
    Unless performed by the city contractor, the construction, repair or relocation of any sidewalk located in public right-of-way within the city shall require the issuance of a permit from the city engineer. Application for such permit shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. Such permit shall be issued by the city engineer and shall include an expiration date. A record of all such permits shall be kept in the office of the city engineer, the fees therefrom to be accounted for and deposited in the sidewalk construction fund. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-02; Code 1994, § 10-02-05; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-05), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-6. - Application for sidewalk permit. 
    An applicant for a permit under this chapter shall file with the city engineer an application showing: 
(1)  Name, address and contact information of the owner or agent in charge of the property abutting the proposed work area; 
(2)  Name, address, contact information, state license number and expiration date, insurance carrier and amount, and bonding company and amount of the contractor doing the work; 
(3)  Location of the work area; 
(4)  Plans or sufficient sketches showing the details of the proposed work; 
(5)  Estimated cost of the work; and 
(6)  Such other information as the city engineer shall find reasonably necessary to the determination of whether or not a permit should be issued hereunder. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-05; Code 1994, § 10-02-06; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-06), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-7. - Standards for issuance of sidewalk permit. 
    The city engineer shall issue a permit under this chapter upon a finding that: 
(1)  The work will be done according to the standard specifications of the city for public work of like character; 
(2)  The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the means of ingress and egress to and from the property affected and adjacent property; and 
(3)  The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-06; Code 1994, § 10-02-07; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-07), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-8. - Sidewalk specifications. 
    Construction, maintenance and repair of sidewalks shall be made in conformity with specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-03; Code 1994, § 10-02-07) 
Sec. 115-6-9. - Sidewalks built to grade. 
    All sidewalks within public rights-of-way shall be constructed in accordance with the elevation and grade therefore approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-07; Code 1994, § 10-02-09; Ord. No. 628, § 1, 1980; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-09), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-10. - Location of sidewalks. 
    All sidewalks within public rights-of-way shall be laid with the edge parallel to and one foot from the property line, unless otherwise directed by the city engineer. 
Sec. 115-6-11. - Structures under sidewalks. 
    Any person desirous of utilizing the underside of the sidewalk in the public right-of-way in front of any building shall, before commencing such work, obtain a permit therefore from the board of city commissioners after review and recommendation by the city engineer. A sufficient brick or concrete wall shall be constructed to retain the roadway of the street; and the division or party walls of such building shall be extended under the sidewalk to such curb wall. The sidewalks in all such cases shall be incombustible materials entirely, supported by walls or iron beams and columns of sufficient strength to safely carry a load of not less than one hundred pounds to the square foot, exclusive of the weight of materials used in the construction of such walk. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-09; Code 1994, § 10-02-11; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-11), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-12. - Sidewalk safety regulations. 
    In the interest of public safety the following regulations applying to the construction and repair of sidewalks shall apply: 
(1)  Barriers. Every person doing any such work as is herein provided for shall guard the portions of the street where the sidewalk is torn out or obstructed with suitable barriers by day and barriers with red lights by night to as to prevent injury to persons lawfully upon the streets. 
(2)  Stairways extending into sidewalk prohibited; exceptions. No person shall construct or maintain any stairway or open area, opening from, extending into, or upon any sidewalk located in a public right-of-way or public ground within the city; except in the case of any basement stairway or open area appurtenant to a building which was constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this subsection. The owner may continue to maintain such stairway or open space provided it meets the requirements of this section. All stairways serving below-grade entryways on public rights-of-way shall be protected with guardrails and a self-closing gate of not less than forty-two inches in height. Open guardrails and gates shall have intermediate rails or ornamental patterns which comply with the horizontal and vertical spacing requirements of the building code. The gate must be approved by the building official and be installed on the open end of the stairway. 
(3)  Openings into the sidewalk. Openings in such walks, for admission of coal or light, shall be covered with prismatic lights in iron frames or with iron covers having a rough surface, and in no case will a smooth surface be tolerated on such cover. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-10; Code 1994, § 10-02-12; Ord. No. 747, § 1, (1989); Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-12), 2-3-2015) 
Sec. 115-6-13. - Private crossings prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to put across any boulevard or sidewalk within the city any private crossing for any purpose whatever, except by and with the consent of the board of city commissioners, and then only in conformity with the specifications to be prescribed by the city engineer. 
(Code 1979, § 8-01-11; Code 1994, § 10-02-13; Ord. No. 1197, § 1(10-02-13), 2-3-2015) 
ARTICLE 7. - SIDEWALK, CURB AND GUTTER SPECIAL FUND 

Sec. 115-7-1. - Special fund established. 
    It is hereby found and determined that: 
(1)  The city has, for many years, maintained a separate, special fund, designated as the sidewalk, curb and gutter special fund, pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of N.D.C.C. chs. 40-29 and 40-31 for issuance of warrants thereon in accordance with the provisions of N.D.C.C. chs. 40-29 and 40-31; 
(2)  In accordance with N.D.C.C. chs. 40-29 and 40-31, the city has duly levied special assessments for the payment of the cost of sidewalks, curbs and gutters constructed, rebuilt or repaired thereunder and for appropriation to said special fund for the payment of such cost or principal and interest on said warrants; 
(3)  Under N.D.C.C. §§ 40-29-14 and 40-31-08, whenever all taxes and assessments collected are insufficient to pay the warrants issued with interest, the board is required upon the maturity of the last warrant, to levy a tax upon all of the taxable property in the city for the payment of such deficiency and is authorized to levy such tax whenever a deficiency exists in the special fund or is likely to occur within one year; 
(4)  In order to equalize and reduce the burden of the taxes which the city may be required to levy for the payment of deficiencies in said special fund as required by N.D.C.C. §§ 40-29-14 and 40-31-08, it is necessary to establish a uniform policy for the administration of said special fund and the issuance of warrants thereon, and for the levy of taxes from year to year in the amounts required to prevent the accumulation of deficiencies therein, and that from and after the final passage and adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the provisions hereof shall govern the administration of said special fund and the issuance of said warrants, provided the city reserves the right to amend or supplement this article as the need therefor may arise, to such extent as will not impair the rights of holders of such warrants under N.D.C.C. chs. 40-29 and 40-31. 
(Code 1994, § 10-02.1-01; Ord. No. 988, § 9, 11-30-2004) 
Sec. 115-7-2. - Administration of special fund. 
    The sidewalk, curb and gutter special fund shall be continued as a separate and special fund of the city so long as any warrants drawn thereon shall be outstanding and unpaid, and shall be administered as follows: In said special fund there shall be maintained a separate account to be a designated construction account, and, upon the issuance of any warrants on said special fund, the proceeds thereof which are not required to be credited to the principal and interest account shall be credited to the construction account unless such warrants are delivered directly to a contractor in payment for sidewalk, curb and gutter construction, rebuilding or repair. The moneys in said construction account shall be disbursed only in payment of sidewalk, curb and gutter construction, rebuilding or repair ordered by the board, as such expenses are incurred and allowed and costs incurred in connection with the issuance of the warrants and the levying of the assessments or to reimbursement of the city for funds advanced from other sources for such purposes; provided that if, upon the completion of sidewalk, curb or gutter work ordered in any calendar year there remains any unexpended balance in the construction account, such balance shall be transferred to the principal and interest account for the payment of warrants issued during the current year, as described in this article. There shall also be maintained in said fund a principal and interest account for the payment of the principal of premium, if any, and interest on the sidewalk, curb and gutter warrants to be issued against said fund from and after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The principal and interest account shall be credited with any accrued interest paid as part of the purchase price, any capitalized interest and all special assessments or taxes levied and collected for the payment of the cost of sidewalk, curb and gutter projects instituted during such year. The moneys in the principal and interest account, as specified in the resolution authorizing issuance of the warrants, shall be used without further authorization or direction for the payment of the principal of premium, if any, and interest on the warrants as the same become due or for the redemption of warrants when and as the same are redeemable by their terms. 
(Code 1994, § 10-02.1-02; Ord. No. 988, § 9, 11-30-2004) 
Sec. 115-7-3. - Assessments. 
    Upon the completion of each project involving the construction, repair or rebuilding of sidewalks, curbs or gutters, the cost thereof shall be assessed against the lots or parcels of land properly chargeable therewith in accordance with the provisions of N.D.C.C. §§ 40-29-05 and 40-31-02, and, on or before November 1 of each year, the city administrator shall deliver to the county auditor a duplicate of all assessment rolls containing sidewalk, curb and gutter assessments, which assessments shall be collected and the payment thereof enforced in the same manner as other taxes. All such assessments shall be payable in equal annual installments, extending over a period of not exceeding ten years, and the unpaid portions thereof shall bear interest at an annual rate of not more than two percentage points above the average rate on the warrants. Such installments, if not theretofore paid, shall be certified and collected with the general taxes of the city for the year in which the assessment is levied and for each of the succeeding years. In the event that any such assessments shall at any time be held or claimed to be invalid due to any error or mistake in the making thereof, a reassessment or new assessment shall be made in lieu thereof, and the city and all of its officers and employees shall take all such action and proceedings as maybe necessary to make such assessment a valid and binding lien upon the property on which the same is levied. 
(Code 1994, § 10-02.1-03; Ord. No. 988, § 3, 11-30-2004) 
Sec. 115-7-4. - Deficiency. 
    Annually, at the time of the preparation of the municipal budget, the city administrator shall compute the requirements and the current resources of the principal and interest account of the sidewalk, curb and gutter special fund for the payment of the warrants drawn thereon, and an amount sufficient for the payment of any deficiency then existing or anticipated to occur within one year in said principal and interest account shall be included in said budget and a tax shall be levied therefor and when collected shall be credited to such account. If, at the last maturity of the warrants drawn on said account, the moneys in said account shall be insufficient for the payment of all such warrants and accrued interest thereon, the board shall levy a tax upon all of the taxable property in the city for the payment of such deficiency as a part of the annual tax levy thereafter made. All taxes levied and collected under the provisions of this section, in advance of the time when such levy is required by the provisions of N.D.C.C. §§ 40-29-14 and 40-31-08, as amended, shall be credited against the levies which the city would otherwise have become obligated to make under such sections. 
(Code 1994, § 10-02.1-04; Ord. No. 988, § 9, 11-30-2004) 
Sec. 115-7-5. - Issuance of warrants. 
(a)  At any time after the award of a contract for sidewalk, curb or gutter work under the provisions of N.D.C.C. §§ 40-29-08 and 40-31-04, the board may, by resolution, authorize the issuance of sidewalk, curb and gutter warrants in anticipation of the collection of special assessments to be levied and collected with respect to the construction, rebuilding and repairing of sidewalks, curbs and gutters ordered during the then current year. Said warrants shall be drawn upon the principal and interest account created in the sidewalk, curb and gutter special fund and shall be issued upon such terms and conditions as set forth in the resolution providing for their issuance. 
(b)  Said warrants shall be prepared for execution under the direction of the city administrator and shall be executed on behalf of the city by the manual or facsimile signature of the president of the board, countersigned by the manual or facsimile signature of the city administrator under seal of the city. When so prepared and executed, they shall be delivered by the city administrator to the purchasers thereof, upon receipt of the purchase price plus interest accrued thereon to the date of the delivery of payment, or, if so directed by resolution of the board, shall be delivered by the city administrator to the contractor for the sidewalk, curb and gutter work for which such warrants are issued, in payment of estimates prepared by the city engineer and approved by the board of the cost of the work and materials theretofore performed and delivered. Purchasers of such warrants shall not be obligated to see to the application of the purchase price, but the proceeds of all such warrants shall be credited to the construction account and the principal and interest account of the sidewalk, curb and gutter special fund as directed in this article. 
(c)  In the event that at any time the moneys in any of said principal and interest account are insufficient to pay all principal and interest then due on warrants issued against such account, such moneys shall be first used to pay the accrued interest and the balance shall be applied in payment of principal, in order of maturity dates, and pro rata in payment of the principal amount of warrants maturing on the same date. 
(d)  The officers of the city are hereby authorized to prepare and furnish to the purchaser or deliveree of any warrants issued against the sidewalk, curb and gutter special fund certified copies of the ordinance from which this article is derived and of the resolutions authorizing such warrants and of any other actions, proceedings or records of the city reasonably required to show the validity or marketability of said warrants, and all instruments so furnished shall be deemed to constitute representations of the city as to the correctness of all statements contained therein. 
(Code 1994, § 10-02.1-05; Ord. No. 988, § 9, 11-30-2004) 
ARTICLE 8. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 115-8-1. - Responsibility for excavation. 
    All excavation work as mentioned in this article shall be done under the supervision and direction of the public works department in consultation with the city engineer. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-19; Code 1994, § 10-06-01) 
Sec. 115-8-2. - Excavation permit required. 
(a)  Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make any excavation in or upon any of the streets, alleys, berms, boulevards or any public place within the city for the purpose of making any connections, constructions or repairs with or to any sewer, water or gas pipes or main or telephone or electric conduit, or for the purpose of planting any trees or shrubs in or grading or landscaping berm, boulevard or public place, without having obtained a permit as is required by this section, or without complying with the provisions of this article or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit; except that this article shall not apply to any street excavations or trenches resulting from work done by city employees or under the terms of contracts let by the city for improvements or repairs. 
(b)  Permit application. Applications for such permits shall be made to the city engineer, and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, the person doing the actual excavating work, the name of the person for whom or which the work is being done and the estimated cost of the work and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. 
(c)  Permit fee. Applications for such permits shall be accompanied by a permit fee, the amount of which shall be as determined from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners.. 
(Code 1979, §§ 8-02-14-08-02-16; Code 1994, §§ 10-06-02-10-06-04) 
Sec. 115-8-3. - Excavation standards. 
    No permit shall be granted for any purposes set forth in section 115-8-2 unless the person who is to do the work shall be licensed as an excavator by the state, provided that such license shall not be required when the work is to be undertaken by the property owner himself, and provided that the public works department in consultation with the city engineer shall have determined that such work will comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The work will be done according to the standard specifications of the city for work of like character; 
(2)  The operation will not unreasonably interfere with vehicular and pedestrian traffic, the demand and necessity for parking spaces, and the means of ingress and egress to and from the property affected and adjacent properties; 
(3)  The use of municipal and public utilities will not be unreasonably impaired; and 
(4)  The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be unreasonably impaired. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-17; Code 1994, § 10-06-05) 
Sec. 115-8-4. - Performance bond required; warranty period. 
    Any person obtaining an excavator's permit under the provisions of this article shall save harmless the city from any liabilities or damages arising from any work to be undertaken under the terms of said permit on any street, alley or public way, by obtaining a performance bond in the amount to be determined by resolution of the board of city commissioners to guarantee performance and compliance. Work performed under the terms of a permit to excavate shall be warranted by the permittee for a three-year period from and after acceptance by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 8-02-18; Code 1994, § 10-06-06) 
ARTICLE 9. - STORMWATER FACILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 1, adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed the former Art. 9, §§ 115-9-1-115-9-5, and enacted a new Art. 9 as set out herein. The former Art. 9 pertained to stormwater conveyance and treatment and derived from Code 1979, §§ 6-01-01, 6-01-03, 6-01-04, 6-01-06; Code 1994, §§ 9-01-01, 9-01-03, 9-01-04, 9-01-06. 

Sec. 115-9-1. - Approval required to install private stormwater facilities that discharge to public stormwater facilities. 
    No person or development shall install a private stormwater system that discharges to any public stormwater facility unless and until a stormwater management plan has been prepared, submitted to the city, reviewed by the city and approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1(c), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 115-9-2. - Cost to install private stormwater facilities. 
    All costs and expense incidental to the installation and operation of private stormwater facilities shall be borne by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1(c), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 115-9-3. - Indemnification. 
    The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of a private stormwater facility and the property owner shall repair all such damage at the property owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1(c), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 115-9-4. - Design of private stormwater facilities. 
    Private stormwater facilities that discharge off-site must meet all applicable design requirements contained in Chapter 107 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 1(c), 12-1-2015) 
Chapter 117 - WATER AND SEWER UTILITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(a), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, amended the title of Ch. 117. Former Ch. 117 was entitled "Utilities". 
State Law reference- Municipal utilities generally, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-33. 

ARTICLE 1. - POTABLE WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 117-1-1. - Restricting use. 
    Whenever, in the opinion of the city administrator on recommendation of the city engineer, there is a shortage of water supply due to any cause, the city administrator shall have the power and authority to restrict the use of water within the city for a period not to exceed 48 hours unless otherwise extended by vote of a majority of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 6-02-18; Code 1994, § 9-02-15) 
Sec. 117-1-2. - Water service application; service connection charge. 
    Application for water service on any premises shall be made on a form provided by the city by the owner of such premises, and said application shall be conditioned upon the absolute guarantee by the property owner for himself and his successors in interest of the payment of all water rentals and charges imposed under this article, or any amendments thereof, whether incurred by him or by any other person occupying said premises during his ownership thereof. Said application shall be accompanied by payment of a service connection charge that shall be established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners as the reasonable cost of furnishing water service. Approval of said application for water service by the city shall be deemed permission for such service. 
(Code 1979, §§ 6-02-04, 6-02-05; Code 1994, §§ 9-02-04, 9-02-05; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-3. 
Sec. 117-1-3. - Water meter required. 
    Except for water lines directly connected to fire suppression systems, no water shall be furnished unless it is measured by or through a meter. Said meter shall be equipped with a remote reading unit supplied by the city and said meter and associated equipment must be located as specified by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 6-02-10; Code 1994, § 9-02-10; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-5. 
Sec. 117-1-4. - Ownership and control of water meter and turn on and off of service. 
(a)  All water meters shall be owned and controlled of the city and may, at the sole discretion of the city, be installed, inspected, maintained, repaired, removed or replaced. The city may contract for the installation, inspection, maintenance, repair, removal or replacement of water meters. The city may authorize private contractors, hired by a developer or builder, to install water meters. 
(b)  Only employees of the city or authorized contractors may turn on or off water service to a property. Should an unauthorized person turn on or off water service to a property or otherwise tamper with a water system valve, that person is subject to the penalty provisions of section 117-7-4. 
(c)  Prior to installing a water meter, a contractor shall obtain a current copy of the water meter installation instructions from the city. Water meters must be installed according to the detailed installation instructions provided by the city. Any deviation from the specified installation instructions must be approved in advance in writing by the city. 
(Code 1979, § 6-02-11; Code 1994, § 9-02-11; Ord. No. 1218, § 9-02-11, 9-15-2015; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015; Ord. No. 1233, § 2, 2-2-2016) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-6. 
Sec. 117-1-5. - Water rates. 
    The board of city commissioners, in order to provide funds to defray the cost of construction, maintenance and repair of the water production and delivery system, may from time to time, by resolution, establish, maintain and change a schedule of rates, charges, surcharges and fees for all services, facilities, commodities and benefits furnished to city residents, and may impose and collect monthly at the time and in the manner said board may provide. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-7. 
Sec. 117-1-6. - Shutoff of water service for non-payment of water service charges. 
    Whenever an account is in arrears for a period of more than 15 days, the city shall send a delinquent notice with a deadline date for payment and a statement that water service will be shut off if payment is not received. If payment is not received by the deadline date, the city at its sole discretion may shut off water service to the property. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-9. 
Sec. 117-1-7. - Discontinuance of water service. 
    Upon discovery of any water meter which has been broken, injured, tampered with or has become defective, whether through intentional or accidental cause, the department director is empowered to shut off water service to such premises until such time as the meter is repaired and in proper condition. The expense of repairing any meter that has been broken, defaced, injured or tampered with by persons other than those employed by the city shall be a charge against the consumer and shall be billed with the next month's water bill. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-1-8. - Use of hydrants restricted. 
    Except for city employees or contractors working for the city, no person shall operate or take water from a fire hydrant unless they have first obtained a permit to do so from the public works director or designated city official. All water so removed shall be metered and paid for at rates established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 6-02-20; Code 1994, § 9-02-17; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-13. 
Sec. 117-1-9. - Water service. 
(a)  Whenever an application to supply water to any building or lot shall hereafter be granted, the contractor performing the work shall pay to the public works department such sum as shall be fixed and determined by the board of city commissioners. Once all applicable fees have been paid, the city shall tap the main and the contractor shall install the service pipe from the main to the property line and install the corporation cock. Water service to the property will not be activated until the city is satisfied that all pipe and fittings have been installed properly in conformance with applicable city requirements. 
(b)  All service pipe, stop cocks, and other fixtures from the main line to said line adjoining the property, must be laid and attached, kept in good repair, and protected from frost, at the expense of the applicant or consumer, but said service pipes will and shall remain under the control of the city, said applicant waiving and releasing all claims thereto, except keeping the same in repair and protecting as heretofore provided. 
(c)  Persons taking water from any connection service pipes with city water mains must pay all expenses thereof from the water main, and shall be charged the cost of the corporation and stop cock with the iron shutoff box attached. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-15. 
Sec. 117-1-10. - Liability of city for loss of water service. 
    It is expressly provided that the city shall not be liable under any circumstances for a deficiency or failure in the supply of water, whether by the shutting off of water to make repairs or connections, nor for any other cause whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-16. 
Sec. 117-1-11. - Meter failure; determination of charge and repair of meter. 
(a)  In the case that any meter shall fail to register properly from any cause, the amount charged for water during such period shall be estimated by the city, such estimate to be based on the average amount registered during the like preceding period. 
(b)  An employee or agent of the city may enter private property after contacting the occupant and property owner and receiving permission to enter the property in order to inspect, maintain, repair or replace a non-functioning water meter. Failure of the occupant or property owner to grant timely entry to the city will result in discontinuance of water service to the property. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-17. 
ARTICLE 2. - SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 117-2-1. - Use of public sanitary sewer required. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Except as provided in this article, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, is required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 60 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet (61 meters) of the property line. 
(Code 1979, § 6-03-02; Code 1994, § 9-03-02) 
Sec. 117-2-2. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of this article, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with all county requirements. 
(b)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in accordance with county requirements. All sludge or solids, to be disposed of from a septic tank, cesspool or other individual method of disposal, shall be disposed of by a licensed septic tank pumper in accordance with state and county regulations. 
(c)  At such time as a public sanitary sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system and the property owner is so notified by the city, a direct connection shall be made to the public sanitary sewer within 60 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be demolished in accordance with county requirements. 
(Code 1979, § 6-03-03; Code 1994, § 9-03-03) 
Sec. 117-2-3. - Permit required to connect to public sanitary sewer. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the property owner. The property owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer and shall repair all such damage at the property owner's expense. 
(c)  It is unlawful to discharge wastewater, industrial wastes or other wastes to any sanitary sewer within the jurisdiction of the city and/or to the wastewater disposal system without having first complied with the terms of article 4 of this chapter. 
(d)  All significant industrial users proposing to connect or to commence a new discharge to the wastewater disposal system shall obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or discharging into the wastewater system. All existing significant industrial users or those industrial users subject to federal pretreatment standards under sections 307(b) and 307(c), as amended, of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), connected to or discharging into the wastewater system shall obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1979, § 6-03-04; Code 1994, § 9-03-04; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(c), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-2-4. - Limitations on discharge into public sanitary sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any polluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any building drain or sewer which, in turn, is connected, directly or indirectly, to the public sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city and the state. 
(Code 1979, § 6-03-05; Code 1994, § 9-03-05; Ord. No. 978, § 2, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(c), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-2-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(d), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed § 117-2-5, which pertained to sanitary sewer system public utility and derived unamended from the original Code. 
Sec. 117-2-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(d), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed § 117-2-6, which pertained to service changes and use of sanitary sewer system and derived unamended from the original Code. 
Sec. 117-2-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(d), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed § 117-2-7, which pertained to policy in regard to cost of improvements, enlargements and extensions and derived unamended from the original Code. 
Sec. 117-2-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(d), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed § 117-2-8, which pertained to surcharge for sanitary sewer system utility may be established and imposed and derived unamended from the original Code. 
ARTICLE 3. - POTABLE WATER, SANITARY SEWER AND STORMWATER FINANCIAL PROVISIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(e), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, amended the title of Ch. 117, Art 3. Former Art. 3 was entitled Water and Sanitary Sewer Financial Provisions. 

Sec. 117-3-1. - Potable water, sanitary sewer and stormwater facilities. 
    The potable water, sanitary sewer and stormwater facilities, now owned by the city or hereafter acquired, were and are declared to be and to constitute a public utility of the city, to be held, operated, maintained, improved, extended and administered as an enterprise department and undertaking of the city funded primarily or wholly with user charges and known as the water and sewer utility. The properties of the utility shall include all plants, systems, works, instrumentalities, equipment, materials, supplies, lands, easements, rights in land, water rights, contract rights, franchises, water mains, pressure adjusting stations, booster pumps, hydrants, sanitary or combined sewer mains, pumping stations, force mains, stormwater conveyance mains, ditches, detention or retention ponds, facilities for production of potable water, facilities for treatment of wastewater and stormwater, facilities for disposal of byproducts of treatment processes and all parts and appurtenances of the foregoing which are useful or used in connection with the acquisition, treatment and delivery of potable water, the collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal of sanitary sewage, domestic wastewater and industrial wastewater and the collection, conveyance, detention, treatment and discharge of stormwater. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-2. 
Sec. 117-3-2. - Scope of utility. 
    The properties of the water and sewer utility and all future improvements, extensions and enlargements thereof, together with all cash and other assets held in the water and sewer utility fund, and all moneys to be derived thereafter from the services, facilities, products and byproducts of said utility, shall be and are appropriated and dedicated to the purpose of insuring the public health, safety and welfare by furnishing and making available potable water, sanitary sewer and stormwater services to the city and its inhabitants and industries and those in the immediate vicinity thereof who may desire or be required to use such service. Said utility shall at all times be under the management and control of the board of city commissioners and shall be operated and maintained in such manner as to provide service with maximum efficiency and at the minimum cost which is compatible with the plan of operation herein described. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(f), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-3-3. - Service charges. 
(a)  The water and sewer utility shall at all times be so operated and maintained, and rates and charges for its services, facilities, products and byproducts shall be such, as to make the utility self-supporting and self-perpetuating. Such charges, from time to time imposed and collected, shall be made and kept adequate to pay, as incurred, all costs of operation and maintenance of the utility and to establish and maintain reasonable operating reserves to produce net revenues which shall be sufficient, at all times, to pay promptly the principal and interest due on all obligations of the city incurred for the improvement, extension and enlargement of the utility to the extent that such obligations are, according to their terms, payable from said net revenue, and to establish and maintain adequate reserves for the security of said obligations, and to produce surplus net revenues, over and above current principal, interest and reserve requirements, in amounts sufficient to provide reasonable allowances for depreciation and replacement of the utility plus a reasonable return on the city's capital investment therein, which surplus net revenues, when actually on hand, and to the extent that they are not required as a reserve for depreciation and replacement, may from time to time be appropriated by the governing board to pay or contribute to the cost of any other city functions, subject to the limitations now or hereafter prescribed by law. 
(b)  The foregoing appropriations shall not, however, be deemed or construed to preclude the city from defraying any part or all of the expense of any improvement, enlargement or extension of the water and sewer utility by the levy of special assessments or taxes or the issuance of general obligation bonds, whenever and to the extent that such action is authorized in the manner provided by law and is deemed fair and equitable by the governing body. 
(Code 1979, § 6-01-03; Code 1994, § 9-01-03; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-4. 
Sec. 117-3-4. - Policy in regard to cost of improvements, enlargements and extensions. 
(a)  It is declared to be the policy of the city, subject to such modifications as shall be deemed by the board of city commissioners to be required by special circumstances in individual cases, and subject to such modifications as may hereafter be made by ordinance mandatory hereof or supplemental hereto, that the cost of capital improvements, enlargements and extensions of the water and sewer utility shall be paid in the following manner: 
(1)  Potable water . 
a.  Where water mains not exceeding 12 inches in diameter are installed by the city adjacent to residential properties, and where water mains not exceeding 12 inches in diameter are installed by the city adjacent to commercial or industrial properties, the total cost thereof shall be assessed against the properties abutting on such improvements, in sums proportionate to and not exceeding the total benefits determined to be derived therefrom by the respective properties. Water mains of the dimensions described in this subsection are referred to in this section as lateral mains, and other mains are referred to as trunk mains. 
b.  Where a trunk main is installed by the city, the board of city commissioners, upon advice of the city engineer, shall estimate the probable cost of construction of a lateral main at the same time and place, and such estimated cost shall be assessed against the properties abutting on such main in the manner provided in subsection a. above. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer . 
a.  Where sanitary sewer mains not exceeding ten inches in diameter are installed by the city adjacent to residential properties, and where sanitary sewer mains not exceeding 12 inches in diameter are installed by the city adjacent to commercial or industrial properties, the total cost thereof shall be assessed against the properties abutting on such improvements, in sums proportionate to and not exceeding the total benefits determined to be derived therefrom by the respective properties. Sanitary sewer mains of the dimensions described in this subsection are referred to in this section as lateral mains, and other mains are referred to as trunk mains. 
b.  Where a trunk main is installed by the city, the board of city commissioners, upon advice of the city engineer, shall estimate the probable cost of construction of a lateral main at the same time and place, and such estimated cost shall be assessed against the properties abutting on such main in the manner provided in subsection a. above. 
c.  Twenty percent of the cost of any sanitary sewer main in excess of the estimated cost of a lateral sewer at the same time and place shall be assessed against all properties determined by the board to require the immediate construction of such main as a trunk sewer, including properties abutting thereon and properties served or capable of being served by lateral sewer connected thereto, in amounts proportionate to and not exceeding the benefits determined to be derived by said respective properties from such trunk sewer. 
(3)  Stormwater . 
a.  Where new developments do not provide on-site stormwater management facilities, the total cost of off-site stormwater facilities installed by the city shall be assessed against the properties within the development generating the need for such improvements, in sums proportionate to and not exceeding the total benefits determined to be derived therefrom by the respective properties. 
b.  Where the city deems it necessary to install facilities larger than those needed to serve the development, as determined by the board of city commissioners, the city may levy ad valorem taxes upon all property within the city over the same period as the levies of assessments for such improvements for that portion of the improvements deemed to be oversizing, or any portion or all of such cost may be paid out of current funds duly provided in the budget or from the proceeds of general obligation bonds duly authorized by the electors. 
c.  Where public stormwater management facilities are installed as part of a street assessment district, the total cost of those facilities shall be paid by the assessments created in sums proportionate to and not exceeding the total benefits determined to be derived therefrom by the respective properties. 
d.  Where public stormwater management facilities are installed that serve an area of the city, the cost of those facilities shall be apportioned among all properties within the tributary drainage area of the facilities. Costs may be reimbursed to the city through property assessments or user fees. The city may allocate funds from other sources to defray some of the costs of the facilities. 
(b)  Where a portion of the benefit of any of the foregoing improvements is deemed to accrue primarily to the city at large, a portion not exceeding one-fifth of the cost thereof, as determined by the board of city commissioners, may be paid by the levy of ad valorem taxes upon all property within the city over the same period as the levies of assessments for such improvements, or any portion or all of such cost may be paid out of current funds duly provided in the budget or from the proceeds of general obligation bonds duly authorized by the electors. 
(c)  Such portion of the cost of any improvements, extensions or additions to the utility as is not paid by special assessments and taxes levied and actually collected in respect thereof shall be paid from the net revenues of the utility. 
(d)  Where due to any error or omission, or to any special circumstances, a special assessment is not levied against any property benefited by an improvement at the time of the construction thereof in accordance with the program described in this section, the city reserves the right to levy a supplemental special assessment upon such property or to impose and collect a special charge for the connection of such property with the utility system in such amount as shall be required to pay its just shares of the assessable cost of such improvements. 
(Code 1979, § 6-01-04; Code 1994, § 9-01-04; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-10. 
Sec. 117-3-5. - Surcharge for potable water, sanitary sewer and stormwater service may be established and imposed. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the board of city commissioners reserves the right, at any time, to establish and impose, by resolution, a surcharge upon any rate or charge imposed and collected in respect to any service, facility, product or byproduct furnished, or to be furnished, and/or made available by the water and sewer utility to residents of the city. Such surcharge may be imposed upon any class of user thereof, upon the users within any area of the city or upon all users within the corporate limits that may, in the opinion of the board of city commissioners, receive special benefits from any of the services and/or facilities of such utility, for which benefits such user should be required to pay in order to achieve fairness and equality in paying for any capital improvements, enlargements, extensions or betterments, made or to be made to any such service or facilities or in the operation and maintenance of such utility. Such surcharge shall be in such amount and shall be in force for such period of time as the board may determine and shall be billed and collected and payment enforced in the same manner and at the same times as other services for such utility are billed, collected and enforced. Payment received thereunder shall be paid into the water and sewer utility fund. 
(Code 1979, § 6-01-05; Code 1994, § 9-01-05; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(b), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-1-11. 
Sec. 117-3-6. - Water and sewer utility fund. 
    All moneys received by the city in respect to the services, facilities, products and byproducts furnished and made available by the water and sewer utility, except collections of special assessments and taxes appropriated to improvement district funds and moneys borrowed for capital improvements, and all money, receipts and returns received from any investments of such earnings, shall be paid into the treasury of the city and kept in a special fund which shall be permanently maintained on the books of the city, separate and distinct from all other funds, designated as the water and sewer utility fund, in the records of which fund all receipts and disbursements of money on account of or in connection with the utility shall be entered and reflected, but the moneys from time to time on hand therein shall always constitute public municipal funds and shall be deposited and their safekeeping secured like other city funds. Separate accounts within the water and sewer utility fund shall be permanently maintained for the purpose of and obligations of the utility, as provided in this section and such revenues shall be administered and accounted for as follows: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance account . There shall be credited at least once in each calendar month to the operation and maintenance account of said fund, as a first lien and charge on the gross revenues of the utility, balance then held therein, to pay all claims which by accepted accounting practices constitute normal, reasonable and current expenses of operation and maintenance of the utility, and to pay such expenses estimated to accrue for a period of approximately one month, and to maintain a reasonable reserve for contingencies. Moneys in said account shall be used only to pay expenses of the foregoing type, and not for repairs or replacement or for capital improvements properly chargeable to replacement and depreciation reserves or surplus funds. 
(2)  Revenue bond account . The net revenues of the utility are defined in this section as the aggregate of all sums on hand in the water and sewer utility fund from time to time in excess of the current requirements defined in subsection (1) of this section. The entirety of said net revenues shall be credited each month to the revenue bond account of the water and sewer utility fund until there shall have been created within said account, and thereafter so much of the net revenues shall be credited to said account as shall be necessary to maintain, at all times, a reserve in an amount at least equal to the sum of the principal and interest payments due within each next succeeding 12-month period upon all revenue bonds of the city heretofore or hereafter issued and made payable from said account. After said reserve has been created, there shall continue to be credited out of the net revenues to the revenue bond account each month, over and above sums required to maintain said reserve, an amount not less than 1/12 of the sum of the principal and interest to become due on all such revenue bonds within the then next succeeding 12 months. Moneys in said account shall be used for the payment of principal and interest as it becomes due on said revenue bonds, and said reserve shall be used for such purpose only when other moneys in the account are insufficient. All revenue bonds heretofore and hereafter issued and made payable from the revenue bond account, subject to the limitations upon such issuance contained in this section, shall constitute a first lien and charge on the net revenues of the utility, as defined in this section, without preference or priority of one bond over any other, provided that if, at any time, the moneys in the revenue bond account should be insufficient to make all payments of principal and interest due on such revenue bonds and cannot be made sufficient by transfer of moneys from the other accounts described in subsections (3) through (6) of this section, the moneys available shall be first used to pay interest then accrued on all bonds payable from said account, and any excess moneys available shall be used to pay matured principal of such bonds in order of their maturity dates, provided that moneys available for the payment of bonds maturing on the same date shall be pro-rated equally among such bonds. 
(3)  Improvement warrant account . There shall also be maintained in said fund an improvement warrant account for the purpose of segregating net revenues required for the payment of any portions of the cost of improvements hereafter instituted, for which such revenues have been pledged in accordance with the provisions of N.D.C.C. §§ 40-22-15 and 40-22-16. There shall be transferred from said account as required, to the fund of each improvement district for which such pledge has been made, sums sufficient, together with tax and assessments collections held in such funds, to pay when due the principal and interest on all improvement warrants drawn upon such funds for the financing of such improvements. Moneys sufficient for the requirements of said improvement district funds shall be credited and paid into the improvement warrant account out of net revenues remaining from time to time after provision for the current requirements of the revenue bond account, and for the lien and charge on said net revenues in favor of improvement warrants for the payment of which such pledges have been made shall be subordinate only to the lien and charge on said net revenues in favor of revenue bonds payable from the revenue bond account. In the event that moneys in the improvement warrant account should be insufficient for the making of all transfers required to be made to the several improvement district funds to which such pledges have been made, and cannot be made sufficient by the transfer of funds from the remaining accounts described in subsections (4) through (6) of this section, the available moneys shall be apportioned first to the several improvement district funds in sums sufficient to pay interest then accrued on all warrants drawn on such district funds, and any remainder shall be applied in payment of matured principal of such warrants maturing on the same date, such available moneys shall be applied to the warrants of the several issues in proportion to the matured principal amount thereof for the payment of which taxes and assessments in the respective improvement funds are insufficient. 
(4)  Replacement and depreciation account . Finally, there shall be maintained a replacement and depreciation account into which there shall be credited and paid as received, except as otherwise stated in subsection (6) of this section, all net revenues in excess of the current requirements of the other accounts described above in this section. In said account there shall be maintained such balance as the board shall from time to time determine to constitute an adequate reserve for depreciation and replacement of the utility, which reserve may be used to redeem prior to maturity obligations payable from the net revenues as and when the same become repayable according to their terms, or to replace worn out or obsolete properties of the utility, or to make extension, enlargements or improvements thereto. Any moneys in said account determined to be surplus to the immediate requirements thereof may be invested or may be transferred to other city funds in the discretion of the board in the manner and subject to the limitations set forth in N.D.C.C. § 40-33-12. 
(5)  Moneys on hand . The moneys on hand in any of the accounts of the water and sewer utility fund shall, at all times, be available and shall be used to the extent necessary to restore any deficiency in the funds on hand in any of the preceding accounts in the order listed in this section for the fulfillment of the requirements of such preceding accounts. 
(6)  Additional accounts . The city reserves the right to create additional accounts within said water and sewer utility fund for the purpose of segregating any surplus net revenues which may be pledged and appropriated to the payment of obligations hereafter issued to finance improvements, enlargements or extensions of said utility, other than the obligations made payable from the revenue bond account and the improvement warrant account pursuant to the authority for such issuance reserved in section 117-3-7, provided that moneys on hand in any such accounts shall at all times be available for and used to the extent necessary to meet the current requirements of all of the foregoing accounts except the replacement and depreciation account. 
(Code 1979, § 6-01-06; Code 1994, § 9-01-06; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(f), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-3-1. 
Sec. 117-3-7. - Provision for financing capital improvements. 
    In borrowing money for capital improvements, extensions or additions to said utility, the following provisions shall at all times be observed: 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, whenever the net revenues of the utility hereinabove appropriated to the improvement warrant account are pledged to pay a portion of the cost of any improvement to be financed by improvement warrants, such warrants and the interest accruing thereon shall be deemed to be payable from said net revenues in the same proportion as that part of the cost payable from said net revenues bears to the principal amount of such warrants; and the portion of such cost payable from net revenues shall be deemed equal to the principal amount of the warrants less the principal amount of the taxes and assessments agreed to be levied for the payment thereof. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, no obligations shall be issued and made payable from the revenue bond account or the improvement warrant account at any time unless the net revenues of the utility, as defined in subsection (2) of section 117-3-6, received during the then next preceding fiscal year, shall have been in an aggregate amount at least equal to 125 percent of the average annual principal and interest payments due on all bonds payable from the revenue bond account which are then outstanding or then to be issued, plus percentage of the average of the annual principal and interest payments due on each issue of improvement warrants then outstanding or then to be issued as shall be payable from said net revenues, which averages shall be computed on the basis of the principal and interest payments due in the fiscal years of the then remaining term of all such revenue bonds and improvement warrants then outstanding. For the purpose of such computation, whenever rates for potable water, sanitary sewer or stormwater service have been changed in the course of any fiscal year, the net revenues for such year shall be deemed to be those which would have been received if such amended rates had been in effect during the entirety of such years, based upon the actual quantities of service furnished to each class of customers and the actual expenses of the utility during such year; provided that in no case shall the net revenues so computed be deemed to exceed 125 percent of the net revenues actually received during such year. 
(3)  Refunding revenue bonds may be issued for the purpose of prepaying and refunding bonds payable from the revenue bond account when and as they become pre-payable according to their terms, in the manner and to the extent permitted by law, provided that such refunding revenue bonds shall be subject to the requirements set forth in subsection (2) of this section, as applied to the past net revenues and future principal and interest requirements as of the date of the issuance of such refunding revenue bonds. However, the city shall and does also reserve the right and privilege of issuing refunding revenue bonds, when permitted by law, for the purpose of refunding and extending the maturities of any bonds payable from the revenue bond account which have matured and for the payment of which moneys in the revenue bond account are insufficient, and cannot be made sufficient by transfer of moneys from other accounts, and such refunding revenue bonds shall be payable from the revenue bond account on a parity as to interest with all then outstanding bonds payable therefrom but the maturities of such refunding revenue bonds shall be subsequent to the maturities of all such outstanding bonds. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require the holder of any revenue bond to accept a refunding revenue bond in exchange therefor. 
(4)  The city also reserves the right and privilege of issuing refunding improvement warrants in the manner and to the extent provided in N.D.C.C. ch. 40-27. The lien and charge of such refunding warrants on the net revenues appropriated to the improvement warrant account shall be the same as that in favor of the improvement warrants refunded thereby; provided that for the purpose of the computations directed to be made in this section, the maturities and the rate or rates of interest payable on such refunding warrants shall be substituted for the maturities and interest rates of the improvement warrants refunded thereby. 
(5)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to affect the obligation of the city, under the laws of the State, to levy ad valorem taxes upon all taxable property within the corporate limits for the purpose of paying a deficiency, if any, in the fund of any improvement district, at the time of the maturity of the last warrant drawn thereon, or at such earlier time as may be hereafter directed by such laws; provided that it shall be the policy of the city that the amounts of any deficiency tax levies so made shall be restored to the general funds of the city out of any surplus net revenues thereafter received, over and above the requirements of the several accounts of the water and sewer utility fund as stated in section 117-3-6. 
(6)  Except as hereinabove authorized, no obligations of any kind shall be issued and made payable from said net revenue unless the lien thereof is expressly made subordinate and junior to the lien and charge on said net revenues in favor of all revenue bonds and improvement warrants payable from the revenue bond account and the improvement warrant account. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(f), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-3-3. 
Sec. 117-3-8. - Covenants with bond and warrant holders. 
    The city shall and does covenant and agree with the original purchaser and each holder from time to time of each bond or warrant issued and made payable from the revenue bond account or the improvement warrant account, as follows: 
(1)  It will complete all improvements financed by the issuance of such obligations with due diligence and with the greatest economy consistent with good workmanship and efficient results and will do so without creating or permitting the creation of any liens or encumbrances on said utility or on the revenue thereof other than the liens and charges on said revenues expressly authorized in this article. 
(2)  As long as any obligations payable from said accounts are outstanding, it will continue to own and operate said utility as a municipal utility, free from all competition as to the services thereby provided and in good and efficient operating condition. 
(3)  It will at all times maintain a schedule of rates, charges and rentals for all services, facilities, commodities and benefits furnished by said utility and will impose and collect the same in amounts at least sufficient to make the minimum payments into the respective accounts of the water and sewer utility fund as specified in section 117-3-6 and will revise such schedules in such manner and whenever and as often as needed to perform this covenant. 
(4)  Under each such schedule, the city shall be obligated to pay and will pay from its other funds to the water and sewer utility fund a fair and equitable amount for any and all services, facilities, commodities and benefits furnished to the city or any of its departments by the utility. 
(5)  It will at all times maintain books of account adequate to show all receipts and disbursements of the city respecting the utility, and the application of such receipts to the purposes of the several accounts described in section 117-3-6, which books of accounts shall be open to inspection by the holder of any obligation payable from the revenue bond account or the improvement warrant account at any reasonable time, and that it will furnish a certified transcript therefrom of any information which any such bond or warrant holder may request, upon payment of a reasonable fee therefor. 
(6)  It will cause the annual financial statement of the city required by the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 40-16-05 include a statement as to the financial condition and the receipts and disbursements of the water and sewer utility fund and of its several accounts during each fiscal year, and will furnish a copy of such statement to the original purchaser of each issue of bonds or warrants upon request. 
(7)  Upon written demand of the holders of 20 percent or more of the bonds or warrants of any issue payable from the revenue bond account or improvement warrant account and then outstanding, it will cause an audit of the books of account of the utility to be made by a certified public accountant satisfactory to the holders of such obligations, the cost thereof to be paid as an operating expense of the utility, and will furnish a copy of the report of any such audit to such party as shall be designated in such demand. 
(8)  It will at all times keep the properties of said utility insured in reasonable amounts against loss or damage by fire, tornado and other risks for which similar properties are customarily insured by prudent owners, and will carry adequate public liability insurance, insuring against any claim of personal injury or property damage which is or may become a charge against the revenues of the utility, and will cause all persons handling funds for the utility to be bonded in suitable amounts for the protection of the city and the holders of obligations of the utility, such insurance and bonds to be carried with the state fire and tornado fund or such reputable and responsible insurers as shall be selected by the board of city commissioners, and the expense of all such insurance and bonds accounted for as an operating cost of the utility, and the city will use the proceeds of any such insurance and bonds to restore the loss or damage compensated thereby. 
(9)  The city and its governing body and each and all of its officers will punctually perform all duties with reference to said utility and the revenues thereof and the obligations, issued hereunder, which are imposed by law or other ordinances and resolutions of the city, including this article, in force on the date upon which any such obligations are issued, and all provisions of the constitution and laws and of such ordinances and resolutions which provide security for the holders of bonds issued hereunder are acknowledged to be part of the city's contract with the holders from time to time of such obligations; provided that nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the city from modifying the policies set forth in section 117-3-4 with reference to any improvements constructed and financed after the effective date of such modification. 
(10)  The holders of 20 percent or more in principal amount of each issue of bonds or warrants payable from the revenue bond account or the improvement warrant account and at the time outstanding shall be privileged, and are empowered, to institute and maintain, in behalf of the holders of all outstanding obligations of the same issue, any suit or proceedings at law or in equity for the protection and enforcement of any covenant, agreement or stipulation herein provided to be performed or observed by the city or its governing body or any of its officers, whether or not any such obligations are then in default as to principal and interest, and each and all of the rights and remedies specified and mentioned in N.D.C.C. §§ 40-35-15 to 40-35-19 are acknowledged to be available to the holders of such obligations. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(f), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-3-4. 
Sec. 117-3-9. - Bonds and interest payable from fund-Requiring endorsement on bond. 
    All bonds hereafter issued and the interest thereon shall be payable from the revenue bond account of the water and sewer utility fund in accordance with the provisions of this article and there shall be endorsed on each and all of said bonds a statement to the effect that such bonds are secured by the covenants and subject to all of the terms and provisions contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(g), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-3-10. - Bonds-Priority. 
    Revenue bonds hereafter issued shall be without preference or priority of one bond over any other as provided in subsection (2) of section 117-3-6. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(g), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-3-11. - Unassessed property. 
    A permit may not be issued to make a connection to potable water, sanitary sewer or stormwater lines of the city until the costs of all potable water, sanitary sewer and stormwater improvements have been paid or assessed to the property. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(f), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-3-5. 
Sec. 117-3-12. - Cross reference to former code section numbers. 
    References in city resolutions to the former Title 9, Chapter 9-01 of the Mandan Code of Ordinances and sections thereof shall also mean and be construed to refer to this Chapter 117, Article 3 and the sections hereof as follows: 
Section in former 
Chapter 9-01 of Title 9 Section in Article 3 of Chapter 117 9-01-01 117-3-1 9-01-02 117-3-2 9-01-03 117-3-3 9-01-04 117-3-4 9-01-05 117-3-5 9-01-06 117-3-6 9-01-07 117-3-7 9-01-08 117-3-8 9-01-09 117-3-9 9-01-10 117-3-10 9-01-11 117-3-11  
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(g), 12-1-2015) 
ARTICLE 4. - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, amended the title of Ch. 117, Art 4. Former Art. 4 was entitled Industrial Wastewater Treatment. 

Sec. 117-4-1. - Definitions. 
    The city does hereby adopt the definitions contained in the latest version of 40 CFR 403.3, and any amendments thereto as may be adopted from time to time shall be automatically incorporated in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 6-03-01; Code 1994, § 9-03-01; Ord. No. 857, § 1, 5-6-1997; Ord. No. 978, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-4-2. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for discharge and control of all significant industrial wastewater into the city's wastewater facilities. It is the intent of the city that the requirements and standards contained in this article comply with all applicable state and federal laws. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system that will interfere with the operation of the system or the use or disposal of the sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater facilities which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into the receiving waters or atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; and 
(3)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system. 
(b)  This article provides for the regulation of the discharge of industrial wastewater into the city's wastewater facilities through the issuance of permits to users of the system and through enforcement of the general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, and provides a procedure for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this article. 
(c)  This article provides for the regulation of, and establishes criteria for, the use of public sanitary or combined sewers, private sewage disposal, building sewers and connections and general prohibitions. This article provides for the regulation of significant industrial wastewater discharges into the city's wastewater facilities. Wastewater pretreatment requirements and criteria are hereby established and defined in this article. 
(d)  This article provides penalties for violations of provisions of this article, and the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued under this chapter. 
(e)  This article shall apply in the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city wastewater facilities. 
(f)  The board of city commissioners shall designate individuals to administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-01; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 4, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-4-3. - Industrial wastewater discharge applications. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall complete and file with the appropriate designated city official an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee set by the board. Existing significant industrial users shall apply for an industrial wastewater discharge permit within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and new significant industrial users shall apply at least 90 days prior to connecting or discharging to the wastewater disposal system. All permit applications shall include the following: 
(1)  Name, address, and location of the facility, including the name and address of the operator and owners. 
(2)  SIC number according to the standard industrial classification manual and a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility and held by or for the owner's facilities. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, those governed by this article, as determined by an analytical laboratory certified by the EPA or a designated state agency. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and contained in section 304(g) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended. 
(4)  Time and duration of discharge. 
(5)  Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variation, if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical, and plumbing plans and details to show all sanitary sewers, sanitary sewer connections and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant process on the premises, including all material that is or could be discharged. 
(8)  If known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge that are limited by the city, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and (for existing discharges) a statement regarding whether the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)  Each product produced by type, amount, and rate of production. 
(10)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(11)  Number of full- and part-time employees, and hours of work. 
(12)  A statement: 
a.  Describing which subcategories might be applicable; and 
b.  Citing evidence and reasons why a particular subcategory is applicable and why others are not applicable. Any person signing the application statement submitted pursuant to this article shall make the following certification: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person who manages the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the designated city official to be necessary to evaluate the permit application or as may be required by federal and state regulators. 
(b)  The designated city official will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue an industrial wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this article and as may be proscribed by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-04; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 7, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed § 117-4-3, which pertained to permit required for wastewater discharges and derived from Code 1994, § 9-03.1-03; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 6, 4-20-2004. Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), consequently renumbered §§ 117-4-4-117-4-19 to be §§ 117-4-3-117-4-18 as herein set out. 
Sec. 117-4-4. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
    Industrial wastewater discharge permits are expressly subject to all provisions of this article, all other applicable federal and state laws or regulations and user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The user charges or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the wastewater disposal system. 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater parameters and characteristics. 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and flow equalization. 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(5)  Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of pretreatment facilities. 
(6)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequencies and method of sampling, standards for tests, and reporting schedule. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city and affording the designated city official access thereto. 
(9)  Requirements of submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(10)  Requirements for notification to and acceptance by the designated city official prior to the introduction of new wastewater constituents, or of any substantial change in the volume or characteristics of the wastewater. 
(11)  Requirement for disposal of sludges, floatables, skimmings, etc. 
(12)  Other conditions, as deemed appropriate by the city, to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-05; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 8, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-5. 
Sec. 117-4-5. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit durations. 
    Permits shall be issued for a specified period, not to exceed five years. The permittee shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. At that time, the city can decide whether or not the permit needs to be reissued. A decision that a permit does not need to be reissued would not affect the user's service. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are identified, or if other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-06; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 9, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-6. 
Sec. 117-4-6. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit modifications. 
    Permits may be modified for just cause upon 30 days' notice. Just cause shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Correction of typographical errors or technical errors. 
(2)  Changes in ownership or name of permittee. 
(3)  Changes or alterations to the permittee's facility or operations. 
(4)  A requirement of more frequent monitoring. 
(5)  Changes of interim dates in a compliance schedule or to modify the permit by including a compliance schedule. 
(6)  New information received by the city relating to the permittee's operation. 
(7)  Amendment of existing regulations by state or federal regulatory agencies, or promulgation of a new applicable national categorical pretreatment standard or other applicable rules and regulations. 
(8)  Changes in the requirements of this chapter. 
(9)  Changes in the process used by the permittee or changes in discharge volumes or character. 
(10)  Changes in design or capability of the receiving wastewater treatment facility. 
(11)  Inclusion of a permit reopener. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-07; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 7, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-7. 
Sec. 117-4-7. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit transfers. 
    Permits are transferable only with prior written approval from the city. Permittees must provide a written request for approval of a permit transfer no later than 60 days prior to any intended sale or transfer of ownership. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-08; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 8, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-8. 
Sec. 117-4-8. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit user reports. 
    The city may require any industrial user discharging or proposing to discharge wastewater to the wastewater system to file periodic reports. The information required to be reported and time period of the report shall be made a condition of the discharge permit. The information to be reported may include, but not be limited to, process, flow conditions, and character of the wastewater, and compliance reports and all reports required under section 403.12 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. All analytical testing shall be performed by methods approved under 40 CFR 136, or as otherwise approved by the state or EPA. All monthly reports shall be submitted no later than the last day of the month following the sampling event. Quarterly reports shall be submitted no later than the last day of the month following the end of the quarter. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-09; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 12, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-9. 
Sec. 117-4-9. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit sampling and monitoring. 
(a)  All industrial users shall perform sampling and monitoring of discharges as specified in their permit. Records relating to the sampling and monitoring shall be submitted as required in the permit. 
(b)  The city may require that the significant industrial discharger provide and operate, at the discharger's expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of each sanitary sewer connection to the wastewater treatment system. Where at all possible, the monitoring facility shall be located on the premises of the discharger. There must be ample room to allow accurate flow measuring and sampling, and the facility shall be kept in a safe and proper operating condition. All data for the equipment to be installed in the monitoring facility shall be submitted to the designated city official. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-10; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 14, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-10. 
Sec. 117-4-10. - Industrial wastewater discharge permit inspection and sampling. 
(a)  The designated city official or his authorized agents may inspect the facilities of any user to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. The user shall allow the designated city official or his representative to enter upon the premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection, sampling or records examination and copying. The city shall be allowed to set up equipment on the user's premises as required for the purpose of collecting samples and recording of flow. 
(b)  As a condition of the industrial's user's permit, the user shall consent to the city's right of entry onto the user's premises for the purpose of announced and unannounced inspections. Further, the user shall consent, as a condition of the permit, to allow the city to set up equipment on the user's premises to conduct sampling and recording of flow on the user's premises. 
(c)  As a condition of the industrial user's permit, the user shall consent to the city's inspection and copying of any and all records relating to discharges into the POTW and any sampling of discharges conducted by the user. 
(d)  As a condition of the industrial user's permit, the user shall consent to payment of the city's court costs and attorney's fees if the city is required to seek a court order for entry upon the premises to conduct an inspection of the premises, sampling of discharges, or a review of user records, necessitated by the user's refusal to allow said entry, inspection, sampling or record review and copying. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-11; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 14, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-11. 
Sec. 117-4-11. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information submitted to EPA authorities . In accordance with 40 CFR 2, any information submitted to the EPA pursuant to federal regulations may be claimed as confidential by the submitter. Any such claim must be assessed at the time of submission in the manner prescribed on the application form or instructions, or, in the case of other submissions, by stamping the words "confidential business information" on each page containing such information. If no claim is made at the time of submission, the EPA may make the information available to the public without further notice. If a claim is asserted, the information will be treated in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 2. 
(b)  Effluent data . Information and data furnished to the city, pursuant to local, state or federal laws or regulations, which are effluent data, shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(c)  Information submitted to city or state authorities . All other information which is submitted to the city or state authorities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless inconsistent with federal law or regulations and at least to the extent provided by 40 CFR 2.302, as amended. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-12; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 15, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-12. 
Sec. 117-4-12. - Wastewater strength. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, regulation or through the EPA approval process of the city's North Dakota Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NDPDES) permit, more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater facilities, if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this article. In all events, the more stringent limitations or requirements as adopted by the city must be consistent with the procedures and requirements of 40 CFR 403, as amended. The limitations for wastewater strength shall be as established by the city in each industrial user's industrial wastewater discharge permit. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-13; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 16, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-13. 
Sec. 117-4-13. - Dilution prohibited as substitute for treatment. 
    Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The control authority may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-14; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 17, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-14. 
Sec. 117-4-14. - Supplementary limitation. 
(a)  Except as noted, no user may discharge wastewater containing materials in excess of the following values: 
Materials Daily Maximum Concentration mg/l Arsenic 0.23 Benzene 0.05 BTEX 0.75 Cadmium 0.25 Chromium-Total 4.12 Chromium (III) 3.55 Chromium (VI) 0.033 Copper 4.04 Lead 0.74 Mercury 0.073 Molybdenum 1.02 Nickel 1.88 Selenium 0.28 Silver 2.46 Zinc 2.0  
(b)  Concentrations apply at the point of discharge to the city collection system. The city may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limits in this section, if deemed appropriate to prevent interference or to protect the quality of the treatment plant effluent or sludge. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-15; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 18, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-15. 
Sec. 117-4-15. - Biocides and toxic chemicals. 
    The permittee shall identify to the city all biocides and toxic chemicals used at the permittee's facility, and shall provide written documentation prior to changing biocides and/or toxic chemicals. The permittee shall provide to the city all of the manufacturer's data for all biocide and toxic chemicals to be used, as well as the quantities to be used. The city reserves the right to limit the discharge of any biocide and/or toxic chemical to prevent an adverse impact on the wastewater facilities or which may result in a violation of the city's NPDES permit, or of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. The permittee shall provide the tanks, equipment, and control devices to limit the discharge and shall operate the system as stipulated in the permit. No biocides or toxic chemicals shall be stored in a room which has a floor drain to preclude an accidental spill into the wastewater facilities. For purposes of this section, the term "toxic chemical or pollutant" means any chemical or pollutant that can cause acute health or significant adverse environmental impacts, and therefore, its manufacture, processing, or use, and any continuous or recurring releases from a facility, must be reported under title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act and shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. A user may not discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly, any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the wastewater disposal system. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-17; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 20, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-16. 
Sec. 117-4-16. - Special agreements. 
    Provisions contained in this article shall not be deemed to prevent any contract authorized by the board of city commissioners in the usual manner between the city and any user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or characteristic may be accepted by the city for treatment which will not violate or cause the city to waive or violate federal or state discharge or pretreatment standards or requirements, and which will not be harmful to the wastewater treatment plant, the treatment process, or the sanitary sewer mains. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-18; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 21, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-17. 
Sec. 117-4-17. - Accidental discharges; slug load. 
    Each industrial discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited or regulated materials or substances established by this article, commonly known as a slug load. Where necessary, facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials must be provided and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protection against slug load discharges must be submitted to the city before construction of the facility. Each existing industrial user shall complete its plans and submit it to the city by a date specified in the permittee's industrial wastewater discharge permit. No new permittee shall introduce wastewater or pollutants into the wastewater facilities until after the accidental discharge protection procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to operate and modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. Users shall notify the designated city official immediately upon the occurrence of a slug load or accidental discharge of substances prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-19; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 22, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-18. 
Sec. 117-4-18. - Discharge of wastewater into storm sewer or watercourse prohibited. 
    No person shall discharge wastewater or industrial wastes into any storm sewer or other watercourse within the city. Wastewater or industrial wastes may be discharged pursuant to this article only into the sanitary sewer system via an approved building sewer or at discharge points authorized by the city. Each day on which an unlawful discharge occurs is a separate offense. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-20; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 23, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-19. 
Sec. 117-4-19. - Purpose of fees. 
    It is the purpose of this article to provide for the recovery of costs from industrial users of the city's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of the NPDES program established in this article. The applicable charges or fees shall be established and amended from time to time by resolution of the board. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-23; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 26, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-22. 
Sec. 117-4-20. - Charges and fees. 
    The board shall establish charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Charges for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(2)  Fees for permit applications; 
(3)  Appeal fees; and 
(4)  Other fees and/or charges as the board may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-24; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 27, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed § 117-4-20, which pertained to rates established; annual audit and derived from Code 1994, § 9-03.1-21; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 24, 4-20-2004. Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), consequently renumbered §§ 117-4-22-117-4-34 to be §§ 117-4-19-117-4-31 as herein set out. 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-23. 
Sec. 117-4-21. - Emergency suspension of service or discharge. 
(a)  The city may, for good cause shown, suspend the wastewater treatment service and the industrial wastewater discharge permit of a user when it appears to the city that an actual or threatened discharge presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the environment, interfere with the operation of the wastewater treatment facility, cause the city to be in violation of its NPDES permit, violate any pretreatment limits imposed by this article or state or federal law or regulation, or violate any industrial wastewater discharge permit issued pursuant to this article. Any user notified of the suspension of the wastewater treatment service shall cease discharging wastewater immediately. In the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall commence whatever steps are necessary to obtain compliance, including, but not limited to, severance of water service and/or judicial proceedings. The city shall reinstate the service and discharge permit upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge creating the threat of imminent or substantial damage. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the noncomplying discharge, slug or accidental discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of the occurrence. 
(b)  Whenever the city suspends service or the permit of a user pursuant to the emergency provisions of this section, the city shall serve notice on the user personally or by first class mail. The user has a right to an informal hearing before the board or designee upon request made in writing and filed with the designated city official. The informal hearing must be held within five days of the request. Following the hearing, the board may affirm, modify or rescind the action. 
(c)  A request for an informal hearing before the board's designee or a hearing before the board filed pursuant to this section does not stay the action appealed pending the hearing. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-25; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 28, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed § 117-4-21, which pertained to wastewater service charges and derived from Code 1994, § 9-03.1-22; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 25, 4-20-2004. 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-24. 
Sec. 117-4-22. - Notification of violation; order to show cause. 
(a)  Whenever the city finds that any person has violated or is violating the provisions of this article, industrial wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained in this article, the designated city official, following consultation with the city engineer, and with the concurrence of the city attorney, may serve upon any person a written notice stating the nature of the violation, requiring corrective action and, if circumstances warrant it, an order to show cause why the user should not be penalized by either the proposed imposition of fines, the temporary suspension of the permit or the revocation of the permit upon a date certain. Within 15 days of the date of notice, unless a shorter time frame is necessary due to the nature of the violation, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof must be submitted to the city by the permittee. 
(b)  The permittee shall file with the designated city official a request for hearing before the board within five days of receipt of the notice and order to show cause, or, in lieu thereof, may enter into an agreement relating to the violation, corrective action, and any imposition of penalty. Any negotiated agreement is subject to approval by the board. Should the board reject the agreement, a hearing before the board shall be scheduled on the matter, which hearing shall be held no later than 30 days after the agreement's rejection. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-26; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 29, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-25. 
Sec. 117-4-23. - Temporary suspension, termination or revocation of permit; fines. 
(a)  A permit may be temporarily suspended, terminated or revoked, or fines imposed by the board, following notice and an opportunity for a hearing for just cause, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Violation or a pattern of repeated violations of any terms or conditions of the industrial wastewater discharge permit; 
(2)  False statements in any required report or application; 
(3)  Obtaining a permit by misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts; 
(4)  Failure to report the discharge of toxic chemicals or pollutants or other prohibited discharges; or 
(5)  Any other violation of this article. 
(b)  Notice shall be given and a hearing provided in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-27; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 30, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-26. 
Sec. 117-4-24. - Show cause hearing. 
    If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to show cause before the board why the proposed enforcement action or revocation should not be taken. A notice must be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the board regarding the enforcement action or revocation, and directing the user to show cause before the board why the proposed enforcement action or revocation should not be taken. The notice must be served personally or by first class mail at least ten days before the hearing. Notice may be made to any agent or officer of a corporation. The proceedings at the hearing shall be considered by the board, which shall then enter appropriate orders with respect to the alleged improper activities of the user. Appeal of such orders may be taken by the user in accordance with applicable law. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-28; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 31, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-27. 
Sec. 117-4-25. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges wastewater, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, requirement or permit condition, the city attorney may, following the authorization of such action by the board, commence action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief. The city's legal action may seek imposition of the civil penalties for violations of this article and injunctive relief which requires or prohibits conduct on the part of the permittee. The city may request the EPA to investigate and prosecute any suspected violations, which may subject the user to either civil or criminal penalties available under state or federal law. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-29; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 32, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-28. 
Sec. 117-4-26. - Violations. 
(a)  Any user who is found to have violated an order of the board, made in accordance with the provisions of this article, orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued under this chapter, is guilty of an offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  Any user who is found to have discharged or caused the discharge of wastewater, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system, contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any other permit requirement, limitation, or condition set by the city, is guilty of an offense. 
(c)  Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-30; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 33, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-29. 
Sec. 117-4-27. - Responsibility for damages and costs of attorney's fees. 
    Any user violating any of the provisions of this article, or who has a discharge which causes a deposit, obstruction, damage, or other impairment of the city's wastewater facilities, must be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by the violation or the discharge. The city may add to the user's charges and fees the costs assessed for any cleaning, repair or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. In addition to the civil penalties in this section, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court report's fees, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate action against the user found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued under this chapter. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-31; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 34, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-30. 
Sec. 117-4-28. - Falsifying information. 
    Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation, or certification in any applicable record, report, plan, application, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or industrial wastewater discharge permit, or who knowingly falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-32; Ord. No. 855, 4-29-1997; Ord. No. 978, § 35, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-31. 
Sec. 117-4-29. - National pretreatment standards; prohibited discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions . A user may not introduce into a POTW any pollutants which cause pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions of subsection (c) of this section apply to each user introducing pollutants into a POTW, whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. 
(b)  Affirmative defenses . A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in subsection (a) of this section and the specific prohibitions in subsections (c)(1) through (c)(3) of this section where the user can demonstrate that: 
(1)  The user did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and 
(2)  A local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or interference, as the case may be, was developed in accordance with subsection (d) of this section for each pollutant in the users' discharge that caused pass through or interference, and the user was in compliance with each such local limit directly prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
(3)  If a local limit designed to prevent pass through or interference, as the case may be, has not been developed in accordance with subsection (d) of this section for the pollutant that caused the pass through or interference, the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass through or interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance with the POTW's NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage use or disposal. 
(c)  Specific prohibitions . In addition, the following pollutants shall not be introduced into a POTW: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0, unless the works is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges. 
(3)  Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in the interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40 degrees Centigrade or 104 degrees Fahrenheit unless the approval authority, upon request of the POTW, approves alternate temperature limits. 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(d)  When specific limits must be developed by POTW . Each POTW developing a POTW pretreatment program pursuant to section 403.8 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act shall develop and enforce specific limits to implement the prohibitions listed in subsections (a) and (c) of this section. Each POTW with an approved pretreatment program shall continue to develop these limits as necessary and effectively enforce such limits. All other POTW's shall, in cases where pollutants contributed by the user result in interference or pass through, and such violation is likely to recur, develop and enforce specific effluent limits for industrial users, and all other users, as appropriate, which, together with appropriate changes in the POTW treatment plant's facilities or operation, are necessary to ensure renewed and continued compliance with the POTW's NPDES permit or sludge use or disposal practices. Specific effluent limits shall not be developed and enforced without individual notice to persons or groups who have requested such notice and an opportunity to respond. 
(e)  Local limits . Where specific prohibitions or limits on pollutants or pollutant parameters are developed by a POTW in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, such limits shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of section 307(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. 
(f)  Failure to commence appropriate action . If, within 30 days after notice of an interference or pass through violation has been sent by the EPA to the POTW, and to persons or groups who have requested such notice, the POTW fails to commence appropriate enforcement action to correct the violation, the EPA may take appropriate enforcement action under the authority provided in section 309(f) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-34; Ord. No. 978, § 37, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-32. 
Sec. 117-4-30. - Public notification of noncompliances. 
(a)  A list of all industrial users that were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements during the previous 12 months shall be published annually in the official newspaper of the city. 
(b)  As used in this section, an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the project of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of city personnel or the general public. 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-35; Ord. No. 978, § 38, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-33. 
Sec. 117-4-31. - Enforcement response plan. 
(a)  Introduction . The EPA promulgated regulations to require all POTWs to adopt an ERP as part of their approved pretreatment programs. The regulation as stated in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(5) is as follows: 
(1)  The POTW shall develop and implement an enforcement response plan. This plan shall contain detailed procedures indicating how a POTW will investigate and respond to instances of industrial user noncompliance. The plan shall, at a minimum: 
a.  Describe how the POTW will investigate instances of noncompliance. 
b.  Describe the types of escalating enforcement responses the POTW will take in response to all anticipated types of industrial user violations and the time periods within which responses will take place. 
c.  Identify, by title, the officials responsible for each type of response. 
d.  Adequately reflect the POTW's primary responsibility to enforce all applicable pretreatment requirements and standards, as detailed in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1) and (f)(2). 
(2)  The ERP outlines the procedures that will be used to identify, document, track and respond to noncompliance. The ERP also provides guidance for selecting the enforcement action most appropriate for a given violation. 
(b)  Purpose . The purpose of the ERP is to provide consistent enforcement responses for similar violations and circumstances. The ERP describes violations, defines a range of appropriate enforcement actions based on the nature and severity of the violation and other relevant factors, and identifies personnel responsible for finalizing enforcement responses. 
(c)  Administration and jurisdiction . All entities discharging nondomestic waste to the POTW are subject to the provisions of the ERP. The control authority consistently administers and implements all elements of the ERP. The ERP does not preclude the control authority from taking any, all or any combination of actions against a noncompliant industrial user. 
(d)  Abbreviations . 
AO Administrative order ATT City attorney BRD Board of city commissioners CA Control authority ERG Enforcement response guide ERP Enforcement response plan IPC Industrial pretreatment coordinator IU Industrial user NOV Notice of violation POTW Publicly owned treatment works SUPT Wastewater treatment superintendent WL Warning letter  
(e)  Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Control authority means the entity directly administering and enforcing pretreatment standards and requirements against industrial users. 
    Domestic wastewater means wastewater from normal residential activities, including, but not limited to, wastewater from kitchen, bath and laundry facilities, or wastewater from the personal sanitary conveniences (e.g., toilets, showers, bathtubs, fountains, noncommercial sinks, and similar structures) of commercial, industrial or institutional buildings, provided that the wastewater exhibits characteristics which are similar to those of wastewater from normal residential activities. Specifically excluded from this definition is wastewater from commercial, industrial, or institutional laundries or food preparation facilities. 
    Industrial user means any source that introduces pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. The term "publicly owned treatment works" also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. 
(f)  Personnel responsibilities . 
(1)  Industrial pretreatment coordinator . The industrial pretreatment coordinator (IPC) is responsible for the day-to-day implementation and enforcement of the industrial pretreatment program. The enforcement carried out by the IPC is as follows: 
a.  Informal notices, verbal and written. 
b.  Notices of violation. 
c.  Informal meetings. 
d.  Referrals to the state or the EPA for criminal action. 
(2)  Superintendent . The superintendent has the responsibility to monitor the IPC's actions and to initiate the following enforcement actions at the recommendation of the IPC: 
a.  Show cause hearings. 
b.  Administrative orders. 
c.  Consent agreements. 
d.  Referrals to the city attorney for civil litigation. 
e.  Referrals to the state or the EPA for criminal action. 
(3)  POTW attorney . The POTW attorney will provide legal consultation as requested by the superintendent on consent agreements and administrative orders and will take the lead on all referrals for civil litigation and POTW-initiated criminal investigations. 
(g)  Identifying and investigation instances of noncompliance . There are many activities associated with the identification and investigation of noncompliance. A brief description of these activities is provided in this ERP. Detailed discussions and procedures for the activities can be found in other relevant sections of the approved pretreatment program document. The activities that facilitate the identification and investigation of noncompliance are as follows: 
(1)  Industrial user inventory . An essential step for identifying noncompliance is knowing who is discharging nondomestic waste to the POTW, where they are located, and the nature of the nondomestic waste being discharged. The industrial pretreatment coordinator maintains a current inventory of all nondomestic sources of waste to the POTW. 
(2)  Monitoring and inspection plan . The industrial pretreatment coordinator prepares an annual monitoring and inspection plan. The control authority monitors the wastewater from each significant industrial user (SIU) at least once per year. The control authority requires all sampling and analysis to be performed in accordance with 40 CFR 136. Control authority sampling procedures, including quality assurance/quality control procedures, discussed elsewhere in the approved pretreatment program document, are followed to maximize sample integrity. 
a.  A comprehensive inspection of each SIU is conducted by the control authority at least once per year. The control authority follows inspection procedures discussed elsewhere in the approved pretreatment program to ensure consistent, thorough, and well-documented inspections. 
b.  Information gathered during control authority industrial user monitoring and inspections is used to verify industrial user compliance status and to determine if enforcement response must be initiated or continued. 
(3)  Compliance screening . All reports from industrial users and reports generated by the control authority are carefully reviewed on an as-received basis for timeliness, completeness and accuracy. The screening process includes a signatory/certification requirements, monitoring frequency, etc. 
(h)  Description of enforcement actions; informal notice . 
(1)  Verbal notification . Verbal notification, by telephone or in person, provide an immediate notification of violations. In general, verbal notifications are used for minor isolated violations or as an initial step leading to an escalated enforcement response. All verbal notifications related to enforcement or the investigation of suspected violations are documented in writing and placed in the respective industrial user file. 
(2)  Warning letter . Warning letters (WLs) are issued under the same circumstances as verbal notifications. They may be issued as follow-up letters to verbal notifications or in lieu of verbal notifications. 
(3)  Informal meeting . An informal meeting is used to gather information concerning noncompliance, discuss steps to alleviate noncompliance, and determine the commitment level of the industrial user. All informal meetings are documented in the city's files. 
(4)  Notice of violation . A notice of violation (NOV) is a written notice to the noncompliant industrial user that a pretreatment violation has occurred. A NOV includes a statement detailing the legal authority under which the control authority issued the NOV, a description of the violation and the date the violation occurred. The NOV requires a response from the industrial user that details the causes of the violation and the corrective actions taken to correct the violation and prevent similar violations from occurring. In general, NOVs are considered to be more stringent enforcement responses than warning letters. 
(5)  Administrative order . Administrative orders (AOs) are enforcement documents that direct industrial users to undertake and/or to cease specified activities by specified deadlines. The terms of an AO may or may not be negotiated with industrial users. AOs may incorporate compliance schedules, administrative penalties, termination of service and show cause orders. An administrative order is the minimum level of enforcement used to address significant noncompliance. 
(6)  Show cause hearing . A show cause hearing is a formal meeting requiring the industrial user to appear, explain its noncompliance and show cause as to why more severe enforcement actions against the user should not go forward. The meeting may also serve as a forum to discuss corrective action and compliance schedules. 
(7)  Termination of service . Termination of service is the revocation of an industrial user's privilege to discharge nondomestic wastewater into the sanitary sewer system. Termination of service is used when the discharge from an industrial user presents imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment or threatens to interfere with the POTW's operations or as an escalating enforcement action to a significant violation when a noncompliant industrial user fails to respond adequately to previous enforcement actions. Termination of service may be accomplished by physical severance of the industrial users connection to the collection system, issuance of an AO (cease and desist order) which compels the IU to immediately terminate its discharge, revocation of the IU's discharge permit or a court ruling. 
(8)  Administrative fines . An administrative fine is a punitive monetary charge assessed by the control authority rather than a court. The penalty authority must be authorized in the POTW's local legal authority. The purpose of the fine is to recover the economic benefit of noncompliance and to deter violations. When assessing an administrative fine the following factors are considered: 
a.  Type and severity of the violation. 
b.  Number of violations cited. 
c.  Duration of noncompliance. 
d.  Impact of the violation on the receiving water, sludge quality, and POTW operation. 
e.  Whether the violation threatened public health. 
f.  The economic benefit or savings the industrial user gained from the noncompliance. 
g.  Compliance history of the industrial user. 
h.  Whether the industrial user is making a good faith effort to comply. 
(9)  Civil litigation . Civil litigation is the formal process whereby the control authority files a lawsuit against the industrial user to secure court-ordered action to correct violations and to secure penalties for the violations, including recovery of cost to the POTW for the noncompliance. Civil litigation also includes enforcement measures which require involvement or approval of the court, such as injunctive relief. 
(10)  Referral to the EPA or the state . Where a POTW does not rely on criminal prosecution for its enforcement authority, referral to the state or the EPA may be made. For violations that may warrant criminal prosecution, the control authority will refer the case to the EPA or the state for further action. Circumstances that trigger the EPA or state referrals include evidence of willfulness, evidence of negligence and bad faith shown by the industrial user. 
(i)  Enforcement response guide . 
(1)  Purpose . The enforcement response guide (ERG) designates several enforcement options for each type or pattern of noncompliance. The intent of the ERG is to provide direction for appropriate enforcement response and to ensure consistent enforcement for similar violations and circumstances. Factors that will be evaluated when determining the appropriate response are as follows: 
a.  Good faith of the user. 
b.  Compliance history of the user. 
c.  Previous success of the enforcement actions against the user (e.g., if, historically, NOVs have not been effective in returning the user to compliance in a reasonable period of time, an administrative order would be a more appropriate response). 
d.  Violations' effect on the environment and/or public health. 
e.  Violations' effect on the POTW. 
(2)  Options for noncompliance . 
a.  Violations resulting in significant noncompliance. Any violation that results in significant noncompliance (SNC) will be addressed through formal enforcement action regardless of the enforcement response otherwise dictated by the enforcement response guide. The minimum level of enforcement used to address SNC is an AO. 
b.  Escalating enforcement response. Escalating enforcement response will be used for recurring violations and failure to achieve compliance subsequent to informal or formal enforcement. A recurring violation is one in which the same type of violation occurs on consecutive reporting periods, the violation occurs seasonally, or any other pattern of noncompliance is shown. 
c.  Violations falling under more than one category. Violations that fall under more than one category in the enforcement response guide will be addressed through the more severe enforcement response. All alleged violations will be included in the more severe response. 
d.  Timeframes for enforcement response. 
1.  All violations will be identified and documented within five days of receiving compliance information. 
2.  Initial enforcement responses, informal or formal, will occur within 15 days of identifying a violation. 
3.  Follow up actions for continuing or recurring violations will be taken within 60 days of the initial enforcement response. 
4.  Violations which threaten health, property or environmental quality are considered emergencies and will receive immediate response, such as halting the discharge or terminating service. 
5.  All violations meeting the criteria for significant noncompliance will be addressed through enforcement within 30 days of the identification of significant noncompliance. 
(j)  Guidelines . 
Noncompliance Severity of Violation Enforcement Action Personnel Fine Unauthorized Discharges Discharge without a permit IU unaware of requirement, no harm to POTW or environment Phone call, send application form IPC NOV with application form IPC IU unaware of requirement, harm to POTW or environment AO IPC, CA Recover cost of damages through user charge or civil action IPC, ATT Failure to apply continues after notice by the POTW AO, show cause, fine IPC, CA, BRD, ATT $500.00 to $1,000.00 Civil action IPC, CA, ATT Terminate service IPC, CA, BRD Criminal action IPC, CA, ATT Nonpermitted discharge 
(failure to renew) IU has not submitted application within ten days of due date Phone call, warning letter IPC IU has not submitted application after notice by POTW NOV, AO, show cause IPC, CA, ATT, BRD Failure to submit application, discharge continues Refer to discharge without a permit guidelines IPC, CA, ATT, BRD Unauthorized discharge through manhole, septic only receiving station, car wash, etc. No harm to POTW or environment NOV, AO IPC, CA, ATT Harm to POTW or environment AO with fine, civil action, criminal investigation IPC, CA, ATT $500.00 to $1,000.00 Recurring Criminal investigation IPC, CA, ATT, BRD Permitted user discharging waste not authorized by permit No harm to POTW or environment NOV, AO IPC, CA, ATT Harm to POTW or environment AO with fine, criminal action IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Recurring Criminal investigation IPC, CA, ATT, BRD Discharge Limit Violations Exceedance of discharge limitation or prohibition in permit or local legal authority (e.g., ordinance) Isolated, no harm to POTW or environment Phone call, WL, NOV IPC, CA Isolated, harm to POTW or environment NOV, require corrective action plan, resample IPC, CA AO, to implement corrective action plan, resample IPC, CA Recover cost of damages through user charge, criminal action IPC, CA, ATT, BRD Recurring, no harm to POTW or environment AO, AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Recurring, harm to POTW or environment AO with fine, civil action, termination of services IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Recover cost of damages through user charge, criminal action IPC, CA, ATT Reporting Violations Document is improperly signed or certified Isolated incident Phone call, WL, NOV IPC, CA Previous notice by POTW, recurring NOV, AO, AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Document is incomplete or inaccurate Isolated incident Phone call, WL, NOV IPC, CA Recurring problem AO, AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Document is late Five days to 29 days Phone call, WL, NOV IPC, CA 30 days or more AO, AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Documents are repeatedly late AO with fine, civil action, terminate service IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Failure to report violation, spill/slug or changed discharge No actual or potential harm to POTW or environment NOV, AO IPC, CA Actual or potential harm to POTW AO with fine, civil action, recover cost of damages through user charge IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Recurring problem AO with fine, civil action, terminate service IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Failure to report additional monitoring Isolated incident Phone call, WL, NOV IPC, CA Recurring AO, AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Falsification of information or data Any instance AO, show cause with fine, criminal investigation, terminate service IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Sampling Violations Failure to monitor for all required parameters Isolated Phone call, WL, NOV IPC, CA Recurring AO, AO with fine, civil action, permit revocation IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Improper sample handling or analytical procedures Isolated Phone call, WL, NOV IPC, CA Recurring AO, AO with fine, civil action, permit revocation IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Failure to resample within required timeframe Isolated Phone call, WL, NOV IPC, CA Prior notification from CA AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Recurring AO, AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Failure to install monitoring equipment/sampling point Delay less than 30 days NOV, WL IPC, CA Delay greater than 30 days AO with fine, civil action IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Tampers with monitoring equipment/sample Any incident AO, show cause with fine, criminal investigation, termination of service IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Sampling at incorrect location Isolated incident NOV IPC, CA Recurring AO with fine, civil action, criminal investigation IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Compliance Schedules Missed milestone Less than 30 days late or will not affect final completion date NOV, AO, phone call IPC, CA Greater than 30 days late or will affect final compliance date, good cause for delay AO, AO with fine, NOV PC, CA $100.00 to $500.00 Greater than 30 days late or will affect final compliance date, no good cause for delay AO with fine, civil action, termination of discharge IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Not in compliance as of final compliance date Less than 30 days late NOV, AO IPC, CA Greater than 30 days late, reasonable cause for delay AO, AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Greater than 30 days late, no reasonable cause for delay Show cause order, civil action, termination of discharge IPC, CA, ATT, BRD Inadequate Recordkeeping Files incomplete or missing, no evidence of intent Isolated NOV IPC, CA Recurring AO, AO with fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Files incomplete or missing, evidence of intent Any instance AO with fine, civil action, termination of service, criminal investigation IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Other Violations Entry denied or consent withdrawn Any instance Obtain warrant and return to IU, AO to suspend or terminate services IPC, CA, ATT, BRD Copies of records denied Any instance Obtain warrant and return to IU, AO to suspend or terminate services IPC, CA, ATT, BRD Wastestreams are diluted in lieu of treatment Initial violation NOV, AO, show cause, fine IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $100.00 to $500.00 Recurring AO, show cause, fine, permit revocation, terminate service IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Failure to mitigate noncompliance or halt discharge Does not result in harm NOV IPC, CA Does result in harm NOV, AO, show cause, fine, recover cost of damages through user charge or civil action, criminal action IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00 Failure to properly operate and maintain pretreatment facility Does not result in harm NOV IPC, CA Does result in harm NOV, AO, show cause, fine, recover cost of damages through user charge or civil action, criminal action IPC, CA, ATT, BRD $500.00 to $1,000.00  
(k)  Fines . Fines will be levied in increasing increments of $100.00 for each successive violation in the same category. For example, the first unauthorized discharge harming the environment would have a fine of $500.00. The second unauthorized discharge harming the environment would have a fine of $600.00, etc. Once the fine has reached the upper limit, the fine would remain at the upper limit for each successive violation. 
(l)  Payment terms . All fines will be added to monthly utility bills. 
(Code 1994, § 9-03.1-36; Ord. No. 1077, 5-28-2010; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(h), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-4-34. 
ARTICLE 5. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM FUNDING 

Sec. 117-5-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article shall be to generate sufficient revenue to pay all costs for the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater system. The costs shall be distributed to all users of the wastewater system in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the treatment works. Factors such as strength (BOD and TSS), volume and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included as the basis for the user's contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of operation and maintenance costs to each user. 
(Code 1994, § 9-06-01; Ord. No. 715, § 1, 1986) 
Sec. 117-5-2. - Determining the total annual cost of operation and maintenance. 
    The city, or the city engineer, shall determine the total annual costs of operation and maintenance of the wastewater system necessary to maintain the capacity and performance of the complete wastewater system during the design life of the works. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, replacement fund, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling, laboratory tests and a reasonable contingency fund. 
(Code 1994, § 9-06-02; Ord. No. 715, § 2, 1986) 
Sec. 117-5-3. - Determining each user's wastewater contribution. 
(a)  The city, or the city engineer, shall determine each user's monthly average volume of wastewater, which has been discharged to the wastewater system. 
(b)  The city, or the city engineer, shall determine each user's monthly poundage of five-day, 20-degree Centigrade biochemical oxygen demand and suspended solids, which have been discharged to the wastewater system. 
(Code 1994, § 9-06-03; Ord. No. 715, § 3, 1986) 
Sec. 117-5-4. - Determining wastewater user charges. 
(a)  Wastewater user charges shall be as established by resolution of the board. Wastewater user charges shall be billed and payable with the water bill. 
(b)  The city shall review the total cost of operation and maintenance on an annual basis and will revise the user charges as necessary to ensure equity of the user charge system and to ensure that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater system. 
(c)  The following charges for the use of the wastewater facilities and the sanitary sewer system of the city are hereby established. Such charges shall be made against each lot, parcel of land, or premise that has a sewer connection to the sanitary sewer system in the city or that may otherwise discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system or any part: 
(1)  Wastewater service charge . The wastewater service charge for the use of and for service supplied by the sanitary sewer system and the wastewater facilities of the city shall consist of a user charge for operation and maintenance plus a replacement charge and a debt service charge. 
(2)  Wastewater treatment charge . The wastewater treatment charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or wastewater meters and shall be for treatment of wastewater having normal concentrations less than the following: Five-day 20-degree Centigrade BOD (230 mg/l) or SS (180 mg/l). 
(3)  High strength user charge . The high strength user charge shall replace the wastewater treatment charge for customers who discharge wastewater that exceeds the normal concentrations and shall be calculated at a rate commensurate with the cost of treatment. The rate shall be set as a multiple of the wastewater treatment charge computed to the nearest tenth of a unit. The rate may be established by measuring an individual user's discharge or by establishing a rate for a class of users. 
(4)  Industrial wastewater charge . In addition to the wastewater service charge and the wastewater treatment charge, those customers who are not being billed a high strength user charge and who discharge wastewater which exceeds the limitations stated in subsection (2) of this section, discharge wastewater that contains high concentrations of certain chemicals or discharge a high volume of wastewater to the system shall pay an additional fee. The charge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters and/or wastewater meters. An industrial wastewater charge will be levied to all users whose wastewaters: 
a.  Exceed permissible pretreatment standards; 
b.  Reserved; 
c.  Contain toxic chemicals or other substances that adversely affect the operation, maintenance or life of the wastewater treatment plant; or 
d.  Produce a rate of flow that has a significant impact on the wastewater treatment plant. 
(Code 1994, §§ 9-06-04, 9-06-06; Ord. No. 715, §§ 4, 6, 1986; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(i), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-5-5. - Replacement funds. 
    A replacement fund is established to obtain sufficient moneys to obtain or replace accessories and equipment during the useful life of the treatment works, which are necessary to maintain its design capacity and performance. All replacement funds shall be held in a separate account for that purpose. 
(Code 1994, § 9-06-09; Ord. No. 715, § 9, 1986; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(i), 12-1-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(i), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, repealed § 117-5-5, which pertained to payment of the user's wastewater user charge; penalty and derived from Code 1994, § 9-06-05; Ord. No. 715, § 5, 1986. Ord. No. 1227, § 2(i), subsequently renumbered §§ 117-5-6, 117-5-7 to be §§ 117-5-5, 117-5-6 as herein set out. 
Sec. 117-5-6. - Lawn and garden watering. 
(a)  Residential users shall not be charged wastewater fees on water used for lawn and garden watering. The city shall determine the average residential wastewater volume contributed during the preceding winter months. The average volume contribution, so determined, shall be used during the lawn and garden watering months of May through September to determine the volume of wastewater to be charged for during this period. 
(b)  Separately metered sprinkler systems shall not be charged wastewater fees. 
(Code 1994, § 9-06-10; Ord. No. 715, § 10, 1986; Ord. No. 1227, § 2(i), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-5-7. 
ARTICLE 6. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 117-6-1. - Creation of stormwater management assessment districts. 
    The city may create regional stormwater management assessment districts for the purpose of constructing regional stormwater management facilities and assessing all benefited properties. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(l), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-6-2. - Stormwater operation and maintenance charge. 
    All properties within the city shall pay a stormwater operation and maintenance charge. The charge shall pay for maintenance and operation of storm drainage facilities within public streets. Those properties within a designated stormwater management district shall also pay a regional stormwater facilities charge for operation and maintenance of regional stormwater management facilities. Stormwater operation and maintenance charges shall be set by resolution of the board of city commissioners and billed as are water use charges. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(l), 12-1-2015) 
ARTICLE 7. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 117-7-1. - Scope of chapter. 
(a)  All pertinent provisions of this chapter are made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person; or whereby the city shall make utility connections, or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the board of city commissioners. 
(b)  The board of city commissioners shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city, within or without the city, and under the management of the city commissioners. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of city administrator or at any other location so designated by the administrator. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(c)  The board of city commissioners in order to provide funds to defray the cost of construction, maintenance and repair of any utility service of the city may, from time to time, by resolution, establish, maintain and change a schedule of rates, charges, surcharges and fees for all services, facilities, commodities and benefits furnished by any utility service, and may impose and collect monthly at the time and in the manner said board may provide. 
(d)  In order to properly segregate funds and obligations of the city for purposes of accurate and proper accounting, the finance director may create sub-accounts within any fund account. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(m), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-7-2. - Property owner's responsibility for public utility charges and fees. 
(a)  Implied contract for services . The owner or occupant of any property causing, permitting or using the connection to any of the city's utility systems or receiving utility services from the city by way of such act shall be presumed to have entered into a contract with the city for utility service. Under the terms of the presumed contract, the owner or occupant of the promises shall pay for the utility service, properly maintain the service connections and permit entry by authorized city employees or agents of the city for the purpose of inspection, maintenance, repair or replacement of city owned utility system components. 
(b)  Joint and several liability of owners and occupants . The owner and occupant of each premises shall be jointly and severally liable for all charges and fees for utility services provided by the city during the period of their respective ownership or occupancy. In addition to any other remedy, all such charges and fees having been properly billed to the owner or occupant of any premises served and not paid, may be recovered by the city in a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction against either the owner or the occupant, or both. 
(1)  All charges or fees for any utility service supplied, provided or furnished by the city shall constitute liens upon the respective lots, tracts, parcels of land and premises receiving such service. The city may take action to file a lien against the property for all such charges or fees which have been properly billed to the owner or occupant of the premises served and which are more than 30 days past due. 
(2)  All such charges or fees which have been properly billed to the owner or occupant of the premises served and which are more than 30 days past due on September 30th of each year shall be certified by the city to the county auditor between the first and tenth day of October of each year. The city, in so certifying such charges and fees, shall specify the amount thereof, the description of the premises served and the name of the owner thereof. The amount so certified shall be added by the county auditor to the tax rolls against such premises, collected by the county treasurer and paid to the city in the same manner and time as other county and municipal taxes are assessed, certified, collected and returned. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(l), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-7-3. - Provision of utility service-Right to hearing. 
(a)  The city has the right to disconnect, refuse to connect or reconnect or refuse to provide any utility service for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of the law; 
(2)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service; 
(3)  Nonpayment of bills; 
(4)  Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise; 
(5)  Damaging or tampering with any city owned utility system component; 
(6)  Theft, diversion or use of service without payment; 
(7)  Vacancy of premises; 
(8)  Failure of occupant or owner of the property to permit entry of the premises to read, maintain, repair or replace the meter or associated equipment. 
(9)  Failure of the occupant or owner to pay an estimated bill when the city has been unable to gain access to the property to read, maintain, repair or replace the meter or associated equipment. 
(b)  The city shall provide written notice of utility service termination to the owner or customer at least five days in advance of disconnecting the service. The notice shall be sent by regular mail to the address shown on the city's billing receipts and shall include a statement that upon written demand filed with the city, the owner or customer has the right to a hearing before the board or its designate. Upon receipt of a written demand for hearing the city shall schedule a hearing as soon as is practicable. Following the hearing, the board or its designate may order that the utility service be terminated or make such other reasonable order as may be necessary or appropriate. 
(c)  Whenever utility service is disconnected pursuant to this section, a reasonable reconnect fee shall be paid by the owner or customer or successor in interest before reconnection. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(l), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-7-4. - Tampering prohibited-Penalty. 
(a)  No person shall tamper with, damage, injure, deface, remove, destroy or break any component of a city utility. 
(b)  A person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of an offense, if they cause a substantial interruption or impairment in the provision of a city utility service. The offense is a Class C felony if the actor engages in the conduct intentionally, and a Class A misdemeanor if the actor engages in the conduct knowingly or recklessly. Otherwise it is a Class B misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(l), 12-1-2015) 
Sec. 117-7-5. - Sale of service by customer. 
    It is unlawful for any person to resell any utility service obtained from the city to others except by special arrangement authorized by the board of city commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1227, § 2(l), 12-1-2015) 
Chapter 119 - SOLID WASTE SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1227, § 2(j), adopted Dec. 1, 2015, enacted a new Ch. 119 as set out herein. 
State Law reference- Sewage and garbage disposal, N.D.C.C. ch. 40-34; solid waste management and land protection, N.D.C.C. ch. 23-29. 

ARTICLE 1. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 119-1-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Collection service means the collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish, and/or the availability or use of any dump, sanitary landfill or disposal facility of the city. 
    Commercial area garbage means all accumulations of animal and vegetable refuse and offal, waste paper, paper containers, tin cans, bottles, and all other refuse that accumulates as a result of operating a restaurant, tavern, office, store or other business, commercial or industrial establishment, including any apartment buildings having four or more dwelling units. 
    Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system except water line flushing, landscape irrigation, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, discharges from potable water sources, foundation and footing drain water, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, street wash water, dye testing, and flows from firefighting or other discharges specified by the city to protect public health and safety. 
    Mobile home, manufactured home, modular home, park model or trailer coach means a residential dwelling unit for the purposes of providing garbage and rubbish collection services and assessing charges for said services. 
    Refuse means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, solid market and industrial wastes, inert wastes and any other discarded materials of every kind and character. 
    Residential area garbage means all accumulations of household waste matter, including dry sink refuse, meat, vegetable, and fruit residues, and all tin cans and bottles, but shall not include grass, shrubbery, tree branches, ashes or other similar wastes. 
    Rubbish means non-putrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as trash, refuse or debris, including, but not limited to, discarded furniture, appliances and other household goods, barrels, rags, cartons, boxes, paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, noxious weeds, pieces of wood or metal, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials, and any other discarded materials of every kind and character, including junked or abandoned vehicles, equipment and machinery. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-01; Code 1994, § 8-03-01; Ord. No. 749, § 1, 1989; Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 7-10-2007; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-1. 
Sec. 119-1-2. - Accumulation of refuse and rubbish prohibited. 
    No person shall cause, permit, keep, maintain or allow to accumulate in or about any yard, lot, place or premises; or upon the boulevard or berm abutting thereon; or upon any street, alley or sidewalk, adjacent to or abutting on any lot, block or place, or premises owned or occupied by him, or for which he may be an agent, within the city limits, any and all refuse or rubbish, nor suffer such yard, lot, place or premises to be or to remain in such condition. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in or about any publicly owned property, or upon any street, alley or sidewalk adjacent to or abutting on any publicly owned property, within the city limits, any and all refuse or rubbish. It is declared a public nuisance for any yard, lot, place or premises; boulevard or berm; or street, alley or sidewalk to remain in such condition and any person or owner, occupant or agent of the yard, lot, place or premises violating the provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-02; Code 1994, § 8-03-02; Ord. No. 749, § 2, 1989; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-2. 
Sec. 119-1-3. - Refuse and rubbish in stormwater systems prohibited. 
    No person shall cause, permit, keep, maintain or allow to accumulate in or about any gutter, inlet, ditch, detention or retention pond, flume, Heart River, Missouri River, or any other part of a stormwater system, including those areas known as "the Dead Heart," any and all refuse or rubbish, including leaves, grass, and illicit discharge, nor suffer such systems or areas to be or to remain in such condition. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in or about any gutter, inlet, ditch, detention or retention pond, flume, Heart River, Missouri River, or any other part of a stormwater system, including those areas known as "the Dead Heart," any and all refuse or rubbish, including leaves, grass, and illicit discharge. It is declared a public nuisance for any of these areas to remain in such condition, and any person violating the provisions of this section is guilty of an infraction. 
(Code 1994, § 8-03-02.1; Ord. No. 1023, § 2, 7-10-2007; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-3. 
Sec. 119-1-4. - Charges; collection. 
(a)  The city shall charge such monthly service charges for providing such residential garbage and rubbish collection as may hereafter be adopted by resolution of the board of city commissioners. 
(b)  The finance department of the city is designated as the collection agency and shall bill for and collect all charges for garbage collection provided for under the provisions of this article in the same manner as for water service. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-04; Code 1994, § 8-03-05; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-4. 
Sec. 119-1-5. - Recovery of nonpayment. 
    In the case that the service charges provided for by this article are not paid when due, such charges may be recovered by the city in an action at law against the owner or occupant of the premises served, or such charges may be assessed against the premises served and collected and returned in the same manner as other county and municipal taxes are assessed, certified, collected and returned. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-05; Code 1994, § 8-03-06; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-5. 
Sec. 119-1-6. - Supervision. 
    The collection, removal and disposal of residential garbage and rubbish under the provisions of this article shall be under the supervision, direction and control of the department director. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-06; Code 1994, § 8-03-07; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-6. 
Sec. 119-1-7. - Frequency. 
    All residential area garbage and rubbish shall be collected by the city or its authorized agents as frequently as is necessary to maintain and preserve the health of the community. Nothing in this article, however, shall require the collection of such garbage and rubbish when the streets and alleys of the city are in such condition as, in the opinion of the department director, renders such collection inadvisable or impractical. Failure to collect residential area garbage and rubbish during such times shall not relieve the owner or occupant of the premises from the payment of garbage and rubbish collection service fees. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-07; Code 1994, § 8-03-08; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-7. 
Sec. 119-1-8. - Refusal to accept service prohibited. 
    No person shall refuse to accept the residential area garbage and rubbish collection service provided for by this article, and the failure of any person to receive such service shall not exempt him from the payment of the service charges provided for, save those persons residing in an area in which no collection service is provided, and, in such cases, no service charges shall be made. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-08; Code 1994, § 8-03-09; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-8. 
Sec. 119-1-9. - Regulations governing residential area garbage collection. 
(a)  Residential area garbage shall be deposited for pickup in durable garbage metal or plastic receptacles equipped with close-fitting covers of a capacity of not less than 15 gallons nor more than 35 gallons or in loose garbage bags secured in a cart or other receptacle that will prevent the garbage from being strewn about by animals or the wind. Each property owner or occupant shall furnish and store one or more garbage receptacles for disposal of garbage in a secure and unobtrusive location on the property. No earlier than 6:00 p.m. the night before pickup, the receptacle or receptacles shall be moved to a location within 15 feet of the alley abutting the premises, or, in case no alley abuts upon the premises, or in case the alley is not open, or is otherwise inaccessible, within 15 feet of the curb in front of the dwelling. 
(b)  Wet residential area garbage shall be drained of excess water and shall be put in leak-proof containers before being deposited in garbage receptacles for pickup. 
(c)  No rubbish shall be placed in any garbage receptacles kept for the deposit of residential area garbage. 
(d)  Garbage receptacles shall be returned to their storage location no later than 10:00 p.m. on the day pickup was made. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-09; Code 1994, § 8-03-10; Ord. No. 849, § 1, 8-20-1996; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-9. 
Sec. 119-1-10. - Regulations governing commercial area garbage collection. 
    All commercial area garbage shall be deposited in containers, provided for that purpose, by each owner or occupant of every commercial building or premises located within the city, the operation of which results in the accumulation of such garbage. Such garbage containers shall be stored in such a manner and have such a capacity and meet such construction standards as may be established by resolution of the board of city commissioners. Property owners who have lots with limited space may enter into a formal agreement with a neighboring property owner to share garbage containers. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-10; Code 1994, § 8-03-11; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-10. 
Sec. 119-1-11. - Hauling of garbage by private contractors. 
    No person shall haul or transport any garbage or rubbish for compensation or as a business without first having obtained a license to do so from the city. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-11; Code 1994, § 8-03-12; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-11. 
Sec. 119-1-12. - Hauling garbage from own premises. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent any person from hauling the garbage or rubbish originating upon his own premises, provided that only that such garbage is transported in covered vehicles or containers. A covered vehicle or container shall be construed to mean that such vehicle or container shall be fitted with a cover which shall eliminate positively any material falling from such vehicle or container while in transit. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-12; Code 1994, § 8-03-13; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-12. 
Sec. 119-1-13. - Recycling containers. 
    No person shall place, deposit or dump any material in a recycling or special use container other than the material that is indicated as allowable on the container. A recycling or special use container may include any publicly or privately owned container, dumpster or receptacle that is clearly signed or marked as being for the deposit of particular materials. 
(Code 1979, § 12-02-13; Code 1994, § 8-03-14; Ord. No. 806, §§ 1, 2, 1993; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-13. 
Sec. 119-1-14. - Storage location. 
    Each commercial or industrial property owner shall provide a three sided or enclosed area to store the garbage containers. Should the lot not have sufficient space to provide such a facility, the property owner may enter into a formal agreement with a neighboring property owner for the storage of garbage containers. 
(Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-14. 
Sec. 119-1-15. - Penalty. 
    Failure to properly manage and secure garbage receptacles or containers is an infraction. 
(Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-15. 
Sec. 119-1-16. - Hauling of garbage by private contractors; required. 
    No person shall haul or transport any garbage or rubbish for compensation or as a business without first having obtained a license to do so from the city. 
(Code 1979, § 10-12-01; Code 1994, § 13-09-01; Ord. No. 912, 6-6-2000; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-16. 
Sec. 119-1-17. - Application; fee; term. 
    Application for said license shall be made on forms provided by the city to the city license officer and shall be accompanied by a fee for each vehicle used in the hauling or transportation of such garbage or rubbish, the amount of which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the board of city commissioners. Licenses issued under this article shall be issued on an annual basis and shall expire on December 31 of each year. No reduction in fee for such license shall be made by reason of its being issued for only a part of a year. 
(Code 1979, § 10-12-02; Code 1994, § 13-09-02; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-17. 
Sec. 119-1-18. - Conditions of issuance. 
    No license shall be granted to any person unless the equipment used by such person in hauling or transporting garbage or rubbish shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Trucks or other vehicles used for the hauling of garbage shall be equipped with bodies having watertight floors and watertight walls to a height of at least six inches above the floor level, and the joints between floor and walls of such body shall likewise be watertight. 
(2)  The sides and tops of such truck bodies shall be of permanent construction, and the loading and unloading openings in such body shall be fitted with tight-fitting doors, which doors shall remain closed except while garbage or rubbish is being loaded into or out of said trucks. 
(Code 1979, § 10-12-03; Code 1994, § 13-09-03; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-18. 
Sec. 119-1-19. - Refuse disposal area open to residents. 
    The premises now or hereafter provided by the city as a city refuse disposal area shall be open and accessible for the use of the residents of the city during such hours as may be fixed by the officer of the city, authorized with the control and supervision of said refuse disposal area by the board of city commissioners, and under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 12-06-01; Code 1994, § 9-07-01; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-19. 
Sec. 119-1-20. - Rules and regulations; authority. 
(a)  Subject to the control and supervision of the officer of the city authorized by the board of city commissioners with the control and supervision of the city refuse disposal area, the city employee placed in charge of said city refuse disposal area shall have, and is vested with, full and complete authority to require persons offering to dump materials upon said grounds to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The dumping of any refuse or other matter upon said ground, at any place or in any manner other than permitted in this article and in accordance with the orders of the city employee in charge of said grounds, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(c)  Persons offering to dump materials within the city refuse disposal area shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  Materials to be dumped shall be placed at such locations on said grounds as may be directed by the city employee placed in charge of said city refuse disposal area. 
(2)  No carcasses of dead animals, or any foul, odorous, offensive, nauseous or decomposed matter, or matter which if exposed to air would become foul, offensive, nauseous, unwholesome or decomposed shall be allowed. 
(Code 1979, § 12-06-02; Code 1994, § 9-07-02); Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-20. 
Sec. 119-1-21. - Entry after hours prohibited. 
    Entry by any person upon said premises during hours when entry thereon is prohibited and in violation of any notice as to hours posted at the entrance thereto shall constitute a trespass upon said refuse disposal area and a violation of this section. 
(Code 1979, § 12-06-03; Code 1994, § 9-07-03; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-21. 
Sec. 119-1-22. - Removal of refuse from disposal area prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove any refuse, garbage, material or matter of any kind from the city refuse disposal area without the written permission of the board of city commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 12-06-04; Code 1994, § 9-07-04; Ord No. 1227, § 2(k), 12-1-2015) 
Note- Formerly § 117-6-22. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1957 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Code of sections of the 1957 Code. 
1957 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 14-0101 101-2-1 14-0102 101-2-2 14-0103 101-2-2 14-0104 101-2-6, 101-2-7 14-0201 101-1-1 14-0202 101-1-3 14-0203 105-2-1 14-0204 105-2-2 14-0205 105-2-3 14-0206 101-1-4 14-0207 105-1-2 14-0208 105-1-3 14-0209 105-1-4 14-0210 105-1-5 14-0211 105-1-1 14-0212 105-1-6 14-0213 105-3-1 14-0214 105-3-2 14-0215 105-3-3 14-0216 105-3-6 14-0217 105-3-7 14-0218 105-3-9 14-0219 105-3-10 14-0220 105-4-1 14-0221 105-4-5 14-0222(1) 105-1-9 14-0222(2) 105-1-10 14-0222(5) 105-1-11 14-0223 105-1-13 14-0224 105-1-12 14-0226 105-1-13 14-0228 105-3-8 14-0228.1 105-3-5 14-0229 105-3-11, 105-3-12 14-0301 101-3-1 14-0302 101-3-1 14-0303 101-3-2 14-0307 101-3-3 14-0401 109-1-2 14-0402 109-1-2 14-0403 109-1-2, 109-1-3 14-0404 101-1-3 - 109-1-1 14-0405 109-1-3 - 109-2-1-109-2-5 14-0406 109-3-2 14-0407 109-3-1 14-0408 109-2-6 14-0409 109-2-6 14-0410 109-2-7 14-0411 109-1-7 14-0412 109-1-7 14-0413 109-2-9 14-0414 109-1-6 14-0415 109-1-5  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1979 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Code of sections of the 1979 Code. 
1979 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 2-01-01 1-5 2-02-01 2-1-1 2-02-02 2-1-1 2-02-03 2-1-1 2-02-04 2-4-5 2-02-04.1 2-4-8 2-03-01 14-1 2-03-05 14-3 2-03-06 14-4 2-04-03 2-1-1 - 2-2-1 2-05-05 2-4-6 2-05-06 2-4-6 2-10-02 14-2 2-10-03 14-2 2-10-04 14-2 3-01-02 2-1-1 4-01-01 2-2-5 4-01-02 2-2-5 4-01-03 2-2-5 4-01-07 10-1-1 4-01-09 2-2-5 4-02-01 2-2-4 4-02-02 2-2-4 4-02-03 2-2-4 4-05-01 103-2-1 4-05-02 103-2-2 4-05-03 103-1-1 4-05-04 103-1-2 4-05-05 103-2-3 4-05-06 103-2-4 4-05-07 103-2-5 4-05-08 103-2-5 4-05-09 103-2-6 4-05-10 103-2-7 4-05-11 103-1-3 4-05-12 103-1-4 4-05-14 103-2-8 4-07-01 2-2-6 4-08-01 2-2-7 4-08-02 2-2-7 4-08-03 2-2-7 4-08-04 2-2-7 4-08-05 2-2-7 4-08-06 2-2-7 4-09-01 8-1-1 4-09-02 8-1-2 4-09-03 8-1-3 4-09-04 8-1-4 4-09-05 8-1-5 4-09-06 8-1-6 4-09-08 8-1-8 5-03-01 2-3-2 5-03-02 2-3-2 5-07-01 111-1-1 5-07-02 111-1-2 5-07-03 2-3-3 5-07-04 111-1-3 5-08-01 2-3-2 5-09-01 2-3-2 5-10-01 2-3-2 6-01-01 115-9-1 6-01-03 115-9-2 - 117-1-4 6-01-04 115-9-3 - 117-1-10 6-01-05 115-9-4 - 117-1-11 6-01-06 115-9-5 - 117-3-1 6-02-04 117-1-3 6-02-05 117-1-3 6-02-06 2-5-1 6-02-08 117-1-12 6-02-09 2-5-2 - 117-1-8 6-02-10 117-1-5 6-02-11 117-1-6 6-02-13 2-5-5 6-02-15 2-5-4 6-02-16 2-5-1 6-02-18 117-1-1 6-02-19 2-5-6 6-02-20 117-1-13 6-03-01 117-4-1 6-03-02 117-2-1 6-03-03 117-2-2 6-03-04 117-2-3 6-03-05 117-2-4 6-03-06 2-5-5 6-03-08 2-5-4 6-03-17 2-5-1 7-01-01 115-1-1 7-01-02 115-1-2 7-01-03 115-1-3 7-01-04 115-1-4 7-01-05 115-1-5 7-01-06 115-1-6 8-01-01 115-3-2 - 115-6-4 8-01-02 115-6-5 8-01-03 115-3-3 - 115-6-8 8-01-04 115-6-2 8-01-05 115-6-6 8-01-06 115-6-7 8-01-07 115-6-9 8-01-09 115-6-11 8-01-10 115-6-12 8-01-11 115-6-13 8-01-12 115-6-1 8-01-13 115-6-3 8-01-14 115-5-1-115-5-5 8-02-04 105-1-8 8-02-14 115-8-2 8-02-15 115-8-2 8-02-16 115-8-2 8-02-17 115-8-3 8-02-18 115-8-4 8-02-19 115-8-1 8-02-20 115-3-4 8-02-21 115-3-5 8-02-23 115-3-6, 115-3-7 8-02-24 109-4-1 8-02-30 115-3-1 8-02-31 16-2-2 8-02-35 16-2-2 8-03-01 115-4-1 8-03-02 115-4-1 8-03-03 115-4-3 8-03-04 115-4-4 8-03-05 115-4-5 8-03-06 115-4-6 8-03-07 115-4-7 8-03-08 115-4-8 8-04-01 109-4-2 8-04-02 109-4-3 8-04-03 109-4-4 8-04-04 109-4-5 8-04-05 109-4-6 8-05-01 111-12-2 8-05-02 111-12-1 9-01-01 24-1-2, 24-1-3 - 24-2-2-24-2-14 - 24-4-1-24-4-3 - 24-5-1, 24-5-2 - 24-6-1, 24-6-2 - 24-7-5 - 24-7-7-24-7-15 - 24-7-17, 24-7-18 - 24-8-2, 24-8-3 - 24-9-1-24-9-10 9-01-03 24-7-1 - 24-7-18 9-03-01 24-7-20 9-03-03 24-7-21 9-03-04 24-7-22 9-03-06 24-7-23 9-04-05 24-7-24 9-04-06 24-7-25 9-05-01 24-3-5 - 24-3-7 9-05-02 24-3-6 9-05-04 24-3-7 9-05-05 24-3-7 9-05-06 24-3-5 9-05-07 24-3-5 9-05-09 24-3-4 9-05-10 24-3-7 9-05-12 24-3-7 9-05-13 24-3-3 9-07-02 24-5-1 - 24-6-1 9-07-03 24-5-2 - 24-6-2 10-01-01 12-1-1 10-01-02 12-1-2 10-01-03 12-1-3 10-01-04 12-1-4 10-01-05 12-1-5 10-01-06 12-1-6 10-01-07 12-1-7 10-01-08 12-1-8 10-01-09 12-1-9 10-01-10.1 4-1-11 10-01-11 12-1-10 10-01-12 12-1-11 10-01-13 12-1-12 10-01-14 12-1-13 10-01-15 12-1-14 10-01-16 12-1-15 10-01-17 12-1-16 10-01-18 12-1-17 10-01-19 12-1-18 10-01-20 12-1-19 10-01-21 12-1-20 10-01-22 12-1-21 10-01-23 12-1-23 10-01-24 12-1-24 10-01-25 12-1-25 10-01-26 12-1-26 10-01-27 12-1-27 10-01-28 12-1-28 10-01-29 12-1-29 10-01-30 12-1-30 10-02-01 4-1-1 10-02-02 4-1-2 10-02-03 4-1-3 10-02-04 4-1-4 10-02-05 4-1-6 10-02-06 4-1-7 10-02-07 4-1-7 10-02-08 4-1-8 10-02-09 4-1-8 10-02-10 4-1-10 10-02-11 4-1-12 10-02-12 4-1-13 10-02-14 4-1-14 10-02-15 4-1-15 10-02-16 4-1-16 10-02-17 4-1-17 10-02-18 4-1-18 10-02-19 12-10-1 10-02-20 12-10-2-12-10-4 - 12-10-7 10-02-21 12-10-5 10-02-22 12-10-6 10-02-23 12-10-9 10-02-24 12-10-8 10-02-25 4-1-20 10-03-01 4-2-1 - 4-2-4 10-03-02 4-2-2 10-03-03 4-2-3 10-03-06 4-2-9 10-03-07 4-2-11 10-03-08 4-2-12 10-03-09 4-2-13 10-03-10 4-2-14 10-03-11 4-2-15 10-03-12 4-2-16 10-03-13 4-2-17 10-03-14 4-2-18 10-03-15 4-2-19 10-03-16 4-2-20 10-03-17 4-3-1-4-3-8 10-04-01 12-4-1 10-04-02 12-4-2 10-04-03 12-4-2 10-04-04 12-4-2 10-04-05 12-4-2 10-04-06 12-4-4 10-04-07 12-9-1-12-9-9 10-12-01 117-6-16 10-12-02 117-6-17 10-12-03 117-6-18 10-14-01 12-5-1 10-14-02 12-5-12 10-14-04 12-5-12 10-14-09 12-5-7 10-14-10 12-5-4 10-14-11 12-5-9 10-14-13 12-5-14 10-18-01 18-3-8 10-18-02 18-3-10 10-18-03 18-3-9 10-18-08 18-3-5, 18-3-6 10-19-01 12-5-1 10-19-02 12-5-12 10-19-03 12-5-13 10-19-04 12-5-4 10-19-06 12-5-9 10-19-07 12-5-7 10-19-08 12-5-5 10-19-09 12-5-6 10-26-01 12-2-2 10-26-02 12-2-1 10-26-03 12-2-3 10-26-04 12-2-4 10-26-05 12-2-5 10-26-06 12-2-6 10-26-07 12-2-7 10-26-08 12-2-8 10-26-09 12-2-9 11-01-01 111-2-1 11-01-03 111-2-2 11-01-04 111-2-3 11-01-05 111-2-4 11-01-06 111-2-5 11-01-07 111-2-6 11-01-08 111-2-7 11-01-11 111-3-1 11-01-16 111-3-2 11-02-01 111-5-1 11-02-02 111-5-2 11-02-03 111-5-3 11-03-01 111-6-1 11-03-02 111-6-2 11-03-03 111-6-3 11-03-04 111-6-4 11-03-07 111-6-8 11-03-08 111-6-5 11-03-09 111-6-6 11-03-15 111-6-9 11-04-01 111-7-2 11-04-02 111-7-1 - 111-7-8 11-04-03 111-7-7 11-04-04 111-7-3 11-04-05 111-7-4 11-04-06 111-7-5 11-04-07 111-7-6 11-04-08 111-7-9 11-04-19 111-7-7 11-05-01 111-8-1 11-05-02 111-8-2 11-05-03 111-8-3 11-05-04 111-8-4 11-05-05 111-8-5 11-05-06 111-8-6 11-05-07 111-8-7 11-05-08 111-8-8 11-05-09 111-8-9 11-05-10 111-8-10 11-05-11 111-8-11 11-05-12 111-8-12 11-05-13 111-8-13 11-05-14 111-8-14 11-05-15 111-8-15 11-05-16 111-8-16 11-05-17 111-8-17 11-05-18 111-8-18 11-05-19 111-8-19 11-05-20 111-8-20 11-05-21 111-8-21 11-05-22 111-8-22 11-05-23 111-8-23 11-05-24 111-8-24 11-05-25 111-8-25 11-06-01 111-9-1 11-06-02 111-9-2 11-06-03 111-9-3 11-06-04 111-9-4 11-06-05 111-9-5 11-06-06 111-9-6 11-06-07 111-9-7 11-06-08 111-9-8 11-06-09 111-9-9 11-06-10 111-9-10 11-06-11 111-9-11 11-06-12 111-9-12 11-06-13 111-9-13 11-07-02 111-4-1 11-07-03 111-4-2 11-07-04 111-4-3 11-07-05 111-4-4 11-07-06 111-4-7 11-07-16 111-4-5 11-07-18 111-4-6 11-08-01 111-10-1 11-08-02 111-10-2 11-08-03 111-10-3 11-08-04 111-10-4 11-08-05 111-10-5 11-08-06 111-10-6 11-08-07 111-10-7 11-08-08 111-10-8 11-08-09 111-10-9 11-08-10 111-10-10 11-09-01 111-11-1 11-09-02 111-11-2 11-09-03 111-11-3 11-09-04 111-11-4 11-09-05 111-11-5 11-10-01 111-1-4 11-10-02 111-1-5 11-10-03 111-1-6 12-02-01 16-3-1 - 117-6-1 12-02-02 16-3-2 - 117-6-2 12-02-04 117-6-4 12-02-05 117-6-5 12-02-06 117-6-6 12-02-07 117-6-7 12-02-08 117-6-8 12-02-09 117-6-9 12-02-10 117-6-10 12-02-11 117-6-11 12-02-12 117-6-12 12-02-13 117-6-13 12-06-01 117-6-19 12-06-02 117-6-20 12-06-03 117-6-21 12-06-04 117-6-22 13-01-01 6-1-1 13-01-02 6-1-3 13-01-03 6-1-4 13-01-04 6-1-5 13-01-05 6-1-6 13-01-06 6-1-7 13-01-07 6-1-8 13-01-08 6-1-9 13-01-09 6-1-10 13-01-10 6-1-11 13-01-12 6-1-2 13-01-111 6-1-12 13-02-01 6-2-7 13-02-02 6-2-8 13-02-03 6-2-9 13-02-04 6-2-10 13-02-05 6-2-11 13-02-06 6-2-12 13-02-07 6-2-1 13-02-08 6-2-2 13-02-09 6-2-3 13-02-10 6-2-4 13-02-11 6-2-5 13-02-12 6-2-6 13-02-14 6-1-2 14-01-01 10-2-1 14-01-02 10-2-6 14-01-04 10-2-7 14-01-05 10-2-8 14-01-06 10-2-9 14-01-08 10-2-11 14-01-09 10-2-12 14-01-12 10-2-13 14-01-13 10-2-14 14-01-15 10-2-15 14-01-16 10-2-16 14-02-01 10-2-5 14-02-03 10-2-17 14-02-04 10-2-18 14-02-05 10-2-19 14-02-06 10-2-20 14-02-07 10-2-21 14-02-08 10-2-22 14-02-09 10-2-23 14-02-10 10-2-24 14-03-02 24-10-1 14-03-03 24-10-1 14-04-03 24-10-1 14-04-04 24-10-2 14-04-05 24-10-3 14-04-06 24-10-4 14-04-07 24-10-5 14-04-08 10-2-2 14-04-09 10-2-3 14-05-01 10-2-4 14-0231 105-3-4 15-01-01 18-1-3 15-02-01 16-3-4 15-02-02 16-3-5 15-02-03 16-3-6 15-02-04 16-3-6 15-02-05 16-3-6 15-02-06 16-3-7 15-02-07 16-3-8 15-02-08 16-3-9 15-02-08.1 16-3-10 15-02-09 16-3-12 15-02-10 16-3-13 15-03-01 16-4-1 15-03-03 16-4-2 15-03-05 16-4-3 15-03-06 16-4-4 15-03-07 16-4-5 15-03-08 16-4-6 15-03-09 16-4-7 15-03-12 16-4-8 15-06-02 18-2-4 15-06-03 18-2-4 15-06-04 18-2-5 16-01-01 20-1-1 16-01-02 20-1-2 16-01-03 20-1-3 16-01-04 20-1-4 16-01-05 20-1-5 16-01-06 20-1-6 16-01-07 20-1-7 16-02-01 20-3-1 16-02-02 20-3-2 16-02-03 20-3-3 16-02-04 20-3-4 16-02-05 20-3-5 16-02-06 20-3-6 16-03-01 20-1-8 16-03-02 20-1-9 16-03-03 20-1-10 16-03-04 20-1-11 16-03-05 20-1-12 16-03-06 20-1-13 16-03-07 20-1-14 16-03-08 20-1-15 16-03-09 20-1-16 16-03-10 20-1-17 16-04-01 20-2-1 16-04-02 20-2-2 16-04-03 20-2-3 16-04-4 20-2-4 16-04-05 20-2-5 16-04-06 20-2-6 16-04-07 20-2-7 16-04-08 20-2-8 16-04-09 20-2-9 16-04-10 20-2-10 16-04-11 20-2-11 16-05-01 20-5-1 16-05-03 20-5-2 16-05-04 20-5-3 16-05-05 20-5-4 16-05-06 20-5-5 16-05-07 20-5-6 16-05-08 20-5-7 16-05-09 20-5-8 16-05-10 20-5-9 16-05-11 20-5-10 16-06-01 20-6-1 16-06-02 20-6-2 16-06-03 20-6-3 16-06-04 20-6-4 16-06-05 20-6-5 16-06-06 20-6-6 16-06-07 20-6-7 16-06-08 20-6-8 16-06-09 20-6-9 16-06-10 20-6-10 16-07-01 20-7-1, 20-7-2 16-07-03 20-7-3 16-07-04 20-7-4 16-07-05 20-7-5 16-07-06 20-7-6 16-07-07 20-7-7 16-07-08 20-7-8 16-07-09 20-7-9 16-07-10 20-7-10 16-07-11 20-7-11 16-07-12 20-7-12 16-07-13 20-7-13 16-07-14 20-7-14 16-07-15 20-7-15 16-07-16 20-7-16 16-07-17 20-7-17 16-07-18 20-7-18 16-07-19 20-7-19 16-08-01 20-4-1 16-08-02 20-4-2 16-08-03 20-4-3 16-08-04 20-4-4 16-08-05 20-4-5 16-08-06 20-4-6 16-08-07 20-4-7 16-08-08 20-4-8 16-08-09 20-4-9 16-08-10 20-4-10 16-08-11 20-2-13 16-09-01 20-8-1 16-09-02 20-8-2 16-09-03 20-8-3 16-09-04 20-8-4 16-09-05 20-8-5 16-09-06 20-8-6 16-09-07 20-8-7 16-09-08 20-8-8 16-09-09 20-8-9 16-09-10 20-8-10 16-09-11 20-8-11 16-09-12 20-8-12 17-01-01 22-2-1 17-01-02 22-2-5 17-01-06 22-2-6  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1994 CODE 
    This table gives the location within the Code of sections of the 1994 Code. 
1994 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-01-10 1-13 1-01-11 1-10 1-02-01 1-1 1-02-02 1-2 1-02-03 1-2 1-02-04 1-2 1-02-05 1-2 1-02-07 1-2 1-02-09 1-11 1-02-10 1-2 1-02-11 1-2 1-02-12 1-11 1-02-13 1-6 1-02-14 1-6 1-02-15 1-6 1-02-16 1-12 1-02-17 1-3 1-02-18 1-2 1-02-20 1-2 1-02-21 1-2 1-03-01 1-5 1-03-02 2-2-1 1-04-01 1-9 1-04-02 1-9 1-04-03 1-9 2-01-01 2-1-1 2-01-02 2-1-1 2-01-03 2-1-1 2-01-04 2-1-1 2-03-01 2-2-7 2-03-02 2-2-7 2-03-03 2-2-7 2-03-04 2-2-7 2-03-05 2-2-7 2-03-06 2-2-7 2-04-01 2-2-6 2-04-02 2-2-6 2-05-01 2-2-5 2-05-02 2-2-5 2-05-03 2-2-5 2-05-07 10-1-1 2-05-09 2-2-5 2-06-01 2-2-8 2-06-02 2-2-8 2-07-01 2-2-4 2-07-02 2-2-4 2-07-03 2-2-4 2-10-01 14-1 2-10-02 14-2 2-10-03 14-2 2-10-04 14-2 2-10-05 14-3 2-10-06 14-4 2-12-01 2-3-2 2-12-02 2-3-3 2-12-08 2-3-2 2-12-09 2-3-2 2-12-11 2-3-2 2-13-01 2-6-1 2-13-02 2-6-2 2-13-03 2-6-3 2-13-04 2-6-4 2-13-05 2-6-5 2-13-07 2-6-6 2-13-08 2-6-7 2-13-09 2-6-8 3-01-01 2-4-1 3-01-02 2-4-2 3-01-03 2-4-3 3-01-04 2-4-4 3-01-05 2-4-5 3-01-06 2-4-6 3-01-07 2-4-7 3-01-08 2-4-8 3-02-01.1 22-1-2 3-02-01 22-1-1 3-02-02 22-1-3 3-03-01 22-2-1 3-03-02 22-2-5 3-03-06 22-2-6 3-04-01 115-1-1 3-04-02 115-1-2 3-04-03 115-1-3 3-04-04 115-1-4 3-04-05 115-1-5 3-04-06 115-1-6 3-021-03 22-1-4 4-01-01 20-1-1 4-01-02 20-1-2 4-01-03 20-1-3 4-01-04 20-1-4 4-01-05 20-1-5 4-01-06 20-1-6 4-01-07 20-1-7 4-02-01 20-3-1 4-02-02 20-3-2 4-02-03 20-3-3 4-02-04 20-3-4 4-02-05 20-3-5 4-02-06 20-3-6 4-03-01 20-1-8 4-03-02 20-1-9 4-03-03 20-1-10 4-03-04 20-1-11 4-03-05 20-1-12 4-03-06 20-1-13 4-03-07 20-1-14 4-03-08 20-1-15 4-03-09 20-1-16 4-03-10 20-1-17 4-04-01 20-2-1 4-04-02 20-2-2 4-04-03 20-2-3 4-04-04 20-2-4 4-04-05 20-2-5 4-04-06 20-2-6 4-04-07 20-2-7 4-04-08 20-2-8 4-04-09 20-2-9 4-04-10 20-2-10 - 20-2-12 4-04-11 20-2-11 4-05-01 20-5-1 4-05-03 20-5-2 4-05-04 20-5-3 4-05-05 20-5-4 4-05-06 20-5-5 4-05-07 20-5-6 4-05-08 20-5-7 4-05-09 20-5-8 4-05-10 20-5-9 4-05-11 20-5-10 4-06-01 20-6-1 4-06-02 20-6-2 4-06-03 20-6-3 4-06-04 20-6-4 4-06-05 20-6-5 4-06-06 20-6-6 4-06-07 20-6-7 4-06-08 20-6-8 4-06-09 20-6-9 4-06-10 20-6-10 4-07-01 20-7-1 4-07-02 20-7-2 4-07-03 20-7-3 4-07-04 20-7-4 4-07-05 20-7-5 4-07-06 20-7-6 4-07-07 20-7-7 4-07-08 20-7-8 4-07-09 20-7-9 4-07-10 20-7-10 4-07-11 20-7-11 4-07-12 20-7-12 4-07-13 20-7-13 4-07-14 20-7-14 4-07-15 20-7-15 4-07-16 20-7-16 4-07-17 20-7-17 4-07-18 20-7-18 4-07-19 20-7-19 4-08-01 20-4-1 4-08-02 20-4-2 4-08-03 20-4-3 4-08-04 20-4-4 4-08-05 20-4-5 4-08-06 20-4-6 4-08-07 20-4-7 4-08-08 20-4-8 4-08-09 20-4-9 4-08-10 20-2-13 - 20-4-10 4-09-01 20-8-1 4-09-02 20-8-2 4-09-03 20-8-3 4-09-04 20-8-4 4-09-05 20-8-5 4-09-06 20-8-6 4-09-07 20-8-7 4-09-08 20-8-8 4-09-09 20-8-9 4-09-10 20-8-10 - 20-8-12 4-09-11 20-8-11 6-1-01 8-2-1 6-1-02 8-2-2 6-1-03 8-2-3 6-1-04 8-2-4, 8-2-5 6-03-01 8-1-1 - 8-1-7 6-03-02 8-1-2 6-03-03 8-1-3 6-03-04 8-1-4 6-03-05 8-1-5 6-03-06 8-1-6 6-03-08 8-1-8 7-01-01 10-2-1 7-01-02 10-2-6 7-01-04 10-2-7 7-01-05 10-2-8 7-01-06 10-2-9 7-01-07 10-2-10 7-01-08 10-2-11 7-01-09 10-2-12 7-01-12 10-2-13 7-01-13 10-2-14 7-01-15 10-2-15 7-01-16 10-2-16 7-02-03 10-2-17 7-02-04 10-2-18 7-02-05 10-2-19 7-02-06 10-2-20 7-02-07 10-2-21 7-02-08 10-2-22 7-02-09 10-2-23 7-02-10 10-2-24 7-03-02 24-10-1 7-04-03 24-10-1 7-04-04 24-10-2 7-04-05 24-10-3 7-04-06 24-10-4 7-04-07 24-10-5 7-04-08 10-2-2 7-04-09 10-2-3 7-04-10 10-2-4 7-04-11 10-2-5 8-03-01 117-6-1 8-03-02 117-6-2 8-03-02.1 117-6-3 8-03-05 117-6-4 8-03-06 117-6-5 8-03-07 117-6-6 8-03-08 117-6-7 8-03-09 117-6-8 8-03-10 117-6-9 8-03-11 117-6-10 8-03-12 117-6-11 8-03-13 117-6-12 8-03-14 117-6-13 9-01-01 115-9-1 9-01-03 115-9-2 - 117-1-4 9-01-04 115-9-3 - 117-1-10 9-01-05 115-9-4 - 117-1-11 9-01-06 115-9-5 - 117-3-1 9-02-04 117-1-3 9-02-05 117-1-3 9-02-08 117-1-12 9-02-09 117-1-8 9-02-10 117-1-5 9-02-11 117-1-6 9-02-15 117-1-1 9-02-16 2-5-6 9-02-17 117-1-13 9-03-01 117-4-1 9-03-02 117-2-1 9-03-03 117-2-2 9-03-04 117-2-3 9-03-05 117-2-4 9-03.1-01 117-4-2 9-03.1-03 117-4-3 9-03.1-04 117-4-4 9-03.1-05 117-4-5 9-03.1-06 117-4-6 9-03.1-07 117-4-7 9-03.1-08 117-4-8 9-03.1-09 117-4-9 9-03.1-10 117-4-10 9-03.1-11 117-4-11 9-03.1-12 117-4-12 9-03.1-13 117-4-13 9-03.1-14 117-4-14 9-03.1-15 117-4-15 9-03.1-17 117-4-16 9-03.1-18 117-4-17 9-03.1-19 117-4-18 9-03.1-20 117-4-19 9-03.1-21 117-4-20 9-03.1-22 117-4-21 9-03.1-23 117-4-22 9-03.1-24 117-4-23 9-03.1-25 117-4-24 9-03.1-26 117-4-25 9-03.1-27 117-4-26 9-03.1-28 117-4-27 9-03.1-29 117-4-28 9-03.1-30 117-4-29 9-03.1-31 117-4-30 9-03.1-32 117-4-31 9-03.1-34 117-4-32 9-03.1-35 117-4-33 9-03.1-36 117-4-34 9-04-01 2-5-1 9-04-02 2-5-2 - 117-1-8 9-04-03 2-5-3 9-04-04 2-5-4 9-04-05 2-5-5 9-05-01 115-2-1 9-05-02 115-2-2 9-05-03 115-2-3 9-05-04 115-2-4 9-05-05 115-2-5 9-05-06 115-2-6 9-05-07 115-2-7 9-06-01 117-5-1 9-06-02 117-5-2 9-06-03 117-5-3 9-06-04 117-5-4 9-06-05 117-5-5 9-06-06 117-5-4 9-06-09 117-5-6 9-06-10 117-5-7 9-07-01 117-6-19 9-07-02 117-6-20 9-07-03 117-6-21 9-07-04 117-6-22 9-08-01 103-2-1 9-08-02 103-2-2 9-08-03 103-1-1 9-08-04 103-1-2 9-08-05 103-2-3 9-08-06 103-2-4 9-08-07 103-2-5 9-08-08 103-2-5 9-08-09 103-2-6 9-08-10 103-2-7 9-08-11 103-1-3 9-08-12 103-1-4 9-08-14 103-2-8 10-01-01 111-12-1 10-01-02 111-12-2 10-02-01 115-6-1 10-02-02 115-6-2 10-02-03 115-6-3 10-02-04 115-6-4 10-02-05 115-6-5 10-02-06 115-6-6 10-02-07 115-6-7, 115-6-8 10-02-09 115-6-9 10-02-11 115-6-11 10-02-12 115-6-12 10-02-13 115-6-13 10-02.1-01 115-7-1 10-02.1-02 115-7-2 10-02.1-03 115-7-3 10-02.1-04 115-7-4 10-02.1-05 115-7-5 10-03-01 115-3-2 10-03-02 115-3-3 10-03-03 115-3-4 10-03-04 115-3-5 10-03-05 115-3-6 10-03-06 115-3-7 10-03-07 109-4-1 10-04-04 105-1-8 10-04-09 115-3-1 10-04-15 16-2-2 10-04-19 16-2-2 10-05-01 115-5-1 10-05-02 115-5-2 10-05-03 115-5-3 10-05-05 115-5-4, 115-5-5 10-06-01 115-8-1 10-06-02 115-8-2 10-06-03 115-8-2 10-06-04 115-8-2 10-06-05 115-8-3 10-06-06 115-8-4 10-09-01 109-4-2 10-09-02 109-4-3 10-09-03 109-4-4 10-09-04 109-4-5 10-09-05 109-4-6 10-10-01 115-4-1 10-10-02 115-4-1 10-10-03 115-4-3 10-10-04 115-4-4 10-10-05 115-4-5 10-10-06 115-4-6 10-10-07 115-4-7 10-10-08 115-4-8 12-01-01 4-1-1 12-01-02 4-1-2 12-01-03 4-1-3 12-01-04 4-1-4 12-01-05 4-1-6 12-01-06 4-1-7 12-01-07 4-1-7 12-01-08 4-1-8 12-01-09 4-1-8 12-01-10 4-1-10 12-01-10.1 4-1-11 12-01-11 4-1-12 12-01-12 4-1-13 12-01-13 4-1-14 12-01-14 4-1-15 12-01-15 4-1-16 12-01-16 4-1-17 12-01-17 4-1-18 12-01-17.1 4-1-19 12-01-18 4-1-20 12-01-19 4-1-21 12-02-01 4-2-1 - 4-2-8 12-02-02 4-2-2 12-02-03 4-2-3 12-02-04 4-2-4 12-02-04.1 4-2-5 12-02-04.2 4-2-6 12-02-04.3 4-2-7 12-02-06 4-2-9 12-02-07 4-2-10 12-02-08 4-2-11 12-02-09 4-2-12 12-02-10 4-2-13 12-02-11 4-2-14 12-02-12 4-2-15 12-02-13 4-2-16 12-02-14 4-2-17 12-02-15 4-2-18 12-02-16 4-2-19 12-02-17 4-2-20 12-02-17.1 4-2-21 12-03-01 4-3-2 12-03-02 4-3-3 12-03-03 4-3-4 12-03-04 4-3-5 12-03-05 4-3-6 12-03-06 4-3-7 12-03-07 4-3-8 12-03-08 4-3-1 12-03-09 12-9-1 12-03-10 12-9-3 12-03-11 12-9-4 12-03-12 12-9-5 12-03-14 12-9-6, 12-9-7 12-03-15 12-9-8 12-03-16 12-9-9 12-03-17 12-9-2 12-04-01 12-10-1 12-04-02 12-10-2 12-04-03 12-10-3 12-04-04 12-10-4 12-04-05 12-10-7 12-04-06 12-10-8 12-04-07 12-10-9 12-04-08 12-10-5 12-04-09 12-10-6 13-01-01 12-1-1 13-01-02 12-1-2 13-01-03 12-1-3 13-01-04 12-1-4 13-01-05 12-1-5 13-01-06 12-1-6 13-01-07 12-1-7 13-01-08 12-1-8 13-01-09 12-1-9 13-01-11 12-1-10 13-01-12 12-1-11 13-01-13 12-1-12 13-01-14 12-1-13 13-01-15 12-1-14 13-01-16 12-1-15 13-01-17 12-1-16 13-01-18 12-1-17 13-01-19 12-1-18 13-01-20 12-1-19 13-01-21 12-1-20 13-01-22 12-1-21 13-01-23 12-1-23 13-01-24 12-1-24 13-01-25 12-1-25 13-01-26 12-1-26 13-01-27 12-1-27 13-01-28 12-1-28 13-01-29 12-1-29 13-01-30 12-1-30 13-02-01 12-2-2 13-02-02 12-2-1 13-02-03 12-2-3 13-02-04 12-2-4 13-02-05 12-2-5 13-02-06 12-2-6 13-02-07 12-2-7 13-02-08 12-2-8 13-02-09 12-2-9 13-02-14 18-3-2 13-02.1-01 12-3-2 13-02.1-02 12-3-1 13-02.1-03 12-3-4 13-02.1-04 12-3-5 13-02.1-05 12-1-29 13-02.1-06 12-3-3 13-02.1-07 12-1-22 13-03-01 18-3-1 13-03-02 18-3-5 13-03-03 18-3-3 13-03-04 18-3-6 13-03-05 18-3-7 13-03-06 18-3-4 13-03-07 18-3-8 13-03-08 18-3-10 13-03-09 18-3-9 13-04-01 12-4-1 13-04-02 12-4-2 13-04-03 12-4-3 13-04-04 12-4-4 13-04-05 12-4-5 13-04-06 12-4-6 13-09-01 117-6-16 13-09-02 117-6-17 13-09-03 117-6-18 13-14-01 12-5-2 13-14-02 12-5-1 13-14-03 12-5-3 13-14-04 12-5-12 13-14-05 12-5-13 13-14-06 12-5-4 13-14-07 12-5-5 13-14-08 12-5-6 13-14-09 12-5-7 13-14-10 12-5-8 13-14-11 12-5-10 13-14-12 12-5-11 13-14-13 12-5-9 13-14-14 12-5-14 13-15-01 12-6-1 13-15-02 12-6-2 13-15-03 12-6-6 13-15-04 12-6-7 13-15-05 12-6-8 13-15-06 12-6-3 13-15-07 12-6-4 13-15-08 12-6-5 13-19-01 12-7-1 13-19-02 12-7-2 13-19-03 12-7-14 13-19-04 12-7-15 13-19-05 12-7-16 13-19-06 12-7-17 13-19-07 12-7-6 13-19-08 12-7-7 13-19-09 12-7-8 13-19-10 12-7-9 13-19-11 12-7-10 13-19-12 12-7-11 13-19-13 12-7-5 13-19-14 12-7-12 13-19-15 12-7-13 13-19-16 12-7-18 13-19-17 12-7-19 13-19-18 12-7-20 13-19-19 12-7-21 13-19-20 12-7-22 13-19-21 12-7-23 13-19-22 12-7-24 13-19-23 12-7-3 13-19-24 12-7-4 13-21-01 12-8-6 13-21-02 12-8-1 13-21-03 12-8-3 - 12-8-7 13-21-04 12-8-4 13-21-05 12-8-5 13-21-06 12-8-2 14-01-01 111-1-1 14-01-02 111-1-2 14-01-03 111-1-3 14-01-04 111-1-4 14-01-05 111-1-5 14-01-06 111-1-6 14-02-01 111-2-1 14-02-03 111-2-2 14-02-04 111-2-3 14-02-05 111-2-4 14-02-06 111-2-5 14-02-07 111-2-6 14-02-13 111-2-7 14-02-14 111-2-8 14-02-15 111-2-9 14-03-01 111-3-1 14-03-07 111-3-2 14-04-04 111-4-1 14-04-05 111-4-2 14-04-06 111-4-3 14-04-07 111-4-4 14-04-08 111-4-5 14-04-09 111-4-6 14-04-10 111-4-7 14-05-01 111-5-1 14-05-03 111-5-2 14-05-04 111-5-3 14-06-01 111-6-1 14-06-03 111-6-2 14-06-04 111-6-3 14-06-05 111-6-4 14-06-06 111-6-5 14-06-07 111-6-6 14-06-08 111-6-7 14-06-09 111-6-8 14-06-10 111-6-9 14-07-01 111-7-1 14-07-02 111-7-2 14-07-03 111-7-3 14-07-04 111-7-4 14-07-05 111-7-5 14-07-06 111-7-6 14-07-07 111-7-7 14-07-08 111-7-8 14-07-09 111-7-9 14-08-01 111-8-1 14-08-02 111-8-2 14-08-03 111-8-3 14-08-04 111-8-4 14-08-05 111-8-5 14-08-06 111-8-6 14-08-07 111-8-7 14-08-08 111-8-8 14-08-09 111-8-9 14-08-10 111-8-10 14-08-11 111-8-11 14-08-12 111-8-12 14-08-13 111-8-13 14-08-14 111-8-14 14-08-15 111-8-15 14-08-16 111-8-16 14-08-17 111-8-17 14-08-18 111-8-18 14-08-19 111-8-19 14-08-20 111-8-20 14-08-21 111-8-21 14-08-22 111-8-22 14-08-23 111-8-23 14-08-24 111-8-24 14-08-25 111-8-25 14-09-01 111-9-1 14-09-02 111-9-2 14-09-03 111-9-3 14-09-04 111-9-4 14-09-05 111-9-5 14-09-06 111-9-6 14-09-07 111-9-7 14-09-08 111-9-8 14-09-09 111-9-9 14-09-10 111-9-10 14-09-11 111-9-11 14-09-12 111-9-12 14-09-13 111-9-13 14-10-01 111-10-1 14-10-02 111-10-2 14-10-03 111-10-3 14-10-04 111-10-4 14-10-05 111-10-5 14-10-06 111-10-6 14-10-07 111-10-7 14-10-08 111-10-8 14-10-09 111-10-9 14-10-10 111-10-10 14-11-01 111-11-1 14-11-02 111-11-2 14-11-03 111-11-3 14-11-04 111-11-4 14-11-05 111-11-5 14-12-01 111-13-1 14-12-02 111-13-2 14-12-03 111-13-3 14-12-04 111-13-4 14.1-01-01 107-1-2 14.1-01-02 107-1-1 14.1-01-03 107-1-3 14.1-02-01 107-3-2 14.1-02-02 107-3-1 14.1-02-03 107-3-3 14.1-03-01 107-3-4 14.1-03-02 107-3-5 14.1-03-03 107-3-6 14.1-04-01 107-3-7 14.1-04-02 107-3-8 14.1-04-03 107-3-9 14.1-04-04 107-3-10 14.1-04-05 107-3-11 14.1-04-06 107-3-12 14.1-04-07 107-3-13 14.1-04-08 107-3-14 14.1-04-09 107-3-15 14.1-04-10 107-3-16 14.1-05-01 107-4-1 14.1-05-02 107-4-2 14.1-05-03 107-4-3 14.1-06-01 107-4-5 14.1-06-02 107-4-6 14.1-06-03 107-4-4 14.1-06-05 107-2-1 14.1-07-01 107-2-3 14.1-07-02 107-2-4 14.1-07-03 107-2-5 14.1-07-04 107-2-6 16-01-01 6-1-1 16-01-02 6-1-3 16-01-03 6-1-4 16-01-04 6-1-5 16-01-05 6-1-6 16-01-06 6-1-7 16-01-07 6-1-8 16-01-08 6-1-9 16-01-09 6-1-10 16-01-10 6-1-11 16-01-11 6-1-12 16-01-12 6-1-2 16-02-01 6-2-7 16-02-02 6-2-8 16-02-03 6-2-9 16-02-04 6-2-10 16-02-05 6-2-11 16-02-06 6-2-12 16-03-01 6-2-1 16-03-02 6-2-2 16-03-03 6-2-3 16-03-04 6-2-4 16-03-05 6-2-5 16-03-06 6-2-6 16-03-08 6-1-2 17-02-01 16-3-1 17-02-02.1 16-3-3 17-02-02 16-3-2 17-02-03 16-3-4 17-02-04 16-3-5 17-02-05 16-3-6 17-02-06 16-3-6 17-02-07 16-3-6 17-02-08 16-3-7 17-02-09 16-3-8 17-02-10 16-3-9 17-02-11 16-3-10 17-02-12 16-3-11 17-02-13 16-3-12 17-02-14 16-3-13 17-03-01 16-4-1 17-03-03 16-4-2 17-03-05 16-4-3 17-03-06 16-4-4 17-03-07 16-4-5 17-03-08 16-4-6 17-03-09 16-4-7 17-03-12 16-4-8 17-04-01 16-5-1 17-04-02 16-5-2 17-04-03 16-5-3 17-04-04 16-5-4 17-04-05 16-5-5 17-04-06 16-5-6 17-05-01 16-6-1 17-05-02 16-6-2 17-05-03 16-6-3 17-05-04 16-6-4 17-05-05 16-6-5 17-05-06 16-6-6 17-05-07 16-6-7 17-05-08 16-6-8 17-05-09 16-6-9 17-05-10 16-6-10 19-05-02 18-1-2 19-05-05 18-1-3 19-05-07 18-1-4 19-06-07 18-2-4 19-06-08 18-2-5 19-06-10 18-1-5 19-08-16 14-5 20-01-01 24-1-1 20-01-07 24-1-2 20-02-01 24-2-3 20-02-02 24-2-4 20-02-03 24-2-5 20-02-04 24-2-6 20-02-05 24-2-7 20-03-01 24-2-2 20-04-01 24-2-8 20-04-06 24-2-13 20-05-03 24-2-9 20-05-07 24-2-10 20-06-01 24-2-11 20-06-02 24-2-11 20-06-03 24-2-11 20-06-04 24-2-11 20-07-01 24-2-12 20-09-02 24-9-1-24-9-10 20-09-36 24-3-1 20-10-13 24-1-3 20-12-08 24-4-1 20-12-09 24-4-2 20-12-10 24-4-3 20-12-12 24-3-2 20-13-03 24-6-1 20-13-04 24-6-2 20-13-08.1 24-7-19 20-14-01 24-7-5 20-14-03 24-7-7 20-14-07 24-7-8 20-14-08 24-7-9 20-14-09 24-7-10 20-14-10 24-7-11 20-14-11 24-7-12 20-14-12 24-7-13 20-14-13 24-7-14 20-14-14 24-7-15 20-14-15 24-7-16 20-14-16 24-7-20 20-14-17 24-7-21 20-14-18 24-7-22 20-14-19 24-7-23 20-14-20 24-7-24 20-14-21 24-7-25 20-14-22 24-7-26 20-14-23 24-7-17 20-14-24 24-7-18 20-14-26 24-7-1 20-14-27 24-7-2 20-14-29 24-7-4 20-14-31 24-7-3 20-15-05 24-5-1 20-15-06 24-5-2 20-16-01 24-3-3 20-16-02 24-3-4 20-16-03 24-3-5 20-16-04 24-3-6 20-16-05 24-3-7 20-18-02 24-8-1 20-18-03 24-8-2 20-18-04 24-8-3 20-18-06 24-8-4 20-18-07 24-2-14 20-20-08 24-1-2 21-01-01 101-2-1 21-01-02 101-2-2 21-01-03 101-2-3 21-01-04 101-2-4 21-01-05 101-2-5 21-01-06 101-2-6 21-01-07 101-2-7 21-01-08 101-2-8 21-02-01 101-1-1 21-02-02 101-1-2 21-02-03 101-1-3 21-03-01 105-2-1 21-03-02 105-2-2 21-03-03 105-2-3 21-03-04 101-1-4 21-03-05 105-1-2 21-03-06 105-1-3 21-03-07 105-1-4 21-03-08 105-1-5 21-03-09 105-1-1 21-03-10 105-1-6 21-04-01 105-3-1 21-04-02 105-3-2 21-04-03 105-3-3 21-04-04 105-3-4 21-04-06 105-3-5 21-04-07 105-3-6 21-04-08 105-3-7 21-04-09 105-3-8 21-04-10 105-3-9 21-04-11 105-3-10 21-04-12 105-3-11 21-04-13 105-3-12 21-04-14 105-4-1 21-04-15 105-4-4 21-04-16 105-4-5 21-04-17 105-4-2 21-04-17.1 105-4-2.1 21-04-17.2 105-4-2.2 21-04-18 105-4-6 21-05-01 105-1-9 21-05-02 105-1-10 21-05-05 105-1-11 21-06-01 105-1-13 21-06-02 105-1-12 21-07-01 105-1-13 21-08-01 101-3-1 21-08-02 101-3-2 21-08-06 101-3-3 21-09-01 109-1-2 21-09-02 109-1-3 21-09-03 109-1-1 21-09-04 109-2-1 21-09-05 109-2-2 21-09-06 109-2-3 21-09-07 109-2-4 21-09-08 109-2-5 21-09-11 109-2-6 21-09-12 109-3-1 21-09-13 109-3-2 21-09-14 109-2-7 21-09-15 109-2-8 21-09-16 109-1-7 21-09-17 109-2-9 21-09-18 109-1-6 21-09-19 109-1-4 21-09-20 109-1-5 21-10-01 113-1 21-10-02 113-2 21-10-03 113-3 21-10-04 113-4 21-10-05 113-5 21-10-06 113-6 21-10-07 113-7 21-10-08 113-8 21-10-09 113-9 21-10-10 113-10 21-10-11 113-11 21-10-12 113-12 21-11-01 105-5-1 21-11-02 105-5-2 21-11-03 105-5-3 21-11-04 105-5-4 21-11-05 105-5-5 21-13-01 105-4-3 21-13-02 105-4-3 21-13-03 105-4-3  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - LEGISLATION 
    This table gives the location within the Code of the ordinances codified in the Code. 
Title of 
Legislation Date Section Section 
in Code Ord. No. 353 1966 (part) 105-2-1 Ord. No. 406 1971 1 101-2-2 2 101-2-3 Ord. No. 429 1972 1 105-3-3 Ord. No. 431 1972 1 105-3-2 Ord. No. 494 1975 2 101-1-2 3 101-2-2 - 101-2-4 Ord. No. 508 1976 1 105-2-1 3 105-3-8 4 105-3-11 5 105-3-12 Ord. No. 526 1976 1 101-2-6, 101-2-7 Ord. No. 532 1976 1 109-2-6 2 109-2-6 3 109-2-9 Ord. No. 534 1976 1 105-1-5 Ord. No. 535 1976 1 105-3-9 2 105-3-10 3 105-3-10 4 105-1-5 Ord. No. 545 1977 1 105-3-6 Ord. No. 554 1977 1 105-2-1 2 105-3-4 Ord. No. 558 1977 105-4-4 Ord. No. 572 1978 1 105-3-4 2 105-3-4 3 105-3-4 4 105-3-4 Ord. No. 584 1978 1 105-3-7 Ord. No. 610 1979 1 105-1-5 Ord. No. 617 1979 1 105-3-3 Ord. No. 618 1979 1 105-3-2 Ord. No. 627 1980 1 4-1-10 Ord. No. 628 1980 1 115-6-9 Ord. No. 634 1980 1 105-3-2 Res. of 12-29-1981 12-29-1981 1.2 109-1-3 1.3 109-1-3 II 101-1-3 III 109-2-1 3.1 109-2-2 3.2 109-2-3, 109-2-4 3.2.1 109-2-4 3.2.2 109-2-4 3.2.3 109-2-4 3.3 109-2-5 IV 109-2-6 4.4 109-3-1 V 109-3-2 6.1 109-1-2 6.2 109-1-2 6.5 109-1-5 6.6 109-2-8 6.7 109-1-7 6.8 109-1-7 6.9 109-1-4 6.10 109-2-9 Ord. No. 636 1981 1 101-1-3 2 105-1-5 Ord. No. 637 12-2-1-12-2-9 Ord. No. 645 1981 1 4-1-1 2 4-1-3 3 4-1-14 4 4-2-2 5 4-2-4 7 4-2-11 8 4-2-15 9 4-2-15 Ord. No. 650 1981 1 115-2-1 2 115-2-2 3 115-2-3 4 115-2-4 5 115-2-5 6 115-2-6 7 115-2-7 Ord. No. 655 1982 1 12-2-1-12-2-9 Ord. No. 657 1982 1 101-1-3 2 105-1-5 Ord. No. 658 1982 1 24-1-2, 24-1-3 - 24-2-2-24-2-14 - 24-4-1-24-4-3 - 24-5-1, 24-5-2 - 24-6-1, 24-6-2 - 24-7-1 - 24-7-5 - 24-7-7-24-7-15 - 24-7-17, 24-7-18 - 24-8-2, 24-8-3 - 24-9-1-24-9-10 Ord. No. 659 1982 1 18-1-3 Ord. No. 660 1982 1 12-10-1-12-10-7 Ord. No. 664 1983 1 6-1-1-6-1-12 - 6-2-1-6-2-12 Ord. No. 666 1983 1 4-2-2 Ord. No. 668 1983 1 12-10-2 2 12-10-8, 12-10-9 Ord. No. 669 1983 1 10-2-1-10-2-15 2 10-2-17-10-2-24 Ord. No. 670 1984 1 105-2-1 2 105-2-2 3 105-3-5 Ord. No. 671 1984 1 111-3-1 - 111-3-2 Ord. No. 675 1984 16-3-11 Ord. No. 682 1985 1 12-10-2 Ord. No. 683 1985 1 4-1-1 3 4-2-9 Ord. No. 685 1985 1 8-1-1-8-1-8 Ord. No. 707 1985 1 16-2-2 5 16-2-2 Ord. No. 708 1986 1 4-1-20 2 4-2-15 Ord. No. 709 1986 1 4-1-1 Ord. No. 715 1986 1 117-5-1 2 117-5-2 3 117-5-3 4 117-5-4 5 117-5-5 6 117-5-4 9 117-5-6 10 117-5-7 Ord. No. 719 1987 1 10-2-1 - 10-2-6-10-2-15 Ord. No. 722 1987 1 105-1-4 2 105-4-1 Ord. No. 723 1987 1 12-10-2 Ord. No. 724 1987 1 4-1-3 Ord. No. 726 1987 1 22-1-1 2 22-1-3 3 22-1-4 Ord. No. 728 1987 1 105-4-4 (part) 105-2-1 Ord. No. 731 1988 1 8-2-1 2 8-2-2 3 8-2-3 4 8-2-4 5 8-2-5 Ord. No. 732 1988 1 12-10-2 Ord. No. 733 1988 1 24-5-2 - 24-6-2 Ord. No. 735 1988 1 2-4-5 2 2-4-8 Ord. No. 737 1988 1 20-1-1-20-1-15 - 20-2-1-20-2-13 - 20-3-1-20-3-6 - 20-4-1-20-4-10 - 20-5-1-20-5-10 - 20-6-1-20-6-10 - 20-7-1-20-7-18 - 20-8-1-20-8-12 Ord. No. 738 1988 1 4-1-11 Ord. No. 743 1988 1 20-7-2 Ord. No. 744 1989 1 4-3-1-4-3-8 2 12-9-1-12-9-9 Ord. No. 745 1989 1 12-10-2 Ord. No. 746 1989 1 20-5-3 3 20-6-10 Ord. No. 747 1989 1 115-6-12 Ord. No. 749 1989 1 16-3-1 - 117-6-1 2 16-3-2 - 117-6-2 4 16-3-9 5 16-3-10 Ord. No. 752 1989 1 4-1-1 2 4-1-7 4 4-1-11 5 4-2-3 6 4-2-17 7 4-2-20 8 4-3-2 9 4-3-1 Ord. No. 753 1989 1 24-7-17 Ord. No. 755 1989 1 12-10-2 Ord. No. 757 1989 1 10-2-1 - 10-2-6-10-2-16 Ord. No. 758 1989 1 111-2-1-111-2-7 Ord. No. 759 1989 1 111-11-1 2 111-11-2 3 111-11-3 4 111-11-4 5 111-11-5 Ord. No. 760 1989 1 111-10-2 2 111-10-4 3 111-10-5 4 111-10-9 Ord. No. 761 1989 1 111-7-1 - 111-7-8 Ord. No. 762 1989 1 24-10-1 3 24-10-1 Ord. No. 763 1989 1 4-2-20 Ord. No. 764 1990 1 12-10-2 Ord. No. 766 1990 1 12-10-2 Ord. No. 768 1990 1 18-2-4 Ord. No. 770 1990 1 4-2-2 Ord. No. 773 1990 1 115-5-1-115-5-5 Ord. No. 774 1990 1 20-7-17 Ord. No. 775 1991 22-2-1 22-2-5, 22-2-6 Ord. No. 776 1991 1 20-1-6 Ord. No. 777 1991 1 101-1-3 2 105-1-3 Ord. No. 778 1991 1 20-5-3 Ord. No. 783 1991 1 4-2-2 2 4-2-4 Ord. No. 784 1991 2 4-2-17 4 4-2-20 Ord. No. 789 1991 1-3 24-1-2, 24-1-3 - 24-2-2-24-2-14 - 24-4-1-24-4-3 - 24-5-1, 24-5-2 - 24-6-1, 24-6-2 - 24-7-1 - 24-7-5 - 24-7-7-24-7-18 - 24-8-2, 24-8-3 - 24-9-1-24-9-10 Ord. No. 795 1992 1 4-2-20 Ord. No. 797 1992 1 4-2-20 Ord. No. 801 1992 1 20-1-7 2 20-1-16 3 20-1-17 4 20-7-18 5 20-6-10 6 20-7-3 7 20-4-2 - 20-7-4 Ord. No. 806 1993 1 117-6-13 2 117-6-13 Ord. No. 809 1993 1 4-1-3 2 4-2-17 3 4-2-20 Ord. No. 811 1993 1(0-00-01) 2-6-1 1(0-00-02) 2-6-2 1(0-00-03) 2-6-3 1(0-00-04) 2-6-4 1(0-00-05) 2-6-5 1(0-00-07) 2-6-6 1(0-00-08) 2-6-7 1(0-00-09) 2-6-8 Ord. No. 825 9-6-1994 1 12-10-2 Ord. No. 828 10-18-1994 111-2-6 Ord. No. 831 12-10-1994 1 20-6-10 Ord. No. 833 5-2-1995 22-1-1 Ord. No. 834 5-2-1995 1 4-1-19 2 4-1-19 3 4-1-19 4 4-1-19 4-2-21 Ord. No. 836 6-21-1995 4-3-2 Ord. No. 849 8-20-1996 1 117-6-9 Ord. No. 851 1996 10-2-1 Ord. No. 852 3-4-1997 1(2) 105-3-2 2(2) 105-3-3 3(2) 105-3-6 4(2) 105-3-7 Ord. No. 855 4-29-1997 117-4-2-117-4-31 Ord. No. 857 5-6-1997 1 117-4-1 Ord. No. 843 1997 2 111-2-3 Ord. No. 853 1997 1 111-2-1 3 111-2-7 Ord. No. 868 1-6-1998 1 101-1-3 2 105-1-2 3(2) 105-3-1 4(2) 105-3-2 5(2) 105-3-3 6(4) 105-3-5 Ord. No. 869 2-3-1998 20-3-3 Ord. No. 881 3-2-1999 1 101-1-3 Ord. No. 882 3-2-1999 1 105-3-7 Ord. No. 883 3-2-1999 1 105-3-9 Ord. No. 884 3-2-1999 1(2) 105-4-1 Ord. No. 885 3-2-1999 1(2) 105-3-10 Ord. No. 886 3-2-1999 1(1) 105-3-12 Ord. No. 888 3-2-1999 1(4) 105-1-4 Ord. No. 889 3-2-1999 1(2(b)) 105-1-3 Ord. No. 890 3-30-1999 5 12-10-2 Ord. No. 892 5-4-1999 1 101-1-3 2(4(c)) 105-1-4 3(1) 105-3-8 Ord. No. 903 9-21-1999 1 6-2-7, 6-2-8 Ord. No. 905 11-30-1999 1 24-7-10 2 24-7-12 Ord. No. 914 6-1-2000 20-7-15 Ord. No. 912 6-6-2000 117-6-16 Ord. No. 913 7-18-2000 1 12-8-1- 12-8-7 Ord. No. 920 4-3-2001 1 101-2-2 2(4) 101-2-3 Ord. No. 922 6-19-2001 4-1-10 Ord. No. 923 7-17-2001 1 101-1-3 2 105-1-4 3 105-1-5 4 105-1-6 5 105-1-6 Ord. No. 930 9-18-2001 1 101-2-6 Ord. No. 933 12-6-2001 1 24-1-2 Ord. No. 952 2002 111-2-7 1 111-2-1 3 111-2-2 4 111-2-3 6 111-2-6 12 111-2-8 15 111-2-4 Ord. No. 953 1-21-2003 1 10-2-1 3 10-2-7 4 10-2-8 5 10-2-9 7 10-2-11 8 10-2-12 9 10-2-13 10 10-2-16 Ord. No. 958 4-1-2003 16-3-3 Ord. No. 960 5-20-2003 1 22-1-1 2 22-1-2 3 22-1-3 4 22-1-4 Ord. No. 961 6-17-2003 1 4-1-20 2 4-1-21 Ord. No. 963 6-17-2003 2 105-5-1 3 105-5-2 5 105-5-4 6 105-5-5 7 105-1-5 105-5-3 Ord. No. 964 6-24-2003 1 12-3-2 2 12-3-1 3 12-3-4 4 12-3-5 5 12-1-29 6 12-3-3 7 12-1-22 Ord. No. 902 10-21-2003 2 101-1-2 3 101-2-8 3(22(a)) 109-3-2 Ord. No. 971 10-21-2003 20-2-12 Ord. No. 973 12-30-2003 2-1-1 Ord. No. 969 2003 1 4-2-4 2 4-2-9 Ord. No. 978 4-20-2004 117-4-1 2 117-2-4 4 117-4-2 6 117-4-3 7 117-4-4 - 117-4-7 8 117-4-5 - 117-4-8 9 117-4-6 12 117-4-9 14 117-4-10, 117-4-11 15 117-4-12 16 117-4-13 17 117-4-14 18 117-4-15 20 117-4-16 21 117-4-17 22 117-4-18 23 117-4-19 24 117-4-20 25 117-4-21 26 117-4-22 27 117-4-23 28 117-4-24 29 117-4-25 30 117-4-26 31 117-4-27 32 117-4-28 33 117-4-29 34 117-4-30 35 117-4-31 37 117-4-32 38 117-4-33 Ord. No. 980 8-17-2004 1 24-3-2 Ord. No. 988 11-30-2004 3 115-7-3 9 115-7-1-115-7-5 Ord. No. 989 5-5-2005 1 105-4-4 Ord. No. 998 6-21-2005 2 105-3-9 Ord. No. 1003 4-4-2006 1 2-3-3 2 111-1-3 3 111-1-5 4 111-1-6 Ord. No. 1004 4-18-2006 12-6-1-12-6-8 Ord. No. 1002 5-19-2006 1 113-1-113-12 Ord. No. 1012 10-17-2006 105-4-6 Ord. No. 1013 10-17-2006 1 101-1-3 2 105-4-2 - 105-4-2.1 5 105-4-2.2 Ord. No. 1015 11-7-2006 2-4-3 Ord. No. 1005 2006 2 107-1-1-107-1-3 3 107-3-1-107-3-3 4 107-3-4-107-3-6 5 107-3-7-107-3-16 6 107-4-1-107-4-3 7 107-2-1 - 107-4-4-107-4-6 8 107-2-3-107-2-6 Ord. No. 1021 3-20-2007 1 105-3-5 Ord. No. 1027 6-19-2007 105-4-6 Ord. No. 1023 7-10-2007 1 117-6-1 2 117-6-3 Ord. No. 1033 1-29-2008 105-5-1-105-5-5 Ord. No. 1034 1-29-2008 2-6-7 Ord. No. 1039 6-13-2008 24-1-2 Ord. No. 1040 7-1-2008 13 4-3-3 Ord. No. 1043 9-2-2008 6 20-6-10 Ord. No. 1047 10-7-2008 4-2-9 Ord. No. 1049 1-20-2009 16-5-1-16-5-6 Ord. No. 1050 2-3-2009 7 20-6-10 Ord. No. 1048 3-3-2009 2 111-2-9 Ord. No. 1051  5- 5-2009 1 10-2-10 Ord. No. 1052 4-21-2009 111-2-9 Ord. No. 1053 6-2-2009 12-7-1-12-7-24 Ord. No. 1058 6-30-2009 2(b) 4-1-11 2(c) 4-1-11 Ord. No. 1060 8-4-2009 115-5-1 Ord. No. 1062 10-6-2009 1 101-2-6 Ord. No. 1065 12-15-2009 4-2-5 Ord. No. 1066 12-15-2009 24-7-7 Ord. No. 1070 2-2-2010 2-3-3 Ord. No. 1075 3-26-2010 24-7-3 Ord. No. 1078 4-20-2010 6-2-2 Ord. No. 1081 5-18-2010 2-4-7 Ord. No. 1077 5-28-2010 117-4-34 Ord. No. 1082 7-16-2010 4-2-6 Ord. No. 1083 7-30-2010 1 4-2-5 3 4-2-5 Ord. No. 1090 3-11-2011 16-6-1-16-6-10 Ord. No. 1094 4-5-2011 2-1-1 Ord. No. 1092 4-19-2011 10-2-1 10-2-10 Ord. No. 1096 7-1-2011 8-1-7 Ord. No. 1101 8-2-2011 4-2-7 Ord. No. 1098 8-12-2011 16-6-1-16-6-10 Ord. No. 1103 9-6-2011 9 20-7-3 Ord. No. 1104 9-6-2011 16-5-3, 16-5-4 Ord. No. 1107 2-7-2012 105-4-2.1, 105-4-2.2 Ord. No. 1108 2-21-2012 1(j)(1) 105-1-6 Ord. No. 1114 4-17-2012 4-1-4 Ord. No. 1115 4-17-2012 7 4-2-10 Ord. No. 1116 4-17-2012 4-1-2 Ord. No. 1117 4-17-2012 4-2-8 Ord. No. 1118 4-17-2012 4-2-11 Ord. No. 1119 4-17-2012 4-2-9 Ord. No. 1120 4-17-2012 4-2-4 Ord. No. 1132 11-20-2012 111-13-1-111-13-4 Ord. No. 1140 2-5-2013 2 4-2-5 Ord. No. 1144 4-26-2013 1 105-4-6 13 105-4-6 Ord. No. 1145 5-7-2013 20-6-10 Ord. No. 1146 5-7-2013 105-4-3 Ord. No. 1161 8-20-2013 4-1-1 Ord. No. 1158 10-15-2013 105-1-6 Ord. No. 1168 10-15-2013 4-2-4 4-2-9 Ord. No. 1172 11-19-2013 10-2-1 10-2-10 Ord. No. 1173 11-19-2013 4-2-14 Ord. No. 1174 11-19-2013 4-2-11 Ord. No. 1175 11-19-2013 20-6-10 Ord. No. 1166 11-29-2013 24-5-1, 24-5-2 Ord. No. 1176 12-3-2013 20-8-5 Ord. No. 1180 3-4-2014 1 12-8-1 Ord. No. 1181 4-15-2014 20-7-4 Ord. No. 1183 5-20-2014 101-1-101-1-3 101-2-1-101-2-8 Ord. No. 1184 5-20-2014 12-6-2 12-6-5-12-6-8 Ord. No. 1185 6-17-2014 2 1-9 Ord. No. 1188 12-16-2014 1(21-03-11)       Added 105-1-14 Ord. No. 1192 11-18-2014 109-1-1 109-2-2 Ord. No. 1193 11-18-2014 1 101-2-2, 101-2-3 Ord. No. 1195 12-16-2014 4-09-01 20-8-1 4-09-05 20-8-5 4-09-08 20-8-8 Ord. No. 1197 2-3-2015 1(10-02-01) 115-6-1 1(10-02-02) 115-6-2 1(10-02-03) 115-6-3 1(10-02-04) 115-6-4 1(10-02-05) 115-6-5 1(10-02-06) 115-6-6 1(10-02-07) 115-6-7 1(10-02-09) 115-6-9 1(10-02-11) 115-6-11 1(10-02-12) 115-6-12 1(10-02-13) 115-6-13 1(10-05-01) 115-5-1 1(10-05-02) 115-5-2 1(10-05-03) 115-5-3 1(10-05-04) 115-5-4 1(10-05-05) 115-5-5 Ord. No. 1204 10-20-2015       Added 16-7-1-16-7-4 Ord. No. 1207  8- 4-2015 1(App. A)       Added 1-9(h), (i)       Added 18-4-1-18-4-17 20-8-8 22-2-2 24-1-2 24-5-1(3) 24-7-17(g)       Added 24-11-1-24-11-4, 24-12-1-24-12-9, 24-13-1-24-13-9, 24-14-1-24-14-44, 24-15-1-24-15-9, 24-16-1-24-16-4, 24-17-1, 24-18-1-24-18-3, 24-19-1-24-19-12 105-1-6(m) 105-4-4 111-2-1       Added 111-2-10 2 1-9 Ord. No. 1210  6-30-2015 22-2-2 Ord. No. 1212  7-21-2015 24-7-17(g) Ord. No. 1218  9-15-2015 117-1-6 Ord. No. 1219 10- 6-2015 1a       Added 24-12-9       Rnbd 24-12-9       as 24-12-10 1b 24-14-4(tit.) 1c       Rnbd 24-14-33       as 24-17-2       Rnbd 24-14-34-24-14-44       as 24-14-33-24-14-43 1d       Added 24-14-44 1e       Added 24-15-5-24-15-9       Rnbd 24-15-5, 24-15-6       as 24-15-10, 24-15-11 1f       Added 24-15-12       Rnbd 24-15-7       as 24-15-13 1g       Added 24-15-14       Rnbd 24-15-8, 24-15-9       as 24-15-15, 24-15-16 1h       Added 24-15-17-24-15-19 1i       Added 24-17-3, 24-17-4 1j       Added 24-19-13 1k       Added 18-4-18 Ord. No. 1220 10-20-2015 10-2-10 Ord. No. 1222 11- 3-2015 1a       Added 16-2-4 1b       Added 115-3-8 Ord. No. 1223 11- 3-2015 1 101-1-3 2 101-2-5(tit.) 3 101-2-8 4 105-1-2 5 105-1-3 6 105-1-4 7 105-1-5 Ord. No. 1226 12- 1-2015 24-11-2 Ord. No. 1227 12- 1-2015 1(a)       Rpld 115-9-1-115-9-5 1(b) Ch. 115, Art. 9(tit.) 1(c)       Added 115-9-1-115-9-4 2(a) Ch. 117(tit.) 2(b)       Rnbd 117-1-2       as 117-3-1       Rnbd 117-1-3       as 117-1-2       Rnbd 117-1-4       as 117-3-3       Rnbd 117-1-5       as 117-1-3       Rnbd 117-1-6       as 117-1-4       Rnbd 117-1-7       as 117-1-5       Rpld 117-1-8       Rnbd 117-1-9       as 117-1-6       Rnbd 117-1-10       as 117-3-4       Rnbd 117-1-11       as 117-3-5       Rpld 117-1-12       Added 117-1-7       Rpld 117-1-14       Rnbd 117-1-15       as 117-1-9       Rnbd 117-1-16, 117-1-17       as 117-1-10, 117-1-11 2(c) 117-2-3, 117-2-4 2(d)       Rpld 117-2-5-117-2-8 2(e) Ch. 117, Art. 3(tit.) 2(f)       Rnbd 117-3-1       as 117-3-6 117-3-2       Rnbd 117-3-3       as 117-3-7       Rnbd 117-3-4       as 117-3-8       Rnbd 117-3-5       as 117-3-11 2(g)       Added 117-3-9-117-3-11 2(h) Ch. 117, Art. 4(tit.) 117-4-1, 117-4-2       Rpld 117-4-3       Rnbd 117-4-4-117-4-19       as 117-4-3-117-4-18       Rpld 117-4-20, 117-4-21       Rnbd 117-4-22-117-4-34       as 117-4-19-117-4-31 2(i) 117-5-4       Rpld 117-5-5       Rnbd 117-5-6, 117-5-7       as 117-5-5, 117-5-6 2(j)       Added Ch. 119 2(k)       Rnbd 117-6-1-117-6-22       as 119-1-1-119-1-22 2(l)       Added 117-6-1, 117-6-2 2(m)       Added 117-7-1-117-7-5 Ord. No. 1228  1- 5-2016       Added 6-2-13 Ord. No. 1229  1- 5-2016       Rpld 16-5-1-16-5-6       Added 16-5-1-16-5-7 Ord. No. 1230  1- 5-2016 107-2-1, 107-2-3, 107-2-6 Ord. No. 1225  1-19-2016 105-4-4(d)(2) Ord. No. 1233  2- 2-2016 2 117-1-4 Ord. No. 1234  2- 2-2016 4-1-3, 4-2-20 Ord. No. 1237  5- 3-2016 1 Ch. 16, Art. 4(tit.), 16-4-1-16-4-8 Ord. No. 1240  6-21-2016 1 111-2-1, 111-2-2 Ord. No. 1241 12-13-2016 1 105-1-2(2), (4)       Added 105-1-2(11) 2       Added 105-1-15 Ord. No. 1242 12-20-2016 1 101-1-3 2       Added 101-4-1-101-4-3 3       Added 105-1-3(3) 4 105-1-4(q)       Added 105-1-4(r) 5 105-3-1-105-3-17 6 109-2-5 Ord. No. 1245  8- 2-2016 1       Added 18-5-1-18-5-8 Ord. No. 1247  7-19-2016 18-2-2, 18-2-3       Rpld 18-2-4       Rnbd 18-2-5       as 18-2-4 Ord. No. 1248  7-19-2016 1       Added 26-1-1-26-1-3, 26-2-1, 26-2-2, 26-3-1-26-3-4 Ord. No. 1252 11- 1-2016 20-7-15 Ord. No. 1255 12-20-2016 1 10-2-1 2, 3 10-2-10 Ord. No. 1256  3- 7-2017       Added 18-1-6-18-1-9 Ord. No. 1257  3- 7-2017 20-6-10(d) Ord. No. 1262  6- 6-2017 (1)       Rpld 4-1-19       Rpld 4-2-20, 4-2-21 (2) 22-1-1 Ord. No. 1264  6-20-2017 14-5 Ord. No. 1265  7-11-2017 20-7-3(i) Ord. No. 1266  7-10-2018 1 18-1-7, 18-1-8 2 101-1-3 3       Added 105-1-4(c)(2)u. 4 105-3-17(1) Ord. No. 1272  9- 5-2017       Rpld 10-2-2-10-2-5 10-2-10 Ord. No. 1276 11- 7-2017 12-7-2 Ord. No. 1279 11-21-2017       Rpld 18-4-18 Ord. No. 1280  1- 2-2018 20-7-3(b)       Rpld 20-7-11 Ord. No. 1281  2- 6-2018 1) 109-2-1 2) 109-2-3 3) 109-2-4 4)       Rpld 101-4-1-101-4-3 Ord. No. 1282  2-20-2018       Added 22-1-5 Ord. No. 1283  3-20-2018 (1) 24-1-2(b) (2)       Rpld 24-5-1, 24-5-2       Rpld 24-6-1, 24-6-2       Rpld 24-19-7-24-19-9       Rpld 24-19-11-24-19-13 (3)       Added 24-5-1-24-5-6       Added 24-6-1, 24-6-2 Ord. No. 1284  4- 3-2018 111-2-3 Ord. No. 1286  4- 3-2018 2-6-8 Ord. No. 1287  4- 3-2018 20-7-15 Ord. No. 1288  5-15-2018 2-6-8 Ord. No. 1291  3- 5-2019 1 101-1-3 2 105-1-4(c)(2) 3 105-4-1(2)a., b. Ord. No. 1296 11- 6-2018 1 105-4-2(b) 105-4-2.1(b) 105-4-2.2(b), (f), (g) Ord. No. 1297 10-16-2018       Added 4-2-4(a)(10) Ord. No. 1298 12-18-2018 1 105-1-15(b) Ord. No. 1299  4-16-2019 1, 2 101-1-3 3 105-1-5(e) 4       Added 105-1-5(k) Ord. No. 1301  3- 5-2019 1 101-1-3 2 105-3-7 Ord. No. 1302 11-20-2018       Added 24-12-11 Ord. No. 1306  3- 5-2019 1 6-1-6 2       Added 105-1-16 Ord. No. 1307  3-19-2019 6-1-1 6-1-2       Rpld 6-1-3-6-1-5 6-1-6 6-2-1, 6-2-2 6-2-4, 6-2-5 6-2-7, 6-2-8 6-2-10, 6-2-11 6-2-13(c)       Added 6-2-14, 6-2-15 Ord. No. 1308  4-16-2019       Added 20-7-5(b)       Rnbd 20-7-5(b)       as 20-7-5(c) Ord. No. 1309  5- 7-2019 105-1-15(e)-(g)       Added 105-1-15(j)(24) 105-1-15(k)(2)c. 105-1-15(l)(9), (14) 105-1-15(p)(5), (11)       Added 105-1-15(s)(7) 105-1-15(t)(4) 105-1-15(u)(4) 105-1-15(v)(2), (4)       Added 105-1-15(v)(7) 105-1-15(z)(3)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
    This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the North Dakota Century Code (N.D.C.C.). 
N.D.C.C. 
Section Section 

in Code 2-06-02 2-3-2 4.1-47-17 16-5-1 4.1-47-24 16-5-5 tit. 5 Ch. 4 (note) - 4-1-18 - 4-2-15 - 12-3-1 ch. 5-01 4-1-7 5-01-01 22-2-3 - 22-2-5 5-01-08 4-1-5 5-01-08.1, 
5-01-08.2 4-1-8, 4-1-9 5-01-09 4-1-6 5-01-21 4-2-5 ch. 5-02 4-1-7 5-02-01 4-2-1 5-02-01.1 4-1-7 5-02-02 4-2-2 5-02-03 4-2-4-4-2-7 - 4-2-9 - 4-2-17 5-02-05 et seq. 4-1-3 5-02-06 4-1-7 - 4-2-4 5-02-09 Ch. 4 5-02-10, 
5-02-11 4-2-16 ch. 5-03 4-1-7 - 4-1-18 ch. 5-04 4-1-7 ch. 10-19.1 101-1-3 ch. 10-33 101-1-3 tit. 12.1 1-9 - 18-1-1 12.1-03-04 1-9 12.1-06-01 18-4-10 12.1-06-03 18-4-10 12.1-06-04 18-4-10 12.1-08-04 18-4-1 12.1-08-11 18-4-2 12.1-11-03 18-4-08 12.1-12-01 20-1-10 12.1-13-04 18-4-3 12.1-17-01 18-4-4 12.1-17-01.1 18-4-4 12.1-17-02 18-4-4 12.1-17-07 14-5 - 18-4-5 12.1-21-05 18-4-6 12.1-20-12.1 18-1-2 12.1-22 12-6-6 12.1-22-03 18-4-7 12.23 12-6-6 12.1-23-02 18-4-8 12.1-23-03 18-4-9 12.1-25-01 18-4-10 12.1-25-03 18-4-10 ch. 12.1-27.1 12-3-3 12.1-31-01 18-4-11 12.1-31-01.1 18-4-12 12.1-31-03 18-4-13 12.1-31-03.1 18-4-14 12.1-32-02 24-11-3 12.1-32-07 24-11-3 12.1-33-02.1 4-2-2 - 4-2-15 - 12-7-20 12.1-34-02(9) 18-5-2 14-07.1-01 18-4-4 19-24.1 18-1-7, 
18-1-8 21-04-01(5) 111-2-9 ch. 23-09.1 101-1-3 - 105-3-2, 
105-3-3 - 105-3-6, 
105-3-7 ch. 23-09.3 105-1-4 23-15-01 10-2-10 ch. 23-16 101-1-3 - 105-1-4 ch. 23-17 101-1-3 23-20.3-03.1 - 113-2 - 113-5, 113-6 - 113-12 23-20.3-03.1(7) 113-6 ch. 23-29 Ch. 115 (note) - Ch. 119 ch. 23-36 6-2-8 ch. 25-03.2 101-1-3 ch. 25-03.3 18-4-4 27-01-10 14-5 ch. 28-32 24-15-18 29-01-20-29-01-23 18-5-3 30-47-01 111-2-6 ch. 30.1-32 113-2 ch. 34-11.1 20-4-10 36-06-43(5) 24-2-2 36-21.2-03 6-1-8 ch. 37-17.1 Ch. 8 (note) - Ch. 8, Art. 1 - 8-1-4 37-17.1-10 8-1-7 37-17.1-12 8-1-8 37-19.1-02 20-2-7 tit. 39 Ch. 24 (note) - 24-1-1 39-01-04 20-1-8 39-01-15 24-17-1 ch. 39-04 24-5-1 39-04-11 24-12-1 39-04-19 24-15-16 39-04-37 24-11-1 39-06-01 24-15-1 39-06-16 24-12-2 39-06-17 24-15-2 39-06-40 24-15-3 39-06-42 24-11-2 39-06-42(4) 24-2-2 39-06-44 24-12-3 39-06-45 24-12-4 39-06.1-06 24-15-18 39-06.2-10.2 24-11-3 39-07-12 24-12-5 39-07-13 34-12-5 39-08-01 24-11-3 39-08-03 24-11-4 39-08-03.1 24-12-6 39-08-05 24-14-1 39-08-08 24-14-2 39-08-09 24-12-5 39-08-11 24-12-5 39-08-18 4-1-10 - 24-12-7 39-08-20 34-12-8 39-08-23 24-12-9 39-08-25 24-12-11 39-09-01 24-16-1 39-09-01.1 24-12-10 39-09-02 24-16-2 39-09-03 24-2-9 - 24-16-3 39-09-09 24-16-4 ch. 39-10 Ch. 24, Art. 3 39-10-02 24-14-3 39-10-04 24-14-4 39-10-05 24-14-5 39-10-06 24-14-5 39-10-07 24-14-6 39-10-07.3 24-14-7 39-10-08 24-14-8 39-10-11 24-14-9 39-10-12 24-14-10 39-10-13 24-14-11 39-10-14 24-14-12 39-10-15 24-14-13 39-10-16 24-2-12 - 24-14-14 39-10-17 24-14-15 39-10-18 24-14-16 39-10-19 24-14-17 39-10-20 24-14-18 39-10-21.1 24-14-19 39-10-22 24-14-20 39-10-23 24-14-21 39-10-24 24-14-22 39-10-25 24-14-23 39-10-26 24-14-24 39-10-26.1 24-14-25 39-10-28 24-13-1 39-10-29 24-13-2 39-10-33 24-13-3 39-10-33.1 24-13-4 39-10-33.2 24-13-5 39-10-33.3 24-13-6 39-10-33.4 24-13-7 39-10-34 24-13-8 39-10-35 24-2-11 - 24-13-9 39-10-36 24-14-26 39-10-37 24-14-27 39-10-38 24-14-28 39-10-41 24-18-1 39-10-42 24-18-2 39-10-43 24-18-3 39-10-44 24-14-29 39-10-45 24-14-30 39-10-46 24-14-31 39-10-46.1 24-14-32 39-10-47 et seq. Ch. 24, Art. 7 39-10-49 24-17-3 39-10-50 24-17-4 39-10-51 24-17-2 39-10-52 24-14-33 39-10-52.1 24-14-34 39-10-54 24-14-35 39-10-54.1 24-14-36 39-10-56 24-14-37 39-10-57 24-14-38 39-10-58 24-14-39 39-10-59 24-14-40 39-10-65 24-14-41 39-10-68 24-14-42 39-10-72 24-14-43 ch. 39-10.1 Ch. 24, Art. 4 39-10.1-04 24-19-1 39-10.2-02 24-19-2 39-10.2-03 24-19-3 39-10.2-04 24-19-4 39-10.2-05 24-19-5 39-10.2-06 24-19-6 ch. 39-12 Ch. 24, Art. 8 - 24-8-3 39-12-02 24-8-4 39-12-04 24-14-44 39-12-05 24-14-44 39-12-05.3 24-14-44 39-13-06 24-18-3 ch. 39-16.1 24-12-8 39-16.1-09 24-15-2 39-19-04 24-12-1 ch. 39-20 24-15-1 39-20-01 24-11-3 39-20-14 24-11-3 39-21-01 24-15-4 - 24-15-5 - 24-15-7 39-21-02 24-15-5 39-21-04 24-15-6 39-21-13 24-15-10 39-21-18 24-14-31 39-21-20 24-15-7 39-21-21 24-15-7 39-21-26 24-15-8 39-21-32 24-15-9 39-21-37 24-15-11 39-21-38 24-15-12 - 24-15-13 39-21-39 24-15-13 39-21-40 24-15-14 39-21-41.2 24-15-15 39-21-41.4 24-15-16 39-21-41.5 24-15-16 39-21-45.1 24-15-17 39-21-46 24-15-18 39-21-50 24-15-19 ch. 39-24 24-5-1 Ch. 24, Art. 6 39-24-02 24-19-10 39-24-04 24-19-10 39-24-09 24-6-1 24-19-10 39-24-11 24-19-10 ch. 39-24.1 Ch. 24, Art. 6 39-24.1-07 24-19-10 ch. 39-26 Ch. 16, Art. 3 - 18-5-7 39-29-10 24-5-3 40-05-01 24-15-2 40-05-01(8) Ch. 115 (note) 40-05-01(10) Ch. 115 (note) 40-05-01(12)-(17) Ch. 115 (note) 40-05-01(19) Ch. 111, Art. 12 40-05-01(20) Ch. 115 (note) 40-05-01(25) Ch. 111 (note) - Ch. 111, Art. 6 40-05-01(26) Ch. 12, Art. 2 - Ch. 12, Art. 4 40-05-01(26), 
40-05-01(27) Ch. 12, Art. 6, 
Ch. 12, Art. 7 40-05-01(30) Ch. 12, Art. 2 - Ch. 12, Art. 4 40-05-01(33) Ch. 18 (note) 40-05-01(34) Ch. 10, Art. 2 - Ch. 111 (note) 40-05-01(35) Ch. 10, Art. 2 - Ch. 111 (note) 40-05-01(37), (38) Ch. 10, Art. 2 40-05-01(44) Ch. 16 (note) 40-05-01(47) 40-05-01(53) Ch. 12, Art. 5 40-05-02(6), (7) Ch. 111 (note) 40-05-02(23) Ch. 111 (note) 40-05-06 1-9 40-05-09 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. 2 40-05-14 Ch. 115 (note) 40-05.1-01 et seq. Char. (note) 40-05-01.1 16-7-3 40-05.1-06 1-4 40-05.1-06(16) Ch. 22, Art. 2 ch. 40-06 Ch. 2, Art. 1 ch. 40-09 Char. Art. 12 - Ch. 2 (note) ch. 40-11 2-1-1 40-11-09 1-1 ch. 40-13 Ch. 2, Art. 2 40-13-02 14-4 40-14-02 14-1 ch. 40-15 Ch. 2, Art. 2 40-16-05 117-3-8 ch. 40-18 Ch. 14 (note) 40-18-01 14-1 40-20-05(24) Ch. 12, Art. 1 ch. 40-22 109-3-1 40-22-15 117-3-6 40-22-16 117-3-6 ch. 40-27 117-3-7 ch. 40-29 115-7-6 40-29-05 115-7-7 40-29-08 115-7-5 40-29-14 115-7-1 - 115-7-4 40-29-18- 
40-29-21 16-2-3 chs. 40-29-40-32 Ch. 115 (note) ch. 40-31 115-7-1 40-31-02 115-7-3 40-31-04 115-7-5 40-31-08 115-7-1 - 115-7-4 ch. 40-33 - Ch. 115 (note) 40-33-12 117-3-6 ch. 40-34 Ch. 115 (note) - Ch. 117, Art. 6 ch. 40-35 115-2-1 40-35-15- 
40-35-19 117-3-8 ch. 40-38 2-3-2 40-44-04 20-3-1 ch. 40-47 Ch. 105 (note) - 105-4-4 40-47-01 113-12 40-47-01.1 111-2-3 - 111-11-1 40-47-02 Ch. 105, Art. 2 40-47-03 101-1-1 40-47-04 113-11 40-47-05 105-1-13 40-47-06 101-2-1 40-47-07 et seq. 105-1-13 40-47-11 105-4-4 40-48-1 et seq. Ch. 101, Art. 2 40-48-03 101-2-1- 
101-2-3 40-48-04 101-2-4 40-48-06 101-2-5, 
101-2-6 40-48-08 et seq. Ch. 101, Art. 3 40-57.3-01 22-1-2 40-57.3-01.1 22-1-1 40-57.3-02 22-1-3, 22-1-4 tit. 40, ch. 63 2-3-2 ch. 42-01 Ch. 16 (note) 43-09-21 Ch. 111, Art. 5 43-18-09 Ch. 111, Art. 6 ch. 43-30 4-3-3 44-04-17.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. 6 44-04-17.1 2-6-2 44-04-18(2) 2-6-7 44-04-22 20-1-15 44-08-01 2-4-3 44-08-01.1 2-4-3 49-09-11 2-1-1 ch. 51-04 12-6-6 ch. 51-21 18-4-15 53-02-01 12-4-2 - 12-4-5 53-02-08 12-4-5 - 12-9-4 ch. 53-03 et seq. Ch. 12, Art. 4 ch. 53-06.1 Ch. 12, Art. 10 - 12-10-1 54-2.3-01 Ch. 111, Art. 7 ch. 54-12 24-11-3 54-21.3-01 Ch. 111 (note) - Ch. 111, Art. 2 54-21.3-08 111-3-1 57-01-02.1 Ch. 22, Art. 2 57-02-39 101-1-3 - 109-2-5 ch. 57-39.2 22-1-2 - 22-2-1-22-2-3 ch. 57-40.2 22-2-1 - 22-2-6 60-01-37 18-5-6 ch. 61-16.2 105-4-4 tit. 62.1 18-1-1 62.1-01-02 18-5-4 62.1-02-6 18-4-16 62.1-02-10 18-4-17  
