Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Home Rule Charter
Chapter HRC
HOME RULE CHARTER
Editor's Note: Approved by the voters at a special city election, May
14, 1991.
§ HRC-1. Article 1. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the City of Williston, within the corporate limits as now
established or as hereafter established in the manner provided by law, shall
continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity, under
the name of the "City of Williston."
§ HRC-2. Article 2. Governing Body to Exercise Powers.
Subject to the limitations imposed by the Constitution of the United States
of America, the Constitution of the State of North Dakota, state law, and
this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the elected, governing
body. The elected, governing body shall enact ordinances, adopt budgets,
determine policies and prescribe the functions of government to be
performed by the city under the authority of the charter and the constitution
and laws of this state.
§ HRC-3. Article 3. Powers of City.
The city shall have all powers granted to municipal corporation by the
constitution and laws of this state and by this charter together with all the
implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted.
Among its enumerated powers, which may be implemented by ordinance
subject to the limitations specified in this charter, shall be the authority to
impose a retail sales tax and use tax of no more than 1% of those gross
receipts taxed pursuant to Chapters 57-39.2 and 57-40.2, N.D.C.C., subject
to the following:
a. The following shall be specifically exempted from any tax imposed
pursuant to this article:
1. Sales of natural gas.
AO:1
2. Those sales exempted from the imposition and computation of the
state sales tax and use tax pursuant to sections 57-39.2-04,
57-39.2-04.1, 57-40.2-04, and 57-40.2-04.1, N.D.C.C. Sales to
contractors that are exempt pursuant to Subsection 15 of Section
57-39.2-04, N.D.C.C., shall be exempt from any city sales tax, but
contractors shall be subject to the city use tax on those items used
within the city that would be taxed pursuant to Section
57-40.2-03.3, N.D.C.C., on which the city sales tax has not
previously been paid.
3. Any other transactions exempted from imposition of the state sales
tax or use tax pursuant to state law.
4. Gross receipts from coin-operated amusement machines.
b. The tax shall not exceed $25 on any single sales transactions involving
one or more items.
c. Any retail sales tax or use tax imposed will be computed and collected
in the same manner provided by law for the collection of the state sales
tax and use tax. The bracket system for the application of the state sales
tax set forth in Section 57-39.2-08.2, N.D.C.C., shall be adjusted to
incorporate the additional city sales tax.
d. Seventy-five percent of the proceeds of any city sales and use tax shall
be dedicated to property tax relief.
e. Twenty-five percent of the proceeds of any city sales tax and use tax
shall be dedicated to a "Job Development Fund," with the primary
objective of creating jobs by applying funds for business retention,
expansion and recruitment in Williston and Northwestern North
Dakota. The fund shall be administered by a seven member committee
appointed by the Williston City Commission and may allow for two City
Commissioners to serve on such a committee. All projects
recommended by the Job Development Fund Committee will be subject
to approval by the Williston City Commission.
f. An ordinance imposing a city sales and use tax adopted pursuant to this
article shall expire no later than June 30, 1996 unless the ordinance has
previously been referred and rescinded by a majority of the qualified
voters. A referral must be made by a petition signed by not less than
15% of the qualified electors of the city voting in the last city election.
An ordinance imposing a city sales tax and use tax approved by a
majority vote of the voters shall remain in effect unless repealed or
amended thereafter pursuant to law.
The charter may be repealed or amended by the procedure set forth in
Section 40-05.1-07, N.D.C.C., provided that any petition for repeal or
amendment of this charter shall be signed by not less than 15% of the
qualified electors of the city voting in the last city election.
§ HRC-3 WILLISTON CODE § HRC-3
AO:2
§ HRC-4. Article 4. Boundaries.
The boundaries of the city shall be the boundaries as established at the time
this charter takes effect, or as such boundaries may be changed thereafter
in the manner authorized by law.
§ HRC-5. Article 5. Separability Clause.
If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder
of this charter, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section
may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part
of section to which such holding shall directly apply.
§ HRC-6. Article 6. Plenary and Implied Powers of the Governing
Body.
The governing body shall have plenary power to enact and make all proper
and necessary ordinances, resolutions and orders to carry out and give
effect to the express and implied powers granted by law or in this charter
to the end that a complete, harmonious and effective municipal government
may be initiated, installed, operated, and maintained in the city, and thereby
protect and safeguard the rights, interests, safety, morality, health and
welfare of the city and its inhabitants.
§ HRC-7. Article 7. Succession in Government.
It is intended that the statutes of this state, so far as applicable,
shall continue to apply to this city, except insofar as superseded by
this charter or by ordinance passed pursuant to this charter, and that
in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby, or
appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the city shall have and
may exercise all powers under the constitution and laws of the state
applicable generally to all cities.
Section 1. Right of Officers and Employees Preserved
Except as otherwise specifically provided, this charter shall not affect
or impair the rights or privileges of officers or employees of the city,
or any office, department or agency thereof, existing at the time this
charter shall take effect. Any provision of law in force at the time this
charter shall take effect, which provision of law is not inconsistent
herewith, shall remain in full force and effect as to qualifications of
personnel, appointment, removal, pension and retirement rights, civil
rights, or any other rights or privileges of officers or employees of the
city or any office, department or agency thereof.
Section 2. Continuance of Present Officers
All persons holding executive and administrative office at the time
this charter takes effect shall continue in office and shall continue
§ HRC-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § HRC-7
AO:3
the performance of their duties until provisions shall have been made
in accordance therewith for the performance of such duties or the
discontinuance of such office.
Section 3. Continuance of Present Offices, Departments or Agencies
Any office, department or agency, heretofore existing, shall continue
to exercise powers and duties the same as were heretofore exercised
and shall have the power to continue any business proceedings or other
matters within the scope of its regular powers and duties until such
office, department or agency shall be changed or abolished by the
governing body.
The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any office,
department or agency of the city by the laws of this state shall, if such
office, department or agency be abolished by this charter or under
its authority, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office,
department or agency designated by the governing body.
Section 4. Continuance of Appointive Boards, Authorities and Commissions
All appointive boards, authorities and commissions, heretofore existing
shall continue and shall exercise such powers and duties as were
granted them until such boards, authorities and commissions and the
powers thereof shall be changed or abolished by the governing body.
Section 5. Continuance of Contracts
All contracts entered into by the city, or for its benefit, prior to the
taking effect of this charter, shall continue in full force and effect.
Section 6. Pending Actions and Proceedings
The adoption of this charter shall not abate or otherwise affect any
action or proceeding civil or criminal, pending when it takes full effect,
brought by or against the city or any office, department, agency or
officer thereof.
Section 7. Ordinances and Statutes to Remain in Force
All ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city, together with
state statutes applicable to municipalities which are in force at the
time this charter takes effect, and not inconsistent with the provisions
thereof, are hereby continued in force until such ordinances,
resolutions and regulations of the city are duly amended or repealed
and until ordinances are enacted providing procedures replacing those
previously required by state statute.
Section 8. Inauguration of Government Under this Charter
If a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting on the question
vote to ratify this charter, the provisions of this charter shall go into
effect upon the filing of the charter by the governing body with the
§ HRC-7 WILLISTON CODE § HRC-7
AO:4
§ HRC-8. Article 8. Method of Amendment and Repeal.
This charter may be amended or repealed as provided by Chapter 40-05.1
of the North Dakota Century Code.
Submitted by the Williston Home Rule Charter Committee on this 12th day
of March, 1991.
/s/_______________________________
Noel K. Hanson, Chairman
/s/_______________________________
Joseph Vranish
/s/_______________________________
Kirk Schoepp
/s/_______________________________
Randy Schwartz
/s/_______________________________
Larry Hanson
Published in the Williston Daily Herald on the 15th day of March, 1991, and
approved by the voters at a special city election on the 14th day of May,
1991. Returns canvassed by the Board of City Commissioners on the 20th
day of May, 1991.
/s/_______________________________
John Kautzman, City Auditor
Code of Ordinances
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. How Code designated and cited. [Code 1957, § 1.1]
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Williston,
North Dakota," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the
"Williston City Code."
Secretary of State, the Clerk of the District Court for Williams County,
and the office of the City Auditor, within 90 days.
§ HRC-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-2
AO:5
§ 1-2. Rules of construction — Generally. [Code 1957, § 1.2]
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the
manifest intent of the Board of City Commissioners:
BOARD, BOARD OF CITY COMMISSIONERS, CITY COMMISSION — The
terms "Board," "Board of City Commissioners" or "City Commission" shall
be construed to mean the Board of City Commissioners of Williston, North
Dakota.
CITY — The words "the City" or "this City" shall be construed as if followed
by the words "of Williston."
CODE — The words "the Code" or "this Code" shall mean the "Code of
Ordinances, City of Williston, North Dakota."
COMPUTATION OF TIME — The time in which any act provided by law is to
be done is computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless
the last is a holiday, and then it is also excluded.
COUNTY — The words "the county" or "this county" mean Williams County,
in the State of North Dakota.
DAY — A day is the period of time between any midnight and the midnight
following.
DAYTIME, NIGHTTIME — "Daytime" is the period between sunrise and
sunset. "Nighttime" is the period of time between sunset and sunrise.
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY — Whenever a provision appears requiring
an officer of the City to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to
be construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection
unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise.
GENDER — Words used importing the masculine gender include the
feminine and neuter.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The term "health department" shall mean the
Upper Missouri District Health Unit.
HEALTH OFFICER — The head of the Upper Missouri District Health Unit
or his designee.
IN THE CITY — Includes all territory over the City now has, or shall
hereafter acquire, jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other
regulatory powers.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words giving a joint authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of them, unless it is otherwise expressed.
MONTH — A calendar month.
N.D.C.C. — The abbreviation "N.D.C.C." shall refer to the North Dakota
Century Code, as now or hereafter amended.
§ 1-2 WILLISTON CODE § 1-2
AO:6
NUMBER — The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
OATH — Includes "affirmation."
OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, ETC. — Officers, departments, boards,
commissions and employees referred to by title only shall mean officers,
departments, boards, commissions and employees of the City of Williston
unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
OR, AND — "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense
requires it.
OWNER — Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole
or a part of such building or land.
PERSON — Includes and be applied to corporations, associations, clubs,
societies, firms, partnerships, municipalities and bodies politic and
corporate as well as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes money, goods, chattels, things in action
and evidences of debt.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
REASONABLE TIME — In all cases where any section of this Code or
other City ordinance shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time
or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall
be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice.
SEVERAL — In relation to number, shall mean two or more.
SHALL, MAY — Is mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines, of a roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SIGNATURE, SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the person cannot
write, his name being written near it and written by a person who writes his
own name as a witness.
STATE — The State of North Dakota.
STREET — The entire width between property lines of every way or place
of whatsoever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public,
as a matter of right-of-way, for purposes of vehicular traffic.
TENSE — Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well
as the present and past.
USUAL AND CUSTOMARY — "According to usage."
§ 1-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-2
AO:7
WEEK — Shall be construed to mean seven days; but publication in a
newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number
of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless
specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day
in each week.
WRITTEN AND PRINTED — The words "writing" and "written" shall include
"typewriting" and "typewritten" and "printing" and "printed," except in the
case of signatures and when the words are used by way of contrast to
"typewriting" and "printing." Writing may be made in any manner, except
that when a person entitled to require the execution of a writing demands
that it be made with ink, it must be so made.
YEAR — A calendar year, except where otherwise provided.
§ 1-3. Same — Application.
The rules of construction set forth in this chapter shall not be applied to
any section of this Code or other City ordinance which shall contain any
express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject matter
or context of such provisions or ordinances may be repugnant thereto.
§ 1-4. Reference to code, conflicts.
§ 1-5. Catchlines of sections. [Code 1957, § 1.3]
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type,
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
(a) In addition to the rules of construction specified in this chapter, the
following rules shall be observed in the construction of these
ordinances
(1) All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters,
articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified.
(2) If the provisions of different chapters of this Code conflict with or
contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail
as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of
such chapter.
(3) If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same
chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical
order shall prevail unless such construction be inconsistent with
the meaning of such chapter.
§ 1-2 WILLISTON CODE § 1-6
AO:8
§ 1-6. Provisions considered as continuations of existing
ordinances. [Code 1957, § 1.4]
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially
the same as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of
this Code, shall be construed as a continuation thereof and not as new
enactments.
§ 1-7. Repeal of ordinances — Effect upon penalties. [Code 1957,
§ 1.7]
The repeal of any ordinance by the Board of City Commissioners shall not
have the effect of releasing or extinguishing any penalty, fine, liability or
forfeiture incurred under such ordinance, but as to cases tried before, or
subsequent to, the repeal of such ordinance, it shall have the effect of
extinguishing any jail or prison sentence that may be, or that has been,
imposed by reason of such ordinance, unless the repealing ordinance shall
provide expressly that the penalties of imprisonment shall remain in force
as to crimes committed in violation of such ordinance prior to its repeal. In
other respects, such ordinance shall remain in force only for the purpose of
the enforcement of such fine, penalty or forfeiture.
§ 1-8. Same — Effect upon ordinances previously repealed. [Code
1957, § 1.6]
Whenever any ordinance of the Board of City Commissioners which
repealed a former ordinance is repealed, such former ordinance shall not be
revived by such repeal, unless there is express provision to the contrary.
§ 1-9. Severability of parts of Code. [Code 1957, § 1.5]
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
Code be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of
this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the Board of City
Commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or
unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
§ 1-10. Altering Code.
It is unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions
any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions
thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
§ 1-11. General penalty; continuing violations. [Code 1957, § 1.9;
Ord. No. 455, 8-12-1969; Ord. No. 455-A, 9-2-1969; Ord. No. 485,
9-25-1973; Ord. No. 568, 3-10-1981; Ord. No. 803, 9-23-1997; Ord.
No. 973, 8-27-2013; amended 8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 1106]
§ 1-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-11
AO:9
§ 1-12. Jurisdiction over persons and property.
The jurisdiction of the City extends to all persons, places and property
within its boundaries and such extra-territorial jurisdiction as is granted to
it under the provisions of the law of the state.
§ 1-13. Standard time. [Code 1957, § 1.8]
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
(a) Class B misdemeanor. Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the
City any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act
is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where
no specific penalty is provided therefor, the penalty shall be classified
as a Class B misdemeanor. Any person upon conviction for the violation
of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding $1,500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, for each such offense. Each day
any violation of any provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall
constitute a separate offense. In the construction and interpretation of
this section, the revocation of a license or permit shall not be
considered as a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty from
being enforced.
(b) Infraction. The penalty for violation of an offense classified as an
infraction is a maximum fine of $1,000. Any person convicted of an
infraction who, within one year before commission of the infraction of
which the person was convicted, has been convicted previously at least
twice of the same offense classified as an infraction may be sentenced
as though convicted of a Class B misdemeanor. If the prosecution
contends that the infraction is punishable as a Class B misdemeanor,
the complaint must specify the offense is a misdemeanor.
(a) Central standard time, based on the nineteenth meridian of longitude
west from Greenwich, shall be the standard time for the City, except
when state or federal law requires the City to be on central daylight
saving time. All ordinances providing for the doing or not doing of any
act or thing after or before a certain time, and the time designated for
holding the municipal court, or the orders made therein, and the
meeting of the Board of City Commissioners or the performance of any
contract in which the City is a party where time is made an element in
the transaction, shall be taken to mean the legal central standard time.
(b) The chief of police shall keep his time regulated by the legal central
standard time, and enforce the provisions of this Code and other
ordinances and all other matters coming under his jurisdiction
according to central standard time.
§ 1-11 WILLISTON CODE § 1-13
AO:10
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 2-1. Appointive officers. [Code 1957, § 2.5; Ord. No. 668,
4-10-1986; Ord. No. 835, 8-8-2000; amended 10-8-2019 by Ord. No.
1108]
At the first meeting after the qualification of its members, or as soon
thereafter as possible, the Board of City Commissioners shall appoint the
following officers:
§ 2-2. Term of appointive officers. [Code 1957, § 2.6; Ord. No. 668,
4-10-1986; Ord. No. 835, 8-8-2000; amended 10-8-2019 by Ord. No.
1108]
The term of all appointive officers in § 2-1 shall commence on the first day
of July of the year of their appointment and such officers shall hold their
respective offices for two years and until their successors are appointed and
qualified. The City Commission, in its discretion, may extend or reduce the
term of an appointed officer, for a time period deemed appropriate by the
Board of City Commissioners.
§ 2-3. Retained appointive officers. [Ord. No. 835, 8-8-2000; Ord.
No. 1030, 11-24-2015; amended 10-8-2019 by Ord. No. 1108]
(a) Attorney;
(b) One or more assessors;
(c) Such other officers or boards as the Board of City Commissioners may
deem necessary.
(a) At the first meeting after the qualification of its members, or as soon
thereafter as possible, the Board of City Commissioners shall also
appoint the following officers if there is a vacancy and the position has
not previously been dispensed with by a majority vote of the Board of
City Commissioners:
(1) Finance Director.
(2) Airport Director.
(3) Economic Development Director.
(4) Development Services Director.
(5) Chief of Police.
(6) City Engineer.
(7) Public Works Director.
(8) Fire Chief.
§ 2-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3
AO:11
§ 2-4. Retained appointive officers - Removal. [Ord. No. 835,
8-8-2000]
After completing any probation period, retained appointive officers in § 2-3
appointed to such office or position may only be removed by a majority vote
of 4/5ths of all of the members of the Board of City Commissioners, only
upon a finding of cause. The facts should be set forth in a written allegation
signed by one or more members of the City Commission and such written
allegation shall be delivered to the officer. Within 14 days after delivery
or service of the written allegation, the City Commission shall hear and
determine the case upon its merits. The officer is entitled to present any
witnesses and evidence in his behalf and the Board or any member of the
Board of City Commissioners is likewise entitled to present any witnesses or
evidence concerning the removal of the officer. The president of the Board
of City Commissioners or the Board of City Commissioners, by a majority
vote of its members, may suspend with pay any officer against whom written
allegations have been delivered or served until the matter is heard and
decided by the Board of City Commissioners. The president of the Board of
City Commissioners may appoint a person to fill any vacancy temporarily
until the disposition of the allegations against the officer. Such person
temporarily appointed may be removed by the president of the Board of
City Commissioners or a majority of the Board of City Commissioners. After
the matter is heard before the Board of City Commissioners, the Board
may make an immediate ruling or may take the matter under advisement
but shall render a decision no later than the next succeeding regularly
scheduled commission hearing.
§ 2-5. Dispensing with an office. [Ord. 1957, § 2.5; Ord. No. 668,
4-10-1986; Ord. No. 835, 8-8-2000]
(9) City Administrator.
(10) Human Resources Director.
(11) PSAP Director.
(b) Retained appointive officials are also known as department heads. All
retained appointive officials in § 2-3(a) shall be subject to the City of
Williston Personnel Policy and its succeeding amendments or as
otherwise directed by the Board of City Commissioners.
(a) The Board of City Commissioners by a majority vote may dispense with
any appointive office listed in § 2-1(a) at the end of the term or during a
vacancy and provide that the duties thereof shall be performed by
contract, by other officers or boards, by the Board of City
Commissioners, or by a committee or committees thereof.
(b) The Board of City Commissioners, by a majority vote, may dispense with
any appointive office listed in § 2-3(a) and provide that the duties
thereof shall be performed by contract, by other officers or boards, by
§ 2-3 WILLISTON CODE § 2-5
AO:12
§ 2-6. Cause for suspension, demotion or dismissal. [Ord. No. 835,
8-8-2000]
An appointive officer may be subject to disciplinary action for conduct
impairing performance of the officer or that of the City government,
including, but not limited to, the following:
the Board of City Commissioners, or by a committee or committees
thereof.
(a) Consumption of alcoholic beverages or unlawful use of any drugs,
narcotic or other controlled substance while on duty, or reporting to
work when under the influence of intoxicants or any narcotic or
controlled substance;
(b) Failure to follow orders of superiors or the Board of City
Commissioners;
(c) Inability to get along with City employees, resulting in interference with
performance of duties of any employee;
(d) Being absent from work without permission or failure to report to the
supervisor or department head when absent;
(e) Being habitually tardy;
(f) Continued failure to perform the assigned work in a satisfactory
manner;
(g) Being habitually wasteful of material, property or working time;
(h) Failure to pay just debts to the best of one's ability and means, if such
failure impairs job performance or interferes with normal and efficient
City government;
(i) Conviction of a felony or conviction of a misdemeanor involving
dishonesty or moral turpitude;
(j) Engaging in criminal, infamous, dishonest or notoriously disgraceful
conduct, or other conduct prejudicial to the government;
(k) Violation of City ordinances or official written policies adopted by the
Board of City Commissioners or departments;
(l) Careless or negligent operation of City vehicles or equipment;
(m) Engaging in conduct or making public statement's which adversely
affect the confidence of the public in the integrity of the Board of City
Commissioners, the department heads or City government or which
directly or indirectly condemns or criticizes the policies of the City or
any of its departments;
(n) Taking any action which might prejudice the City's interest in a criminal
or civil action;
§ 2-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-6
AO:13
§ 2-7. Powers and duties of City Administrator. [Ord. No. 1051,
9-13-2016]
(o) Betting or participation in any illegal gambling activity while on Cityowned
or City-leased property or while on duty for the City;
(p) Displaying discourtesy or disrespect to a member of the public when
acting in an official capacity;
(q) Having a suspended or revoked driver's license when a current license
is required as part of the job description and responsibilities.
(a) The City Administrator, shall among other duties, plan, manage,
coordinate and oversee the administration of municipal operations;
shall coordinate assigned activities with other City departments and
outside agencies; shall implement and administer City Commissionestablished
policies for efficient operation of the municipal government;
shall provide direct supervision of the City Administrator's office as well
as the Human Resources Director and Public Information Officer upon
fulfillment of the vacancies for said positions.
(b) The City Administrator shall supervise all other retained appointive
officers and departments for the City of Williston and ensure the
completion of all reports and correspondences required by State and
Federal rules and regulations.
(c) The City Administrator in conjunction with the designated portfolio
commissioner as provided in Sections 2-13 — 2-16, Article I, Chapter 2,
and the applicable retained appointive officer shall establish goals and
objectives for all departments to ensure compliance with the City
Commission policy directives and any applicable local, State, or Federal
rules and regulations.
(d) The City Administrator in conjunction with the City Auditor and
designated Commissioner of Finance and revenue shall coordinate the
financial status of the City with departmental goals, objectives and
actual performance; and aid in the development of the budget and
recommend and monitor the budget for all departments. The City
Administrator shall monitor expenditures for various items to ensure
compliance with guidelines.
(e) The City Administrator shall serve as liaison for the City with nongovernmental
and governmental organizations, contractors and
citizens concerning City projects and policies.
(f) The City Administrator shall serve to represent City departments to the
City Commission to present the plans and accomplishments of each
department and to provide recommendations regarding current plans,
projects, and programs.
§ 2-6 WILLISTON CODE § 2-7
AO:14
(g) The City Administrator shall have the authority of promoting,
disciplining, transferring, demoting, or compensating any City
employee.
(h) The City Administrator shall also have the authority to fire any City
employee, with the exception of retained appointive officers.
(i) The City Administrator has the authority to prepare a written report to
each member of the Board of City Commissioners providing a
recommendation for disciplining or terminating a retained appointive
officer for cases involving violation of City policy or unsatisfactory
service. Removal and suspension of retained appointive officers shall be
subject and pursuant to § 2-4 of Article I, Chapter 2 of the Williston
Code of Ordinances.
(j) The City Administrator shall have the authority to hire any City
employee with the exception of all other retained appointive officers.
The City Administrator shall provide a recommendation to the Board of
Commissioners for the City of Williston as it relates to filling a vacancy
of a retained appointive officer, and the Board of City Commissioners
shall make the final hiring decision for the retained appointive officer
position as provided for in § 2-3 of Article I, Chapter 2 of the Williston
Code of Ordinances.
(k) Notwithstanding the provisions in Sections 2-18 — 2-25 of Article II,
Chapter 2 of the Williston Code of Ordinances, purchases of supplies,
materials, equipment and contractual services when: 1) they have a
total cost of less than $50,000; 2) authorized within the City approved
budget may be made in the open market, without competitive bidding,
and 3) said purchases do not involve the expenditure of Federal funds;
provided:
(1) The purchasing retained appointive officer or designee solicits
prices or quotes for the supplies, materials, equipment and
contractual services from a minimum of three vendors; or if fewer
than three vendors are available, then from all available vendors.
(2) A report is filed with the City Administrator by the purchasing
retained appointive officer stating:
a. The particular supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services that are sought to be purchased without competitive
bidding;
b. The purchasing retained appointive officer's opinion as to why
the purchase should not be made using competitive bidding;
c. The vendors from who the purchasing retained appointive
officer solicited prices or quotes for the supplies, materials,
equipment and contractual services;
d. The prices or quotes supplied by such vendors;
§ 2-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7
AO:15
§ 2-8. through § 2-11. (Reserved)
e. The retained appointive officer's recommendation that the
purchase be made from the vendor submitting the lowest price
or quote that meets or exceeds the specifications of the
purchase and the needs of the City;
f. The retained appointive officer's opinion that the purchase
price for the supplies, materials, equipment or contractual
services is a reasonable and fair price in the local market.
(3) The purchase without competitive bidding is approved by the City
Administrator or his designee.
(4) The purchase without competitive bidding is reported to the Board
of City Commissioners.
(l) Prepare and maintain personnel policy with final approval by Board of
City Commissioners.
§ 2-7 WILLISTON CODE § 2-8
AO:16
ARTICLE II
Board of City Commissioners
§ 2-12. Designation of commissioners. [Code 1957, § 2.4]
The Board of City Commissioners, by a majority vote of all the members
thereof, shall designate from among its members the commissioners whose
duties are specified in this article.
§ 2-13. Commissioner of finance and revenue. [Code 1957, § 2.4]
The commissioner of finance and revenue shall have under his special
charge the enforcement of all laws for the assessment and collection of
taxes of every kind and the collection of all revenues belonging to the City,
from whatever source the same may be derived, and shall examine into and
keep informed as to the finances of the City.
§ 2-14. Commissioner of police and fire. [Code 1957, § 2.2]
The commissioner of police and fire shall have special charge and
supervision of all police regulations of the City and the general supervision
of the chief of police and chief of the fire department, poundmaster and the
officers, employees and members of the police and fire departments.
§ 2-15. Commissioner of streets and improvements. [Code 1957,
§ 2.3]
The commissioner of streets and improvements shall have special charge of
the street commissioner, City Physician and employees of the City working
under any of such officers named in this section. He shall have under his
special charge the supervision of the streets and alleys of the City and
shall be charged with responsibility for the lighting, cleaning and sanitary
condition of the streets and alleys and with the enforcement of all rules
and regulations relating thereto, and with the preservation of the health
of the inhabitants of the City. He shall have under his special charge the
supervision of all public improvements, and shall see that all contracts
for such improvements and the conditions of all grants of franchises or
privileges are complied with faithfully and performed.
§ 2-16. Commissioner of waterworks and sewerage. [Code 1957,
§ 2.1]
The commissioner of waterworks and sewerage shall have special charge
and supervision of the superintendent of water department and all
employees and officers doing work in connection with the City's water and
sewerage system. He shall see to the enforcement of all regulations with
respect to said department and all revenue pertaining thereto.
§ 2-17. Salaries. [Code 1957, § 2.8; Ord. No. 478, § 1, 5-23-1972;
Ord. No. 652, 8-13-1985; Ord. No. 849, 9-25-2001; Ord. No. 892,
§ 2-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17
AO:17
2-28-2006; Ord. No. 899, 12-26-2007; Ord. No. 940, 9-25-2011; Ord.
No. 957, 2-12-2013; Ord. No. 977, 10-8-2013]
The City Commissioners shall receive a salary of $763 per month, and the
President of the City Commission shall receive a salary of $1,144 per month.
Said salary to be payable monthly at the end of each month on warrants to
be drawn on the general fund.
This section shall be effective January 1, 2014.
§ 2-18. Lease, sale, etc., of real property — Approval. [Ord. No. 448,
§ 2, 11-5-1968; Ord. No. 500, 7-22-1975]
Real property belonging to the City shall be conveyed, sold, leased or
disposed of only as approved by a majority of the members of the Board of
City Commissioners.
§ 2-19. Same — Advertisement for bids. [Ord. No. 448, § 2,
11-5-1968; Ord. No. 500, 7-22-1975; Ord. No. 551, 8-28-1979; Ord.
No. 584, 8-25-1981; Ord. No. 697, 6-23-1987]
§ 2-20. Same — Where bids submitted. [Ord. No. 448, § 2,
11-5-1968; Ord. No. 500, 7-22-1975]
Bids for the purchase or lease of real property belonging to the City,
whether or not advertisement therefor has been made, shall be directed to
the Board of City Commissioners and submitted to the City Auditor, who
shall present any and all such bids to the Board of City Commissioners at its
next regularly scheduled meeting.
(a) In all cases where the Board of City Commissioners contemplates
conveyance, sale, lease or disposal of real property owned by the City
and estimated by the governing body of the municipality to be of value
greater than $2,500 the Board shall by resolution or motion:
(1) Authorize the public sale of said property and give notice thereof by
publishing the same in the official newspaper of the City containing
a description of the property, the place and time of sale, and
whether the bids are to be received at auction or as sealed bids. A
majority of the Board may cause the highest bid or any bid to be
rejected if deemed insufficient. Said notice to be published once
each week for two consecutive weeks at least 10 days in advance of
the date set for sale; or
(2) The governing body of the municipality may by resolution describe
the real property of the City which is to be sold; provide a maximum
rate of fee, compensation, or commission; and provide that the City
reserves the right to reject any and all offers determined to be
insufficient. After adoption of the resolution, the governing body of
a City may engage licensed real estate brokers to attempt to sell
the described property by way of nonexclusive listing agreements.
§ 2-17 WILLISTON CODE § 2-21
AO:18
§ 2-21. Same — Validity of instruments. [Ord. No. 448, § 2,
11-5-1968; Ord. No. 500, 7-22-1975]
Instruments effecting a conveyance, sale, lease or disposal of real property
belonging to the City shall be valid only when duly executed by the
president of the City Commission and attested by the City Auditor.
§ 2-22. Same — Statutory provisions. [Ord. No. 448, § 2, 11-5-1968;
Ord. No. 500, 7-22-1975]
§ 2-23. Lease, sale, etc., of personal property — Approval. [Ord. No.
448, § 1, 11-5-1968]
Whenever any personal property is no longer required for a public purpose
it may be offered for sale by the City Auditor, who may exercise his
discretion as to whether or not the City shall advertise for bids on said
property, or whether it should be sold at public auction. Except when
offered for sale at public auction, items with a value in excess of $100
shall be sold only after approval of the Board of City Commissioners. This
(a) When specific statutory provisions contained in the North Dakota
Century Code provide for a procedure which is in conflict with portions
of this article governing the conveyance, sale, lease or disposal of real
property, such provisions shall not apply insofar as they are in conflict
with such state law. Said statutory procedures are as follows:
(1) Lease of airports or landing fields, or portions thereof shall be
under authority granted in § 2-02-06, N.D.C.C. Said lease shall
further be in compliance with regulations and directives of
appropriate federal agencies.
(2) Conveyance of right-of-way for any state highway shall be as
provided in Section 24-01-1946, N.D.C.C.
(3) Leasing of oil and gas lands shall be as provided in Sections
38-09-02 through 38-09-04 and Sections 38-09-14 through
38-09-20, N.D.C.C.
(4) Conveyance of property to a municipal parking authority shall be as
provided in Section 40-61-05 N.D.C.C.
(5) Lease of public buildings or portions thereof shall be as provided in
Chapter 48-08, N.D.C.C.
(6) Granting of concessions for cafes, restaurants and confectioneries
on public buildings and grounds shall be as provided in Chapter
48-09, N.D.C.C.
(7) Granting of right-of-way for a railway, telephone line, electric light
system or a gas or oil pipeline system shall be as provided in
Section 49-09-16, N.D.C.C.
§ 2-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-23
AO:19
provision shall not apply however, to property to be traded in as part of the
purchase price of a new purchase.
§ 2-24. Same — Sales to contractors. [Ord. No. 448, § 1, 11-5-1968]
For purposes of convenience and expediting of the performance and
satisfactory completion of City construction contracts, appropriate City
departments may re-sell to contractors for installation on City contract
projects only, on-hand items including but not limited to water hydrants and
meters.
§ 2-25. Same — Statutory provisions. [Ord. No. 448, § 1, 11-5-1968]
When specific statutory provisions contained in the North Dakota Century
Code provide for a procedure which is in conflict with the provisions of
this article governing the conveyance, sale, lease or disposal of personal
property, such provisions shall not apply insofar as they are in conflict with
such state law. Said statutory proceedings are as follows:
Sale of abandoned or unclaimed personal property shall be as provided in
Section 40-05-02 (20), N.D.C.C.
§ 2-26. through § 2-36. (Reserved)
§ 2-23 WILLISTON CODE § 2-26
AO:20
ARTICLE III
Board of Health
§ 2-37. Composition; executive officer. [Code 1957, § 11.1]
The Board of City Commissioners shall constitute the Board of Health,
referred to in this article as the "Board." The City Physician shall be the
executive officer of the Board.
§ 2-38. Powers and duties generally. [Code 1957, § 11.2]
§ 2-39. Refusal of entrance into buildings. [Code 1957, § 11.4]
Whenever the Board of Health deems it necessary for the preservation of
the public health to enter any building within its jurisdiction to examine,
destroy, remove or prevent any nuisance, source of filth or cause of sickness
and is refused entrance into such building, any member of the Board may
make complaint under oath to a county justice within the jurisdiction of the
Board, stating the facts in the case so far as he has knowledge thereof. The
justice thereupon shall issue a warrant directed to the sheriff or other peace
officer commanding him to destroy, remove or prevent, between the hours
of sunrise and sunset, the nuisance, source of filth or cause of sickness,
under the direction of such members of the Board of Health as accompany
him.
(a) The Board of Health shall have the following powers and duties within
its jurisdiction:
(1) To employ such persons as may be necessary to carry into effect the
regulations established by it, the health and sanitation provisions of
this Code and the provisions of N.D.C.C., Title 23;
(2) To inquire into all nuisances, sources of filth and causes of sickness,
and to make such regulations regarding the same as are necessary
for the public health and safety;
(3) To adopt such quarantine and sanitary measures as are necessary
when an infectious or contagious disease exists in its jurisdiction;
(4) To provide such necessities of life as in its judgment shall be
needed for the maintenance, welfare and comfort of persons
afflicted with contagious and infectious diseases;
(5) To enter into and examine at any time all buildings, lots and places
of any description within its jurisdiction for the purpose of
ascertaining the conditions thereof, insofar as public health may be
affected; and
(6) To make such rules and regulations as are necessary and proper for
the preservation of public health and safety.
§ 2-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-40
AO:21
§ 2-40. Publication of notices. [Code 1957, § 11.3]
Notice of general orders and regulations made by the Board of Health shall
be published once in the official newspaper published within the jurisdiction
of the Board, and if no such newspaper is published within such jurisdiction,
then such notice either shall be published in the county official newspaper
or shall be posted in five public places within the jurisdiction of the Board.
Such publication or posting shall constitute legal notice to all persons.
§ 2-41. City Physician — Powers and duties generally. [Code 1957,
§ 11.5]
The City Physician, subject to the approval of the Board of Health, shall
provide such additional rules and regulations as may be proper and
necessary for the preservation of the health of the people of the City, to
prevent the spread of contagious diseases and to cause the removal of all
objects to the detriment of the health of such people, and he shall enforce
all rules and regulations for the protection of the public health. All rules and
regulations prepared by him shall be submitted to the Board of Health and
if approved by it shall have the force of a City ordinance. The City Physician
from time to time shall make such recommendations to the Board of Health
as to him shall appear necessary for the preservation of the public health.
§ 2-42. Same — Annual report. [Code 1957, § 11.7]
The City Physician shall report to the state department of health on or
before the 15th day of January in each year, on blanks furnished by the
department for that purpose, all health activities in his jurisdiction during
the calendar year just ended.
§ 2-43. Same — Persons to aid. [Code 1957, § 11.6]
All members of the police force, all magistrates and other civil officers and
all citizens shall aid the City Physician in the discharge of his duties, and on
his demand, the chief of police shall serve, or detail one or more policemen
to serve the notices issued by the City Physician and to perform such other
duties as he may require.
§ 2-40 WILLISTON CODE § 2-43
AO:22
Chapter 2.5
AIRPORT REGULATIONS
§ 2-43 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-43
AO:23

ARTICLE I
Landing Fees and Charges1
§ 2.5-1. Legislative intent. [Ord. No. 583, § 1, 7-28-1981]
The City of Williston owns and operates Sloulin Field International Airport.
Increased air activity and use of such airport have necessitated continued
improvements and expenditures of money by the city to provide the
required services demanded by the users of the airport, including
passengers, tenants, visitors, the general public, and all other parties using
such airport for whatever purpose. The governing body desires to establish
fees to be paid by users of the airport to help defray all the costs and
expenses incurred by the city. The governing body hereby establishes the
following uniform guidelines in the establishment of landing fees and
charges for the use of Sloulin Field International Airport by commercial
operators providing air transportation.
§ 2.5-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 583, § 2, 7-28-1981]
§ 2.5-3. Fees and charges. [Ord. No. 583, § 7-28-1991]
(a) As used in this article:
(1) Based operators shall include those operators who have an
established base of operations at Sloulin Field International
Airport, including offices, hangar space, and permanent facilities,
who conduct business with the general public.
(2) Non-based operators shall include those operators who use the
airport on a continuing basis, but not on a daily basis, for the
transportation of persons or property, but who do not have
permanent facilities located at the airport. Such non-based
operators do not make frequent use of the airport but make an
occasional landing. Such non-based operators generally do not
solicit customers from the general public for purposes that include
the use of Sloulin Field International Airport on a regular basis.
(3) Scheduled air carriers shall include those operators that provide
scheduled daily transportation for the general public for carrying of
passengers or cargo or both. Such carriers may or may not provide
every day service or more than once a day service. Such carriers
generally actively solicit customers from the general public. Such
carriers need not have published flight schedules specifying the
times for flights, days of the week for flights, and places between
which such flights are performed, if, in fact, such carriers actually
provide frequent transportation for the general public for carrying
of passengers or cargo or both.
1. Editor's Note: This article replaces the Resolution of the board of city commissioners
passed on April 14, 1981, establishing fees, retroactive to July 1, 1980, and ratifying any
fees imposed by the airport manager for scheduled air carriers.
§ 2.5-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2.5-3
AO:25
§ 2.5-4. Penalty. [Ord. No. 583, § 4, 7-28-1981]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed
$500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Such penalty provision shall not affect the city's right to
pursue collection of any landing fees and charges through civil remedies.
§ 2.5-5. (Reserved)
(a) Based operators.
(1) There shall be no landing fees assessed for this category of
operators under this article. Such operators generally enter into
separate lease agreements providing for the payment of rentals
and other fees and charges in lieu of landing fees.
(b) Non-based operators.
(1) There shall be no landing fees assessed for this category of
operators under this article. The airport manager is authorized and
directed to prepare rules, regulations, fees and charges for such
non-based operators who make more than an occasional use of the
airport, subject to the approval of the governing body.
(c) Scheduled air carriers.
(1) A fee shall be assessed for scheduled air carriers based on a given
dollar amount per thousand pounds of gross weight for each type of
aircraft used in this category of operation. Such fee shall be reevaluated
from time to time by the airport manager, subject to the
approval of the governing body of the city, taking into account
increased costs and expenditures necessary by the city in operating
the airport, as a result of the use of the airport by such scheduled
air carriers. The minimum fee shall be $150 per month.
(2) Each scheduled air carrier shall enter into a written agreement,
renewal annually, between itself and the city for the payment of
such landing fees. Such agreement shall run from the 1st day of
January to the 31st day of December. The airport manager shall
request the city attorney to draw up such agreement, and any such
agreement shall be subject to the approval of the board of city
commissioners.
(d) Security deposit.
(1) As and for security for the payment of any landing fees due as a
result of this article any agreements entered into between the city
and any users of the airport facilities, the user shall be required to
pay its landing fees three months in advance, or in lieu thereof, may
furnish the city with a surety bond approved by the city attorney in
an amount equal to three months advance landing fees.
§ 2.5-3 WILLISTON CODE § 2.5-5
AO:26
ARTICLE II
Parking Ordinance
§ 2.5-6. Title. [Ord. No. 941, § 1, 10-11-2011]
This article shall be known and cited as "The Sloulin Field International
Airport Parking Ordinance."
§ 2.5-7. Definitions. [Ord. No. 941, § 2, 10-11-2011; Ord. No. 1063,
6-13-2017]
§ 2.5-8. Parking rules and regulations. [Ord. No. 941, § 3,
10-11-2011; Ord. No. 1063, 6-13-2017]
(a) When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
(1) MOTOR VEHICLE - Means every vehicle which is self-propelled.
(2) PARKED - Means standing a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon
the parking lot, when not loading or unloading, except when
making necessary repairs.
(3) PARKING LOT - Means that area of pavement located near the
Airport Terminal building which is designed and used for the
parking of motor vehicles.
(4) PERSON - Means every natural person, firm, association, or
corporation and their legal successors.
(5) SHORT TERM PARKING - Means hours 2-24 on the first day of
parking.
(6) LARGE COMMERCIAL VEHICLE - Means any vehicle occupying
more than one vehicle space in the parking lot.
(7) LONG TERM PARKING - Means any hours, from 0-24, on the
second day of parking and each day thereafter.
(8) DAY - Means from 12:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. each calendar day.
(a) The City of Williston is not responsible for damage or theft of vehicles
while they are parked in the Airport's parking lot.
(b) The City may enter into a private agreement for the general operation
and management of parking of motor vehicles at certain parking
facilities serving the Sloulin Field International Airport as long as the
agreement is approved by a majority of the Board of City
Commissioners. The document must be kept on file for review at Sloulin
Field International Airport.
(c) The City may set, by resolution, the fees to be collected for a violation of
the agreement specified in Subsection (2).
§ 2.5-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2.5-8
AO:27
§ 2.5-9. Prima facie responsibility for parking violation. [Ord. No.
941, § 4, 10-11-2011]
If a motor vehicle is parked in violation of Section 2.5-8 of this article,
and the violation is a civil infraction, the person in whose name that motor
vehicle is registered in this state or another state at the time of the violation
is prima facie responsible for the violation and subject to the penalties
provided in Section 2.5-11 of this article.
§ 2.5-10. Removal of illegally parked vehicles; costs. [Ord. No. 941,
§ 5, 10-11-2011]
§ 2.5-11. Penalties. [Ord. No. 941, § 6, 10-11-2011; Ord. No. 10632,
6-13-2017]
A person who violates Section 2.5-8 of this article is responsible for a civil
infraction and shall be fined not less than $20 nor more than $100. The
penalty shall be set by resolution.
(d) If any vehicle is parked outside of the designated parking spaces the
airport reserves the right to tow the vehicle at the owner's expense.
(e) No large commercial vehicles are allowed to be parked in the airport's
parking lot.
(f) Any vehicle leaking fluids is subject to tow.
(a) Whenever any police officer finds a motor vehicle parked in the parking
lot in violation of Section 2.5-8 of this article, such officer is hereby
authorized to remove or cause to be removed such motor vehicle to the
nearest garage or other place of safety or to require the driver or other
person in charge of the motor vehicle to move the same to a position off
the parking lot.
(b) The necessary costs for such removal shall become a lien upon such
motor vehicle and the person into whose custody the vehicle is given
may retain it until the expenses involved have been paid.
(c) The removal of any motor vehicle authorized under this section shall
have no effect on a prosecution for a violation of Section 2.5-8 of this
article.
2. Note: This ordinance (Ordinance No. 1063) shall be retroactive to the date of signing of
the agreement first signed on February 1, 2013.
§ 2.5-8 WILLISTON CODE § 2.5-11
AO:28
Chapter 3
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 2.5-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2.5-11
AO:29

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 3-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 550, § I, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 619, § 1,
6-28-1983; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 1044, 6-13-2017;
Ord. No. 1043, 6-24-2016]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, or phrases
whenever used herein, shall have the following meaning unless from the
context of the section a contrary meaning appears obvious:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any liquid suitable for drinking by human
beings, which contains 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by volume. All alcoholic
beverages shall be deemed intoxicating.
BARREL OF BEER — A cylindrical container used for holding beer not to
exceed 32 gallons of beer.
BEER — Any malt beverage containing more than 1/2 of 1% of alcohol by
volume.
BREWER TAPROOM — A brewer which brews 25,000 barrels or fewer of
beer per year and produced or manufactured on the licensed premises
for consumption on or off the premises, or serves beer produced or
manufactured on the premises for purposes of sampling the beer.
COMMERCIAL BOWLING FACILITY — Only such structures within which
12 or more bowling lanes or alleys are maintained and operated by a
commercial bowling establishment.
DISTILLED SPIRITS — Any alcoholic beverage that is not beer, wine, or
sparkling wine.
DOMESTIC DISTILLERY — An operation located within the State of North
Dakota in which the owner or operator produces distilled spirits in
accordance with the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 5-01-19.
DOMESTIC WINERY — An operation located within the State of North
Dakota in which the owner or operator produces wine in accordance with
the provisions of N.D.C.C. § 5-01-17.
GROWLER — A sealed container not to exceed 64 ounces that is filled with
beer and sealed on site for the sole purpose of off-premises consumption.
At the time of sale, the container shall be sealed with a paper or plastic
adhesive band, strip, or sleeve which is applied over the top of the twisttype
closure, cork, stopper, or plug in such a manner that the seal must be
broken in order to open the container. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve
shall either (a) bear the name and address of the licensee-seller, or (b)
have the sales receipt attached to the container. The sale of growlers in
compliance with this chapter is authorized only for general microbrewery
licensees approved to sell alcoholic beverages both on-sale and off-sale. The
filling of growlers shall not constitute the breaking of a package, as defined
in this chapter. The sale of a filled growler shall be considered off-sale. A
§ 3-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1
AO:31
growler with a broken seal shall be considered an open container for the
purposes of N.D.C.C. § 39-08-18.
HOTEL OR MOTEL — As used in this chapter, means only such structures
which have 70 rooms or more.
LIQUOR — Any alcoholic beverage except beer.
LODGE OR CLUB — Any corporation or association organized for civic,
fraternal, social, or business purposes, or for the promotion of sports, which
has at least 250 members in the City of Williston at the time of application
for license under this chapter, and was in existence at the time of the
adoption of this chapter.
MICROBREW PUB — A brewer which brews 10,000 or fewer barrels of
beer per year and sells beer produced or manufactured on the licensed
premises for consumption on or off the premises, or serves beer produced
or manufactured on the premises for purposes of sampling the beer.
MINORS — For purposes of this chapter, means persons under 21 years of
age.
OFF-SALE — The sale of alcoholic beverages in the original package solely
for consumption off or away from the licensed premises where sold. An offsale
license shall authorize the licensee to conduct such off-sale at the place
designated in the license.
ON-SALE — The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the licensed
premises where sold.
PACKAGE AND ORIGINAL PACKAGE — Any container or receptacle holding
alcoholic beverages which is corked or sealed by the manufacturer and
which cork or seal has not been removed or broken prior to the sale of such
package to the purchaser.
PERSON — Includes, where the context of the provision allows, any natural
person, partnership, incorporated or unincorporated association, and
bodies corporate, and any agent thereof.
PREMISES — The distinct portion of the building, lot, or public way upon
which alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed.
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment that is licensed to engage in
the sale of alcoholic beverages at retail pursuant to this chapter, and which
has a City, County or State restaurant license. Such City, County or State
restaurant license shall not be a limited restaurant license.
SALE — Any transfer, exchange, or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration and includes all sales made by any person,
whether principal proprietor, agent, servant, employee or corporation.
SELL AT RETAIL OR SALE AT RETAIL — A sale to a consumer for use or
consumption and not for the purpose of resale in any form.
SPARKLING WINE — Wine made effervescent with carbon dioxide.
§ 3-1 WILLISTON CODE § 3-1
AO:32
WHOLESALER — Any persons engaged in the sale and distribution of
alcoholic beverages at wholesale to persons holding a retail license for the
sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages within the State or in interstate
commerce.
WINE — The alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of agricultural
products containing natural or added sugar or such beverage fortified with
brandy and containing not more than 24% alcohol by volume.
§ 3-2. Application of chapter. [Ord. No. 550, § I, 8-28-1979]
This chapter is declared to be an exercise of the police power directly
affecting and designed to promote the peace, safety, good order, health,
and well-being of the people of this city. This chapter shall apply to all
territory within the city and to such outlying contiguous territory without
the corporate limits within which the city may exercise police jurisdiction as
defined by law.
§ 3-3. through § 3-13. (Reserved)
§ 3-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3
AO:33

ARTICLE II
Minors
§ 3-14. Possession or consumption of alcohol by persons under the
age of twenty-one. [Ord. No. 550, § II, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 722,
9-12-1989]
A person under the age of 21 may not purchase, attempt to purchase, have
in his or her possession, furnish money for such purpose, or consume any
alcoholic beverage.
§ 3-15. Purchasing for or furnishing to minors. [Ord. No. 550, § II,
8-28-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or procure for any minor
any form of alcoholic beverages or to furnish or deliver any such alcoholic
beverages to any minor.
§ 3-16. Presence in licensed premises prohibited as to minors. [Ord.
No. 550, § II, 8-28-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any minor to enter or be upon the premises where
any form of alcoholic beverages is sold or offered for sale, except when such
minor qualifies for one of the exceptions hereinafter specifically set forth in
Section 3-18 of this Article II.
§ 3-17. Prohibitions as to licensees allowing minors to enter or be
upon the premises. [Ord. No. 550, § II, 8-28-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any of his agents, servants, or
employees to permit any minor to enter or be upon the premises where
alcoholic beverages are sold or are allowed to be sold unless such minor
qualifies for one of the exceptions hereinafter specifically set forth in
Section 3-18 of this Article II.
§ 3-18. Exceptions permitting persons under 21 to enter or be upon
the premises. [Ord. No. 550, § II, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 628, § 1,
2-28-1984; Ord. No. 821, 8-25-2000]
Any person under 21 years of age may remain in a restaurant where
alcoholic beverages are being sold if the restaurant is separated from the
room in which alcoholic beverages are opened or mixed, if gross sales of
food are at least equal to gross sales of alcoholic beverages which are
consumed in the dining area, or if (1) employed by the restaurant as a food
waiter, food waitress, busboy, or busgirl under the direct supervision of a
person 21 or more years of age, and not engaged in the sale, dispensing,
delivery, or consumption of alcoholic beverages, or (2) if the person is a
law enforcement officer entering the premises in the performance of official
duty or (3) any person who is 19 years of age or older but under 21 years
of age may be employed by the restaurant to serve and collect money
for alcoholic beverages, if the person is under the direct supervision of
§ 3-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-18
AO:35
a person 21 or more years of age, but may not be engaged in mixing,
dispensing, or consuming alcoholic beverages. Any establishment where
alcoholic beverages are sold may employ persons from 18 to 21 years of age
to work in the capacity of musicians under the direct supervision of a person
21 or more years of age.
§ 3-19. Licensee shall not sell or dispense alcoholic beverages to
minors. [Ord. No. 550, § II, 8-28-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any of his agents, servants, or
employees, to sell, dispense, or deliver alcoholic beverages to a minor,
or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed
premises by any minor, or to permit any sale, dispensing, or delivering of
any alcoholic beverages to any minor.
§ 3-20. Prohibition as to licensees allowing minors to be furnished
with alcoholic beverages. [Ord. No. 550, § II, 8-28-1979]
No licensee shall permit any minor to be furnished with any alcoholic
beverages on the premises for which a license is granted and issued
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 3-21. Statement of age may be required prior to purchase. [Ord.
No. 550, § II, 8-28-1979]
Before selling, serving, dispensing or delivering to any person any alcoholic
beverages, or permitting a person to enter or be upon the premises where
any form of alcoholic beverages is sold or offered for sale, a licensee, his
agent, servant, or employee, may require a statement in writing and signed
by such person of such person's age, in addition to requesting support of
such age with other documentary proof such as a driver's license, a birth
certificate, or other identification showing such persons' age.
§ 3-22. False statements as to age prohibited. [Ord. No. 550, § II,
8-28-1979]
It shall be unlawful for any minor to make any false statement or to furnish,
present or exhibit any false or fictitious registration card or other
documentary proof or evidence for the purpose of gaining admission to
any place where his presence is prohibited or for the purpose of procuring
the sale, delivery or furnishing to him or any alcoholic beverages for
consumption or otherwise, or to in any other manner misrepresent or
misstate his age or the age of any other person for the purpose of
purporting to show such person to be of legal age to purchase, consume, or
otherwise take possession of alcoholic beverages.
§ 3-23. Posting sign. [Ord. No. 550, § II, 8-28-1979]
It shall be the duty of any person who is the proprietor or keeper of
a licensed premises to post conspicuously in his place of business the
following sign: "Persons under the age of 21 years not allowed here."
§ 3-18 WILLISTON CODE § 3-24
AO:36
§ 3-24. Violations by minors; penalty; referral to addiction facilities.
[Ord. No. 592, § 3-23-1982]
Except as permitted by Section 3-18, any person under the age of 21
years of age purchasing, attempting to purchase, or being in possession of
alcoholic beverages, or furnishing money to any person for such purchase,
or entering any licensed premises where alcoholic beverages are being sold
or displayed, except a restaurant when accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian, or in accordance with Section 3-18, or if the person is a law
enforcement officer entering the premises in the performance of official
duty, is guilty of a violation of this article and shall, if a fine is imposed, be
fined not less than $300. The court may refer the person to an out-patient
addiction facility licensed by the department of health for evaluation and
appropriate counseling or treatment.
§ 3-25. through § 2-34. (Reserved)
§ 3-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-25
AO:37

ARTICLE III
Licenses
§ 3-35. Required. [Ord. No. 550, § III, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 1020,
7-28-1915]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the sale of beer, liquor, wine,
or other alcoholic beverages within the City without first obtaining a license
or permit therefor.
§ 3-36. Retail licenses to be issued. [Ord. No. 550, § III, 8-28-1979;
Ord. No. 1040 § 1, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 1044, 6-13-2017]
(a) The City shall issue retail licenses pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
beverages. Such retail licenses to be issued hereunder shall consist of
the following kinds:
(1) General on-sale beer.
(2) General on-sale liquor.
(3) General off-sale beer.
(4) General off-sale liquor.
(5) Club or lodge on-sale beer.
(6) Club or lodge on-sale liquor.
(7) Specialty restaurant on-sale beer.
(8) Hotel or motel on-sale beer.
(9) Hotel or motel on-sale liquor.
(10) Specialty airport on-sale beer.
(11) Specialty airport on-sale liquor.
(12) Specialty supper club on-sale beer.
(13) Specialty supper club on-sale liquor.
(14) Specialty recreational on-sale beer.
(15) Specialty recreational on-sale liquor.
(16) Municipal golf course beer license.
(17) Beer and wine on-sale.
(18) Microbrew pub license.
(19) Restaurant on-sale beer and liquor.
(20) Domestic distillery license.
§ 3-35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-36
AO:39
§ 3-37. Conditions and license fees. [Ord. No. 550, § III, 8-28-1979;
Ord. No. 579, § 1, 6-23-1981; Ord. No. 600, § 1, 6-8-1982; Ord. No.
628, § 2, 2-28-1984; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 792,
4-23-1996; Ord. No. 799, 8-12-1997; Ord. No. 911, §§ 1, 2,
9-23-2008; Ord. No. 946, 3-27-2012; Ord. No. 955, 7-10-2012; Ord.
No. 1040 § 2, 2-23-2016; Ord. No. 1044, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 1070,
11-14-2017]
(21) Domestic winery license.
(22) Brewer taproom license.
(a) The following special conditions, limitations, restrictions, and license
fees shall apply to the various classes of licenses as indicated below.
(b) Except for initial issuance fees and transfer fees as established by
resolution, the yearly license fee may be prorated, depending upon the
date of the license application, as follows: If the license is applied for
during: January, February, or March, the full license fee shall be due;
April, May or June, 75% of the full license fee shall be due; July, August,
or September, 50% of the full license fee shall be due; and October,
November, and December, 25% of the full license fee shall be due.
(1) A "general on-sale beer license" shall authorize the licensee to sell
beer, at retail for consumption upon the premises of the licensee.
The license fee for a general on-sale beer license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission. The license fee
must be submitted with the application for said license. Licenses
issued under this subsection shall be limited in number to one for
each 2,000 people residing in the City as shown by the most recent
Federal or State census.
(2) A "general on-sale liquor license" shall authorize the licensee to sell
intoxicating liquor at retail for consumption upon the premises of
the licensee. The license fee for a general on-sale liquor license
shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. The
license fee must be submitted with the application for said license.
Licenses issued under this subsection shall be limited in number to
one for each 4,000 people residing in the City as shown by the most
recent Federal or State census.
(3) A "general off-sale beer license" shall authorize the licensee to sell
beer, in the original package or container at retail as provided
herein. The license fee for a general off-sale beer license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission. The license fee
must be submitted with the application for said license. Licenses
issued under this subsection shall be limited in number to one for
each 2,000 people residing in the City as shown by the most recent
Federal or State census.
§ 3-36 WILLISTON CODE § 3-37
AO:40
(4) A "general off-sale liquor license" shall authorize the licensee to sell
intoxicating liquor in the original package at retail as provided
herein. The license fee for a general off-sale liquor license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission. The license fee
must be submitted with the application for said license. Licenses
issued under this subsection shall be limited in number to one for
each 3,000 people residing in the City as shown by the most recent
Federal or State census.
(5) A "club or lodge on-sale beer license" shall authorize the licensee to
sell beer at retail for consumption upon the premises of the
licensee primarily for the convenience of the club or lodge
members. The license fee for a club or lodge on-sale beer license
shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. The
license fee must be submitted with the application for said licensee.
There shall be no restrictions as to the number of licenses granted
to clubs or lodges under this chapter.
(6) A "club or lodge on-sale liquor license" shall authorize the licensee
to sell intoxicating liquor at retail for consumption upon the
premises of the licensee primarily for the convenience of the club
or lodge members. The license fee for a club or lodge on-sale liquor
license shall be established by resolution of the City Commission.
The license fee must be submitted with the application for said
license. There shall be no restrictions as to the number of licenses
granted to clubs or lodges under this chapter.
(7) A "specialty restaurant beer license" shall authorize the licensee to
sell tap beer at retail for consumption upon the premises of the
licensee, subject to the following specifications and restrictions:
a. This subsection is applicable to, and the license specified
hereunder is limited to, those restaurants or establishments
specializing in the sale of pizza and similar specialty foods.
b. The food and beer license hereunder shall be for the sale of
beer for consumption on the premises only and no sales for
consumption off the premises shall be made.
c. A licensee hereunder shall sell tap beer only which shall be
dispensed by the licensee or any employee from kegs or
barrels. The sale of beer in bottles, cans or similar packages
shall be permitted only by permission of the Board of City
Commissioners on a case-by-case basis considering the
circumstances of each licensed establishment.
d. Beer shall be consumed at tables or booths only, and no beer
shall be consumed at a counter or bar.
e. No dancing shall be permitted in an establishment holding a
license hereunder.
§ 3-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-37
AO:41
f. An establishment holding a license hereunder shall provide offstreet
parking within the discretion of and subject to the
approval of the Board of City Commissioners.
g. The license fee for a specialty restaurant beer license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission. The license
fee must be submitted with the application for said license.
h. Except as modified in this subsection, a licensee hereunder
shall comply with and be subject to all of the remaining
qualifications for licensees.
i. Licenses issued under this section shall not be limited by
population.
j. It shall be unlawful for any specialty restaurant licensee under
this chapter to sell, give away, or permit to be consumed
therein any beer between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
(8) A "hotel or motel on-sale beer license" may be issued to a hotel or
motel providing at least 70 rooms for transient guests. Such license
shall authorize the licensee to sell beer for consumption upon the
premises of the hotel or motel, provided that the room from which
such sales are made must be physically attached to and be a part of
said hotel or motel. The license fee for a hotel or motel on-sale beer
license shall be established by resolution of the City Commission.
The license fee must be submitted with the application for said
license. Temporary bars may be used in banquet rooms or other
areas for special events such as conventions, dinner meetings, or
similar events, all of which must be held within the confines of the
hotel or motel; such areas need not be designated in the license. To
qualify for the renewal of a hotel or motel on-sale liquor license, the
applicant must have maintained an average room occupancy rate of
at least 50% for the year preceding the application for renewal.
There shall be no restrictions as to the number of licenses issued
under this subsection.
(9) A "hotel or motel on-sale liquor license" may be issued to a hotel or
motel providing at least 70 rooms for transient guests. Such license
shall authorize the licensee to sell intoxicating liquor for
consumption upon the premises of the hotel or motel, provided that
the room from which such sales are made must be physically
attached to and be a part of said hotel or motel. The license fee for
a hotel or motel on-sale liquor license shall be established by
resolution of the City Commission. The license fee must be
submitted with the application for said license. Temporary bars
may be used in banquet rooms or other areas for special events
such as conventions, dinner meetings, or similar events, all of
which must be held within the confines of the hotel or motel; such
areas need not be designated in the license. To qualify for the
renewal of a "hotel or motel on-sale liquor license," the applicant
§ 3-37 WILLISTON CODE § 3-37
AO:42
must have maintained an average room occupancy rate of at least
50% for the year preceding the application for renewal. There shall
be no restrictions as to the number of licenses issued under this
subsection.
(10) A "specialty airport on-sale beer license" may be issued to the
person approved by the City Commission to operate the restaurant
facilities at the Sloulin Field International Airport, or the Williston
Basin International Airport, once the airport facilities are relocated
and fully operational. Such license shall authorize the licensee to
sell beer, at retail, for consumption upon the premises of the
licensee in connection with the airport restaurant, in order to
provide the service desired for patrons of and visitors to such
airport. The license fee for a specialty airport on-sale beer license
shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. The
license fee must be submitted with the application for said license.
Any applicant for such license shall otherwise be subject to the
qualification requirements for licensees contained in this chapter.
No off-sale distribution of beer shall be permitted under such
specialty license, and all State and municipal regulations as to
hours and time of service and clientele to be served shall be
observed by any such licensee. Said licensee shall be required to
maintain said on-sale service of beer as provided herein during all
hours in which retail dispensing of alcoholic beverages is permitted
under State and local law when said restaurant facility is open for
business.
(11) A "specialty airport on-sale liquor license" may be issued to the
person approved by the City Commission to operate the restaurant
facilities at the Sloulin Field International Airport, or the Williston
Basin International Airport, once the airport facilities are relocated
and fully operational. Such license shall authorize the licensee to
sell intoxicating liquor, at retail for consumption upon the premises
of the licensee in connection with the airport restaurant, in order to
provide the service desired for patrons of and visitors to such
airport. The license fee for a specialty airport on-sale liquor license
shall be established by resolution of the City Commission. The
license fee must be submitted with the application for said license.
Any applicant for such license shall otherwise be subject to the
qualification requirements for licensees contained in this chapter.
Any applicant for such license shall otherwise be subject to the
qualification requirements for licensees contained in chapter. No
off-sale distribution of intoxicating liquor shall be permitted under
such specialty license, and all State and municipal regulations as to
hours and times of service and clientele to be served shall be
observed by any such licensee. Said licensee shall be required to
maintain said on-sale service of intoxicating liquor as provided
herein during all hours in which retail dispensing of alcoholic
beverages is permitted under State and local law when said
restaurant facility is open for business.
§ 3-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-37
AO:43
(12) A "specialty supper club on-sale beer license" shall mean a special
license to sell beer on an on-sale basis only, which may be issued to
steak, seafood or similarly menued supper clubs having a seating
capacity of 50 or more seats arranged in supper club style. Holders
of a supper club license shall be permitted to use a "service type"
bar for the preparation of drinks only and such drinks must be
consumed at the tables. The holder of a supper club license shall
have the right to provide a waiting area bar for patrons who are
waiting to be seated in the dining area of the supper club. The
license fee for a specialty supper club on-sale beer license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission. The license fee
must be submitted with the application for said license. Except as
modified in this subsection, a licensee hereunder shall comply with
and be subject to all of the remaining qualifications for licensees.
Licenses issued under this subsection shall be limited in number to
one for each 3,500 people in the City as shown by the most recent
Federal or State census.
(13) A "specialty supper club on-sale liquor license" shall mean a special
license to sell intoxicating liquor on an on-sale basis only, which
may be issued to steak, seafood or similarly menued supper clubs
having a seating capacity of 50 or more seats arranged in supper
club style. Holders of a supper club license shall be permitted to
use a "service type" bar for the preparation of drinks only and such
drinks shall be consumed at the tables. The holder of a supper club
license shall have the right to provide a waiting area bar for
patrons who are waiting to be seated in the dining area of the
supper club. The license fee for a specialty supper club on-sale
liquor license shall be established by resolution of the City
Commission. The license fee must be submitted with the
application for said license. Except as modified in the subsection, a
licensee hereunder shall comply with and be subject to all of the
remaining qualifications for licensees. Licenses issued under this
subsection shall be limited in number to one for each 3,500 people
in the City as shown by the most recent Federal or State census.
(14) In addition to all other licenses for retail sale of beer authorized by
this chapter, the City Commission may issue a "specialty
recreational on-sale beer license" to the owner of an establishment
providing unique recreational activities for its patrons, such as, but
not limited to, a discotheque nightclub that features a dance floor,
light shows, a sophisticated sound system, and recorded music
featuring the disco sound; a peanut bar that features honky-tonk
piano music, old movies, sing-a-longs, and similar entertainment,
and that serves peanuts and/or popcorn to its customers; or a
recreational activity center which provides billiard tables, pool
tables, fooseball machines, pinball machines and other similar
electronic parlor games and similar activities. Such licenses may be
issued only on the following conditions:
§ 3-37 WILLISTON CODE § 3-37
AO:44
a. The license fee shall be the same as provided for general onsale
beer licensees. The license fee must be submitted with the
application for said license.
b. All other qualifications for licensees shall apply.
c. The application for license under this subsection shall be
accompanied by an architect's interior and exterior design,
floor plans, site locations and plans, and other operational
characteristics, including entertainment.
Licenses issued under this subsection shall be limited in
number to one for each 3,500 people in the City as shown by
the most recent Federal or State census.
(15) In addition to all other licenses for retail sale of liquor authorized
by this chapter, the City Commission may issue a "specialty
recreational on-sale liquor license" to the owner of an
establishment providing unique recreational activities for its
patrons, such as, but not limited to, a discotheque nightclub that
features a dance floor, light shows, a sophisticated sound system,
and recorded music featuring the disco sound; a peanut bar that
features honky-tonk piano music, old movies, sing-a-longs, and
similar entertainment, and that serves peanuts and/or popcorn to
its customers; or a recreational activity center which provides
billiard tables, pool tables, fooseball machines, pinball machines
and other similar electronic parlor games and similar activities.
Such licenses may be issued only on the following conditions:
a. The license fee shall be the same as provided for general onsale
liquor licensees. The license fee must be submitted with
the application for said license.
b. All other qualifications for licensees shall apply.
c. The application for license under this subsection shall be
accompanied by an architect's interior and exterior design,
floor plans, site locations and plans, and other operational
characteristics, including entertainment.
Licenses issued under this subsection shall be limited in
number to one for each 3,500 people in the City as shown by
the most recent Federal or State census.
(16) In addition to all other liquor licenses authorized by this chapter,
the City Commission may issue a municipal golf course beer license
to an operator authorized by the Williston Park District for the
purposes of selling beer at the municipal golf course. Sales under
this license are subject to the following condition:
§ 3-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-37
AO:45
a. Only beer sold by the operator/licensee approved by the
Williston Park Board shall be consumed on the municipal golf
course property.
b. All sales shall take place within the club house in a space
where minors are not allowed, except for tournaments
specifically authorized by the Williston Park Board during
which sales may take place on the course.
c. Unopened beer in a manner suitably identified in the Williston
Park Board's discretion may be removed from the club house to
the golf course. However, opened or unopened beer may not
leave the golf course premises.
d. Minors may be allowed in the club house where consumption
takes place; however, nothing within this license shall be
interpreted or construed to allow sales to or consumption by
minors.
e. The consumption of the beer may take place within the club
house or outside.
f. The annual fee for the municipal golf course license shall be set
by resolution of the City Commission. The license fee must be
submitted with the application for said license.
g. There shall be no self-serve or machine sales of beer.
h. The person selling the beer must be 21 years of age or older.
i. The licensee/operator may be a golf-related organization
recognized and approved by the Williston Park Board, or an
individual approved by the Williston Park Board.
(17) A "beer and wine on-sale" license shall authorize the licensee to sell
beer and/or wine at retail for consumption upon the premises of the
licensee. The initial fee for a beer and wine on-sale license shall
established by resolution of the City Commission and must be
submitted with the application for said license. The annual renewal
fee for a beer and wine on-sale license shall be established by
resolution of the City Commission and must be submitted with the
application for renewal.
(18) A "microbrew pub license" authorizes the licensee to produce and
manufacture beer at retail for consumption upon the licensed
premises, in accordance with the requirements and limitations of
N.D.C.C. § 5-01-14, which are incorporated herein by reference. A
microbrew pub licensee is also subject to the following
specifications and restrictions:
a. A microbrew pub may manufacture on the licensed premises,
store, transport, sell to wholesale malt beverage licensees, and
export no more than 10,000 barrels of beer per year.
§ 3-37 WILLISTON CODE § 3-37
AO:46
b. The initial fee for a microbrew pub license shall be established
by resolution of the City Commission and must be submitted
with the application for said license. The annual renewal fee
for a microbrew pub license shall be established by resolution
of the City Commission and must be submitted with the
application for renewal.
c. A microbrew pub license will authorize the licensee to sell:
(1) Growlers, sold off-sale only; and
(2) Beer that has been brewed on the premises of the licensee,
which may be sold either on-sale or off-sale.
d. A microbrew pub licensee may not engage in wholesaling
activities. All sales and delivery of beer to any other retail
licensed premises may be made only through a wholesale beer
licensee. A microbrew pub licensee must comply with all
statutory provisions for taxation under N.D.C.C. § 5-01-14.
e. A microbrew pub licensee is not precluded from retailing beer
it purchases from a wholesaler.
f. Complimentary samples of beer may not be in an amount
exceeding 16 ounces per patron.
g. A microbrew pub licensee shall abide by the provisions of
Section 3-76 of Article V of this Chapter 3, governing hours and
days of sale.
h. Except as modified in this subsection, a microbrew pub
licensee shall comply with and be subject to all of the
remaining qualifications for licensees.
(19) A "restaurant on-sale beer and liquor license" shall mean a special
license to sell beer and liquor on an on-sale basis only, which may
be issued to an establishment providing multi-course meals as well
as appetizers and desserts and which derives 50% or more of its
annual gross receipts from the sale of prepared meals on premises
and not alcoholic beverages. The applicant shall disclose the
amount of alcohol versus food sales tax information that was
reported to the State and such will be provided within seven days of
request to verify the 50% requirement for food sales or they shall
forfeit license. Main course menu items shall be fully prepared on
the premises and shall not be primarily pre-packaged, preprocessed,
or pre-prepared food products intended for fast or
convenient service. The holder of a restaurant on-sale beer and
liquor license shall have the right to provide an area where food
and beverages are served to patrons seated at a bar type structure
and where beverages are prepared for other patrons seated in the
restaurant. The hours within which sales of alcoholic beverages
may be made shall coincide with the hours permitted by the City of
§ 3-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-37
AO:47
Williston for the sale of alcoholic beverages and shall also be
additionally limited as set forth herein. When the kitchen is not
in full operation and a full menu service is not being offered to
patrons, the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall be
discontinued. It is the intention of this restriction that the purpose
of a "specialty establishment on-sale beer and liquor license" is
to allow the sale of alcoholic beverages as an adjunct to the
restaurant operation and not that of operating a full-time liquor
establishment. Therefore, no live music, public dancing, or strobe
lights are allowed at any time. A recipient of a "restaurant onsale
beer and liquor license" shall provide a full and complete
restaurant and kitchen adequate for the preparation of food as
required by this section. Such restaurant and kitchen shall be
subject to approval by the Board of City Commissioners. The initial
one-time fee for a restaurant on-sale beer and liquor license shall
be established by resolution of the City Commission and must
be submitted with the application for said license. The annual
renewal fee for the license shall be established by resolution of the
City Commission and must be submitted with the application for
renewal. Except as modified in this subsection, a license hereunder
shall comply with and be subject to all of the remaining
qualifications for licenses. There shall be no restrictions as to the
number of licenses issued under this subsection. A restaurant onsale
and liquor license is specific to the location listed on the
original application, is not transferable on a temporary basis, and
any future transfers are restricted to establishments meeting the
above criteria at that location. Noncompliance will require review
and possible penalties by the Williston City Commission.
(20) A "domestic distillery license" authorizes the licensee to produce
distilled spirits and authorizes the sale of distilled spirits in
accordance with the requirements and limitations of N.D.C.C.
§ 5-01-19, which are incorporated herein by reference. A domestic
distillery licensee is also subject to the following restrictions and
conditions:
a. A domestic distillery licensee may sell spirits produced by that
distillery at on-sale or off-sale, in retail lots, and not for resale,
and may sell or direct ship its spirits to persons inside or
outside the State in a manner consistent with the laws of the
place of the sale or delivery in total quantities not to exceed
25,000 gallons in a calendar year. Direct sales within the State
of North Dakota are limited to 2.38 gallons or less per month
per person for personal use and not for resale. The packaging
for spirits must conform with the labeling requirements set
forth in N.D.C.C. § 5-01-16.
b. The initial fee for a domestic distillery license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission and must be
submitted with the application for said license. The annual
§ 3-37 WILLISTON CODE § 3-37
AO:48
renewal fee for a domestic distillery license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission and must be
submitted with the application for renewal.
c. A domestic distillery licensee may obtain a domestic distillery
license and a retailer license allowing the on-premises sale of
alcoholic beverages at a restaurant owned by the licensee and
located on property contiguous to the domestic distillery. A
domestic distillery licensee may also own or operate a winery.
d. A domestic distillery license shall only be issued to a domestic
distillery owner or operator who has obtained an annual
manufacturing license from the North Dakota State Tax
Commissioner allowing the production of distilled spirits.
e. A domestic distillery licensee shall abide by the provisions of
Section 3-76 of Article V of this Chapter 3, governing hours and
days of sale.
f. To the extent the following activities are authorized under
N.D.C.C. § 5-01-19(2), the same shall also be authorized within
the City:
1. A licensee may dispense free samples of the distilled
spirits offered for sale.
2. Special events for which a permit has been obtained from
the State Tax Commissioner allowing the domestic
distillery to give free samples of its product and to sell its
product by the glass or in closed containers at off-premises
events are, as a result of such permit, authorized within
the City.
3. Participation in Pride of Dakota events for which a special
events permit has been obtained from the State Tax
Commissioner is, as a result of such permit, authorized
within the City.
g. A domestic distillery license authorizes the licensee to sell
glassware, distilled spirits literature and accessories, cheese,
cheese spreads, and other snack food items.
(21) A "domestic winery license" authorizes the licensee to operate a
domestic winery and to produce and sell wine on-sale and off-sale
within in the City in accordance with the requirements and
limitations of N.D.C.C. § 5-01-17, which are incorporated herein by
reference. A domestic winery licensee is also subject to the
following restrictions and conditions:
a. A domestic winery license may be issued only to a domestic
winery owner or operator who obtains a license from the State
Tax Commissioner allowing the production of wine.
§ 3-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-37
AO:49
b. The initial fee for a domestic winery license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission and must be
submitted with the application for said license. The annual
renewal fee for a domestic winery license shall be established
by resolution of the City Commission and must be submitted
with the application for renewal.
c. A domestic winery license authorizes the licensee to sell wine
produced by that winery at on-sale or off-sale, in retail lots, and
not for resale, and may sell or direct ship its wine to persons
inside or outside the State in a manner consistent with the laws
of the place of the sale or delivery in total quantities not to
exceed 25,000 gallons in a calendar year. In addition, a
domestic winery licensee may, if so authorized by a license
issued by the State of North Dakota, sell beer on-sale only,
provided that such on-sale beer sales shall be incidental to the
sale of wine.
d. A domestic winery license authorizes the licensee to sell
glassware, wine literature and accessories, cheese, cheese
spreads, and other snack food items.
e. Direct sale by licensed wineries.
1. A licensed winery that produces no more than 50,000
gallons of wine per year may sell and deliver, on site or off
site, the wine produced by the winery directly to licensed
retailers. The licensed winery may sell and deliver wine on
site to a licensed retailer who presents the retailer's
license or a photocopy of the license. The winery may
deliver the wine off site if the winery:
i. Uses the winery's equipment, trucks, and employees
to deliver the wine;
ii. Contracts with a licensed distributor to ship and
deliver the wine to the retailer; or
iii. Contracts with a common carrier to ship and deliver
the wine to the retailer directly from the winery or the
winery's bonded warehouse.
2. The shipments delivered by a winery's equipment, trucks,
and employees in a year may not exceed 4,500 cases. A
case may not exceed 2.38 gallons of wine.
3. Individual shipments delivered by common carrier may not
exceed three cases per day for each licensed retailer. The
shipments delivered by a common carrier in a year may
not exceed 4,500 cases. A case may not exceed 2.38
gallons of wine.
§ 3-37 WILLISTON CODE § 3-37
AO:50
f. To the extent the following activities are authorized under
N.D.C.C. § 5-01-17(2), the same shall also be authorized within
the City:
(1) A licensee may dispense free samples on the licensed
premises of the wines offered for sale.
(2) Special events for which a permit has been obtained by the
State Tax Commissioner to give free samples of its product
and to sell its wine by the glass or in closed containers at
off-premises events are, as a result of such permit,
authorized within the City.
(3) Participate in Pride of Dakota events, for which a special
events permit has been obtained from the State Tax
Commissioner is, as a result of such permit, authorized
within the City, provided that the incidental sales of onsale
beer allowed by paragraph c above, will not be
allowed at the locations where said permits are utilized.
g. A domestic winery license shall not be required for a domestic
winery owner or operator possessing a license from the State
Tax Commissioner allowing the production of wine and only
being present within the City to utilize special event permits
issued by the State Tax Commissioner. It is the intent of this
exemption to not require licensure by domestic winery owners
or operators, if properly licensed elsewhere, where its only
presence in the City is to utilize special event permits.
h. A domestic winery licensee shall abide by the provisions of
Section 3-76 of Article V of this Chapter 3, governing hours and
days of sale.
i. Except as modified in this subsection, a licensee hereunder
shall comply with and be subject to all of the remaining
qualifications for licensees.
(22) A "brewer taproom license" authorizes the licensee to manufacture
on the licensed premises, store, transport, sell, and export 25,000
barrels or less of beer annually in accordance with the
requirements of N.D.C.C. § 5-01-21, as amended from time to time,
which are incorporated herein by reference. A brewer taproom
licensee is also subject to the following restrictions and limitations:
a. The initial fee for a brewer taproom license shall be
established by resolution of the City Commission and must be
submitted with the application for said license. The annual
renewal fee for a brewer taproom license shall be established
by resolution of the City Commission and must be submitted
with the application for renewal.
§ 3-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-37
AO:51
b. A licensee may sell malt beverages manufactured on the
licensed premises for consumption on the premises of the
brewery or a restaurant owned by the licensee and located on
property contiguous to the brewery.
c. A brewer taproom licensee may sell beer manufactured on the
licensed premises for off-premises consumption in brewerysealed
containers of not less than 12 ounces, growlers, and in
brewery-sealed kegs not to exceed 5.16 gallons.
d. A licensee may sell and deliver beer produced by the brewery
to licensed beer wholesalers.
e. A brewer taproom licensee shall abide by the provisions of
Section 3-76 of Article V of this Chapter 3, governing hours and
days of sale.
f. A brewer taproom licensee shall obtain any brewery license
required by the State of North Dakota.
g. Multiple brewer taproom licenses may be issued to the owner
or operator of a brewery producing no more than 25,000
barrels of malt beverages annually. Brewer taproom licensees
with multiple taprooms must produce beer at each location and
the total amount of beer produced at all locations combined
may not exceed 25,000 barrels of malt beverages annually.
h. To the extent the following activities are authorized under
N.D.C.C. § 5-01-21(2), as amended from time to time, the same
shall also be authorized within the City:
1. A licensee may dispense free samples of beer offered for
sale. Complimentary samples may not exceed 16 ounces
per patron.
2. A licensee may sell and deliver beer produced by the
brewery to licensed retailers within the State of North
Dakota, subject to the conditions set forth in N.D.C.C.
§ 5-01-21(2)(f), as amended from time to time.
3. Special events for which a permit has been obtained from
the State Tax Commissioner allowing the brewer taproom
licensee to give free samples of its beer and to sell its beer
by the glass or in enclosed containers at off-premises
events are, as a result of such permit, authorized within
the City, so long as notice of the special event to which the
permit is issued is given to the City Auditor, who shall
forward to the Chief of Police, no less than three days
before the event is to occur.
4. A licensee may participate in Pride of Dakota events, for
which a special events permit has been obtained from the
§ 3-37 WILLISTON CODE § 3-37
AO:52
§ 3-38. Retail liquor license does not authorize beer sale; exception.
[Ord. No. 550, § III, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 911, § 3, 9-23-2008]
Only the holder of a "restaurant on-sale beer and liquor license" is entitled
to sell beer without the purchase of a separate license for the sale of beer.
The holder of a retail liquor license in a class other than "restaurant onsale
beer and liquor license" shall not be entitled to sell beer without the
purchase of a separate license for the sale of beer.
§ 3-39. Wholesale licenses to be issued by the state. [Ord. No. 550,
§ III, 8-28-1979]
Any person engaging in the sale at wholesale of beer or liquor in this city
must first procure a license from the State Treasurer for the State of North
Dakota. The city shall not issue wholesale beer or liquor licenses.
§ 3-40. Special event alcoholic beverage permit authorized. [Ord.
No. 550, § III, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord. No.
1049, 4-25-2017]
State Tax Commissioner is, as a result of such permit,
authorized within the City.
i. All sales and delivery of beer to licensed retailers within the
State must be made in accordance with N.D.C.C. § 5-03-07
(governing tax rate) and N.D.C.C. § 5-01-21(2)(f) (governing
sale and delivery of beer to licensed retailers within the State).
Additional sales may be made through a wholesaler licensed in
this State. Beer manufactured on the licensed premises and
sold by a brewer taproom licensee directly to the consumer for
consumption on or off of the premises are subject to the taxes
imposed pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 5-03-07, in addition to any
other taxes imposed on brewers and retailers.
(a) The office of the City Auditor may, by special permit, authorize an onsale
alcoholic beverage licensee to engage in the sale of alcoholic
beverages at special events, public dances or music festivals on such
premises as may be designated by such permit. The fee for such local
special permits shall be $25, and such permits shall not be valid for a
period greater than 14 days and may include Sundays.
(1) An alcoholic beverage licensee desiring to conduct a special event,
public dance or music festival wherein alcoholic beverages will be
sold, or to sell alcoholic beverages at a special event, public dance
or music festival conducted by any other person who has been
granted a permit to do so by the Board of City Commissioners, shall
make an application for a special permit to do so to the office of the
City Auditor. The application shall set forth:
a. The name of the applicant;
§ 3-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-40
AO:53
§ 3-41. Special Sunday alcoholic beverage permit. [Ord. No. 550,
§ III, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 768, § 1,
6-14-1994; Ord. No. 1022, 8-25-2015]
The board of city commissioners may issue a Sunday alcoholic beverage
permit to any qualified alcoholic beverage licensee licensed as a retail
alcoholic beverage establishment under this chapter and under the laws of
this state. Such special permit shall be granted only upon proper application
to and approval by the board of city commissioners. No extra fee shall
be charged for such permit. The board of city commissioners may permit
dancing and the distribution of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the
premises of the licensee between the hours of 11:00 a.m. on Sunday and
1:00 a.m. on the following Monday. The general public may be permitted to
participate in the consumption of alcoholic beverage distributed under the
authority of the permit.
Any person who dispenses, sells or permits the consumption of alcoholic
beverages in violation of this section or the conditions of a permit issued
b. The time or period for which the permit is desired;
c. The place where such special event, public dance or music
festival is to be conducted or held.
Said application shall be filed on the form supplied by the City
for such purposes.
(2) The City Auditor shall refuse to issue such permit and shall revoke
a permit already issued when it appears that:
a. The permitted site is or is likely to become a public nuisance or
detrimental to public morals;
b. Alcoholic beverages or controlled substances are being sold or
given away except as provided by such permit;
c. Any of the ordinances of this City or the laws of the State are
being violated; or
d. The City Auditor may refer to the Board of City Commissioners,
protests to the issuing of such permit that are made, either
orally or in writing, by a sufficient number of people living in
the neighborhood of such site for which application for such
permit is made to warrant refusal or revocation of such permit
as being in a public interest.
(3) An applicant may appeal a decision made by the City Auditor to the
Board of City Commissioners. The appeal must be filed within 30
days of the City Auditor's decision. A hearing on the appeal shall be
held at the next regular commission meeting following the filing of
the appeal. The appeal must be filed on a form provided by the City
and signed by the applicant.
§ 3-40 WILLISTON CODE § 3-41
AO:54
hereunder, or who furnished information required by this section which is
false or misleading, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 3-42. Special private groups alcoholic beverages permit
authorized. [Ord. No. 550, § III, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 1049,
4-25-2017]
§ 3-43. Parking provisions. [Ord. No. 550, § III, 8-28-1979]
In addition to the other requirements set forth herein, applicants under the
provisions of this article shall provide adequate off-street parking within the
(a) Special permits to serve beer, liquor, wine or other alcoholic beverages
in public buildings leased for social or business use by private groups
without license fees or other charges therefor may be obtained upon
compliance with the provisions of this section.
(1) Qualification. The application for a permit authorized by this
section must be for a temporary social or business use not open to
the public at large but restricted to a particular organization
temporary or permanent described in the application. The
application must be for a permit to:
a. Serve without charge by the applicant, his or her, or its guests
as an act of hospitality.
b. Serve without profit and at cost to those persons who are
described in the application and who have contributed to a
fund with which applicant has purchased the beer, wine, liquor
or alcoholic beverage with mixes and incidentals to its service.
(2) Compliance. Any person or organization operating under a special
permit issued under this section shall operate in compliance with
all applicable provisions of this chapter relating to alcoholic
beverages except those provisions relating to licensees.
(3) Application form. The application for a permit authorized by the
provisions of this section shall be made to the office of the City
Auditor upon forms furnished by it, and the applicant shall furnish
additional information required by the City Auditor.
(4) Statement. The application for a permit under this section must
state that the applicant will not sell at retail any beer, wine, liquor,
or other alcoholic beverages under such special permit.
(5) Fee. The applicant for a permit under this section shall pay with the
filing of the application a fee of $25 for handling of the same.
(6) Inspection of premises. The applicant for a permit under this
section shall, by making such application, consent and agree that
police officers may enter and inspect the leased premises or part
thereof at any time to check compliance with City ordinances.
§ 3-41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-43
AO:55
discretion of and subject to the approval of the board of city commissioners,
or otherwise comply with applicable ordinances relating to parking
requirements in the business district.
§ 3-44. Cancellation of specialty license upon cessation of specialty.
[Ord. No. 550, § III, 8-28-1979]
If the specialty upon which any of the above licenses are based, ceases
to be in operation, the license issued in reliance of such specialty shall
immediately be cancelled and the license holder shall turn such license in
to the board of city commissioners.
§ 3-45. Consumption in commercial bowling facility. [Ord. No. 619,
§ 2, 6-28-1983; Ord. No. 798, 8-12-1997]
(a) Notwithstanding the definitions of "Premises" and "On-sale" in Section
3-1 herein, sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in a
commercial bowling facility not specifically licensed under this chapter
is not unlawful subject to the terms and conditions hereinafter
provided.
(1) A licensed seller may sell alcoholic beverages in a commercial
bowling facility only during league play and during tournaments to
actual participants. Observers may consume on the bowling
premises during tournaments or league play but must purchase
within the licensed facility. The licensed seller's facility must be
located within the same building as the commercial bowling facility.
No alcoholic beverages may be brought onto the bowling premises
except as sold on-sale by the licensee. The mixing of drinks and
storage of alcoholic beverages shall be restricted to the licensed
seller's premises.
(2) The owner of the bowling establishment and the licensed seller
have consented in writing to such activity and use, and such
consent shall be filed annually with the liquor license application.
(3) The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and
recreation.
(4) The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite
violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(5) The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation.
(6) The licensed facility is responsible for complying with all
ordinances dealing with alcoholic beverages as though the bowling
facility were a licensed premises, except minors may be present. It
is the licensed seller's duty to prohibit any minor from consuming
any alcoholic beverage sold by the licensee in any area where
licensee is serving.
§ 3-43 WILLISTON CODE § 3-45
AO:56
§ 3-46. Transfer of license; dropping licenses — Procedure. [Ord.
No. 745, § 1, 11-12-1991]
A licensee holding an on- or off-sale liquor license, an on- or off-sale beer
license, or any combination of licenses may not transfer such licenses by
sale or other means except as a whole unit as approved by the board of city
commissioners and payment of the proper fee by the new applicant. Persons
or corporations acquiring an on- or off-sale liquor license, on- or off-sale
beer license, or any combinations of licenses may, without penalty, drop any
one or more of the licenses by not marking on the application that part of
the license and not paying that portion of the fee. Any such dropped license
shall be considered null and void.
§ 3-47. Temporary charitable or civic event alcoholic beverage
permit authorized. [Ord. No. 1020, 7-28-2015]
(7) The privilege to sell and allow consumption in the bowling facility
may be revoked by the city commission if:
a. The owner of the bowling facility at which the activity takes
place withdraws his consent;
b. The activity and use incites or encourages violence, crime or
disorderly conduct;
c. The activity requires unusual, extraordinary or burdensome
expense or police operations; or
d. For any other reason the city auditor or any other person or
officer as may be designated by the board of city
commissioners, reasonably believes that the activity or use
detracts from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety or
recreation.
(1) Temporary special event alcoholic beverage permits may be issued to
eligible charitable and civic groups by the Board of Commissioners of
the City of Williston in conjunction with special events held within the
City of Williston. Any permit issued pursuant to this section may be
issued for a period of time established by the board of city
commissioners, not to exceed five consecutive days. The permit shall be
issued to a person at a specific place in the same manner as licenses
and permits issued pursuant to Article III, Chapter 3 of the Williston
Code of Ordinances.
(2) The special alcoholic beverage permits available are as follows:
a. Special event beer retailer. Special event beer retailer permits are
available to any civic organization, as approved by the board of city
commissioners.
§ 3-45 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-47
AO:57
§ 3-48. through § 3-54. (Reserved)
b. Special event on-sale wine retailer. Special event on-sale wine
retailer permits are available to any civic organization, as approved
by the board of city commissioners.
c. Special event on-sale liquor retailer. Special event on-sale liquor
retailer permits are available to any civic organization, as approved
by the board of city commissioners.
(3) Persons or groups requesting a special event alcoholic beverage permit
shall make application on forms available from the City of Williston, and
shall be subject to the same requirements as an applicant for a permit
under Section 3-40 of the Williston Code of Ordinances.
(4) The hours of operation of each special event alcoholic beverage permit
shall be as set by the board of city commissioners.
(5) Persons applying for a special event alcoholic beverage permit shall pay
a nonrefundable application fee as follows:
a. Special event beer retailer - $50 per event.
b. Special event on-sale wine retailer - $50 per event.
c. Special event on-sale liquor retailer - $150 per event.
(6) No person may be issued more than 12 special event alcoholic beverage
permits within any calendar year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any
combination of permits issued to the same person, at the same place,
for the same time, and for the same special event shall be counted only
as one permit for the purposes of the twelve-permit annual limit.
(7) The board of city commissioners shall refuse to issue a special event
alcoholic beverage permit and shall revoke a permit when it appears
that:
a. The permitted site is or is likely to become a public nuisance or
detrimental to public morals;
b. Alcoholic beverages or controlled substances are being sold or
given away, except as approved by such permit;
c. Any of the ordinances of this city of the laws of this state are being
violated; or
d. Protests to the issuance of such permit are made, either orally or in
writing, by a sufficient number of people living in the neighborhood
of such site for which the application for such permit is made. It is
in the sole judgment of the board of city commissioners to
determine whether said protests warrant refusal or revocation of
such permit as being against the public interest and welfare.
§ 3-47 WILLISTON CODE § 3-48
AO:58
ARTICLE IV
Application for License; Qualifications of Licensee
§ 3-55. Application for license - Information required. [Ord. No.
550, § IV, 8-28-1979]
(a) Any person desiring a license to sell intoxicating beverages at retail as
hereinabove described shall make and file with the board of city
commissioners an application for such license accompanied by the fee
as hereinbefore provided. Such application shall be verified by the
person making the application. If the applicant is a corporation, it shall
be verified by the president and secretary of the corporation; if an
individual, by such individual, and if a co-partnership, by each member
of such co-partnership, and if a club or lodge, by the duly elected
presiding officer of such club or lodge. The following information,
together with such other information as may, from time to time be
required by the board of city commissioners shall be contained in the
application required by the preceding section:
(1) Name of applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name and
address of all persons holding 1% or more of the stock in the
corporation; if the applicant is a copartnership, the name and
address and place of residence of each member of the copartnership
and any persons having any financial interest therein.
(2) Citizenship, residence, etc. Whether the applicant is a citizen of the
United States, and if a naturalized citizen, the date and place of
naturalization. Whether the applicant is a resident of the state and
the place of residence of the applicant for a period of one year last
preceding the date of the application. If the applicant is a
corporation, the date of incorporation, the state where
incorporated, the amount of the authorized capital, the amount of
the paid in capital and whether such corporation is a subsidiary of
any corporation and if so, the name of the parent corporation, the
purpose for which such corporation was incorporated, the names
and addresses of the corporate officers, corporate directors and
managing agents of such corporation.
(3) Description of premises. The legal description of the place for
which license is sought.
(4) Name and address of owner of premises; lessee. The name and
address of the owner of the premises for which license is sought by
a person other than the owner of such premises, the terms of the
lease under which such applicant holds possession of the premises,
insofar as the terms of such lease and the rental to be paid therefor
are concerned. The applicant shall when required by the board of
city commissioners furnish to the board a copy of the lease under
which he holds possession of the premises. If the license is sought
by the owner of the premises sought to be licensed, the applicant
shall state the time when such applicant acquired title thereto.
§ 3-55 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-55
AO:59
(5) Tax delinquencies. Whether the taxes on such property are
delinquent. Whether or not the personal property taxes of the
applicant are delinquent and if a co-partnership, whether or not the
personal property taxes of each member of the co-partnership and
each person financially interested therein are delinquent, and
whether or not the personal property taxes levied against the
property to be used in conducting the business are delinquent.
(6) Previous retail, etc., experience. Whether the applicant has ever
engaged in the sale or distribution of liquor prior to this application
and if so, the date and type of business and the place where so
engaged whether within or without the state. If the application is
for a renewal license, the date the applicant first began to operate;
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to a license
issued hereunder.
(7) Previous license revocations. Whether the applicant has ever had a
license for the sale of intoxicating liquor revoked for any violation
of state laws or local ordinances and if so, the names of the bodies
revoking such license, the dates of such revocations and the
reasons.
(8) Violations of liquor laws. Whether the applicant has ever been
convicted of the violation of any law of the United States or of any
state or of the violation of any local ordinance with regard to the
manufacture, sale, distribution, or possession of intoxicating liquor
and if so, the dates, names of places and courts in which such
convictions were had.
(9) Other convictions. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted
of any other crime than stated in paragraphs (7) and (8) above, in
this state or any other state or under any federal law, and if so, the
date of such convictions, the name of the crime for which
convicted, the amount and terms of sentence passed and the court
in which convicted.
(10)Name and address of manager. The name and address of the
person who will have charge, management or control of the
establishment for which the license is sought.
(11) Agreement, etc., to transfer license. Whether the applicant has any
agreement, understanding or intention to have any agreement or
understanding with any person, co-partnership or corporation to
obtain for any other person or to transfer to any other person this
license or to obtain it for any other than for the specific use of the
applicant, and if so, the names and addresses of such persons and
the conditions of such agreement.
(12) Interest in other liquor businesses. Whether the applicant has any
interest whatsoever, directly or indirectly, in any other liquor
establishment, either at wholesale or retail, within or without the
state, and if so, the names and addresses of such establishments.
§ 3-55 WILLISTON CODE § 3-55
AO:60
§ 3-56. Investigation of applicant. [Ord. No. 550, § IV, 8-28-1979]
The board of city commissioners or such other person or officer as may be
designated by the board of city commissioners shall, upon the application
being filed, investigate the facts as stated in the application and the
character, reputation and fitness of the applicant. If such investigation is
made by a person other than the board of city commissioners, he shall
report all such matters to the board.
§ 3-57. Inspection of premises to be permitted. [Ord. No. 550, § IV,
8-28-1979; Ord. No. 800, 8-12-1997]
In addition to the other requirements that are set forth in the application
made by a person seeking a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor, such
person, co-partnership, corporation, club or lodge seeking such license shall
state therein that the licensee expressly consents to any law enforcement
officer of the City of Williston or the State of North Dakota to enter areas
of public access of the licensed premises and will produce for any law
enforcement officer the license authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquors.
This provision is meant to include the holders of capital stock in
any corporation dealing in liquor either at wholesale or retail and
within the borders of the United States.
(13) Past occupation. The occupation which the applicant has followed
during the past 10 years.
(14) References. The names and addresses of at least three business
references and a brief statement of the nature and extent of the
business relations with such persons.
(15) Commercial rating. Whether the applicant is rated by any
commercial agency, and if so, the name and address of such agency.
(16) Other businesses. Whether the applicant is engaged in any other
business or intends to engage in any other business than the sale of
liquor under the license applied for; if so, the type of business, and
the name and address of employer.
(17) Class of license. The classification of license applied for, whether
on-sale, off-sale or license for lodge or club.
(18) Lodge or club. Where the license is sought for a lodge or club as
herein defined, the date of the organization of such club, the
number of members therein, the purpose for which organized and
the purpose for which profits to be derived from the business
engaged in pursuant to such license are to be applied. Wherever
required by the board of city commissioners, such applicant shall
furnish and file with the board of city commissioners a list of the
members belonging to such lodge or club.
§ 3-55 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-58
AO:61
§ 3-58. Licensee to be resident of the State of North Dakota;
licensee as agent prohibited. [Ord. No. 550, § IV, 8-28-1979; Ord.
No. 793, 9-24-1996; Ord. No. 797, 8-12-1997; Ord. No. 916,
10-10-2009]
§ 3-59. Licensee to be 21 and morally fit. [Ord. No. 550, § IV,
8-28-1979]
No license shall be issued to any person under the age of 21 years or to any
person deemed by the board of city commissioners to be morally unfit to
engage in the business for which the license is sought.
§ 3-60. Location of licensed premises. [Ord. No. 550, § IV,
8-28-1979]
No license shall be issued to any building, room or place within 150 feet
of any church, public or parochial school or synagogue, and in determining
such distance, the distance shall be measured by the ordinary route of
travel from the nearest point upon the grounds upon which such church,
public or parochial school or synagogue is located to the entrance of the
premises for which the license is sought.
§ 3-61. Restrictions on location, payment of real estate taxes and
special assessments. [Ord. No. 550, § IV, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 713,
6-28-1988]
Each license shall contain the legal description of the place where the
holder thereof operates his place of business. No license shall be issued,
renewed, or transferred for any location for which there are delinquent
(a) No retail license or licenses shall be issued to any individual applicant
unless that individual is a legal resident of the United States and a legal
and bona fide resident of the State of North Dakota.
(b) In the case of a partnership applicant, unincorporated association
applicant, or a corporation applicant, no retail license or licenses shall
be issued to any such applicant unless such applicant deems an
individual as manager of such applicant and unless such manager is a
legal resident of the United States and a legal and bona fide resident of
the State of North Dakota. Such individual so deemed must fulfill the
residency requirements herein.
(c) The residency requirement herein is a continuing requirement during
the term of any license issued hereunder.
(d) No license shall be issued to any person, partnership, unincorporated
association, or corporation engaged in business as the representative
or agent of another, except that a license may be issued to and in the
name of the lessee of a hotel or motel having 70 rooms or more,
notwithstanding that such lessee presently holds a retail license or
licenses for a hotel or motel.
§ 3-58 WILLISTON CODE § 3-61
AO:62
taxes or special assessments unless the licensee or applicant has entered
into a contract with the city for the payment of the taxes and special
assessments.
§ 3-62. through § 3-72. (Reserved)
§ 3-61 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-62
AO:63

ARTICLE V
Regulation of Licensed Premises and Patrons
§ 3-73. Sale or use on street prohibited. [Ord. No. 550, § IV,
8-28-1979; Ord. No. 713, 6-28-1988; Ord. No. 755, 6-9-1992; Ord.
No. 1043, 6-24-2016]
The sale, serving, or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon any street,
public way, or area used principally for public parking is prohibited.
Notwithstanding the above general prohibition, the board of city
commissioners may authorize the sale, serving, or consumption of alcoholic
beverages upon a street, public way, or area used principally for public
parking when requested in conjunction with the issuance of a special event
alcoholic beverage permit as set forth in Section 3-40 of the Municipal Code
of Ordinances.
Further, notwithstanding the above general prohibition, the sale, serving, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages upon a public way may be authorized
when requested in conjunction with the issuance of an outdoor sidewalk
cafe permit as set forth in Section 20-1 of the Municipal Code of Ordinances.
§ 3-74. Solicitation of drinks. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979]
No person shall frequent or loiter in any tavern, cabaret, bar, or night
club, with the purpose of soliciting persons of the opposite sex to purchase
drinks. No proprietor or operator of any such establishment shall allow the
presence in the establishment of any person who solicits persons of the
opposite sex to purchase drinks.
§ 3-75. Acts prohibited on licensed premises. [Ord. No. 550, § V,
8-28-1979; Ord. No. 733, 2-26-1991; Ord. No. 816, 10-12-1999]
(1) The licensee at all times shall maintain good order in and about the
premises licensed; he shall not permit, nor suffer, any carousing,
boisterous conduct or behavior within or on such licensed premises.
(2) The licensee and licensee's employees shall at all times prohibit
persons within the licensed premises from performing or simulating
acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation, or simulate or touch, caress, or fondle breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitals.
(3) Any person engaged as an exotic dancer, stripper, or go-go dancer, shall
not have any physical contact with customers on the licensed premises.
They shall not allow patrons to touch their breasts or genitals in any
way, nor shall they touch the patron's breasts or genitals. Example:
sitting on laps, no touching of breasts or genitals, either over or under
clothing.
§ 3-73 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-75
AO:65
§ 3-76. Hours, days of sale. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979; Ord. No.
693, 4-28-1987; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 768, § 2,
6-14-1994; Ord. No. 908, 8-26-2008]
No holder of a license under this chapter shall sell, deliver, give away,
serve, permit to be sold, served or consumed on the licensed premises
any alcoholic beverages between 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays,
between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on all other days of the week,
or on Christmas Day or after 6:00 p.m. Christmas Eve. In addition, a person
may not provide off sale after 1:00 a.m. on Thanksgiving Day. A person who
violates this section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(4) Licensed premises under this section shall include any area or room
under control of the licensee, or as to which he has the lawful right to
assert control, whether control is exercised or not, including:
a. Any area or in any portion of which alcoholic beverages are stored,
mixed, prepared, opened, served or consumed as an incident of the
business operation of the licensee carried on pursuant to the
license;
b. Any area the interior of which is visible from an area or room
described in subparagraph (4)a;
c. Or any other area that is in the licensed premises.
(5) A violation of subsections (2) or (3) above shall be a Class B
Misdemeanor for a first offense. Any second offense occurring within
two years of prior offense or conviction of first offense shall be handled
pursuant to Section 12.1-27 of the North Dakota Century Code. This is
in addition to any suspension or revocation of license determined to be
appropriate by the board of city commissioners.
(6) Nor shall any such licensed premises have or suffer others to have or
maintain in such licensed premises, any slot machines or other
gambling devices whatsoever, nor shall any licensee permit any games
of chance, for money or anything of value, to be placed, carried on or
practiced at any time, by any person, in any room or place in any
building wherein any intoxicating beverages are retailed, and which
room or place may be occupied by the license holder, except as
permitted by state law and city ordinance pertaining to charitable
gambling.
(7) Any person who is 19 years of age or older but under 21 years of age
may be employed by a restaurant to serve and collect money for
alcoholic beverages, if the person is under the direct supervision of a
person 21 years or more of age, but may not be engaged in mixing,
dispensing, or consuming alcoholic beverages.
§ 3-75 WILLISTON CODE § 3-77
AO:66
§ 3-77. Use of licensed premises for other purposes prohibited.
[Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979]
No retail license of any kind shall be granted hereunder for the retail sale of
intoxicating beverages where the room or building sought to be licensed is
used or shall be used for any other business or purpose other than the sale
of intoxicating beverages at retail. Nor shall such room or place so licensed
during the period of the license be used by the licensee or any person or
any other business or purpose whatsoever, and if the licensed premises, or
any part thereof, is so used or permitted to be used for any other purposes,
the retail license shall terminate and shall stand revoked.
Notwithstanding the restrictions contained in the paragraph immediately
above, a room or premises sought to be licensed under this chapter may
be used for the sale of cheese, nuts, sausages, or other gourmet specialty
items, related sundries, and mixing supplies.
§ 3-78. Maintenance of premises generally. [Ord. No. 550, § V,
8-28-1979]
Every licensee shall at all time maintain the interior of his licensed premises
in a clean and sanitary condition and conduct and maintain his business in
a clean, orderly, and respectable manner.
§ 3-79. Three licenses to a person; number of licenses allowed,
limitation based on population. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979; Ord.
No. 794, 9-24-1996]
(a) Not more than three on- and/or off-sale retail beer licenses and three
on-sale liquor licenses or one off-sale beer and one off-sale liquor
license can be applied for, issued, or granted to any one person.
(1) The population restrictions contained in Article III, Section 3-37,
shall not apply to renewals of existing licenses, but no new licenses
shall be issued hereunder except on a population basis, unless
otherwise provided in such article, provided, however, that any
licensee holding both on-sale and off-sale beer licenses on the
effective date of this chapter, who shall have made application on or
before August 15, 1979, for a general on-sale liquor license, may be
entitled to receive a general on-sale liquor license, provided that
any such applicant and the premises proposed for licensing
otherwise qualify for such license.
(2) For purposes of the population restrictions contained in this
chapter, it is herewith determined that the population of the city of
Williston is now 13,000 people.
§ 3-77 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-80
AO:67
§ 3-80. Prohibition on consumption in certain places. [Ord. No. 550,
§ V, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 756, 6-9-1992; Ord. No. 791, 4-23-1996;
Ord. No. 1043, 6-24-2016]
No person shall drink or consume any intoxicating beverages in any of the
cemeteries, parks, or similar public places within the city; nor shall any
person have in his possession or under his control in any such public place
any intoxicating beverage in any package, bottle or container, unless the
package, bottle or container is sealed and stamped as required by the laws
of the state and that such package, bottle or container has not been opened
or the seal broken.
The above prohibition shall not apply to such areas of the Williston Park
System which have been specifically set forth as a licensed premises in
an application for retail license approved by the Williston Park District
and approved in the normal course by the board of city commissioners.
The above prohibition shall not apply to beer sold and consumed on the
municipal golf course pursuant to the provisions of the municipal golf
course beer sales license or special event license.
The above prohibition shall not apply to such areas of public ways or public
places which have been specifically approved and obtained a permit for
an outdoor sidewalk cafe or have been specifically approved and permitted
for a special event alcoholic beverage permit allowing the consumption of
intoxicating beverages as provided for in the municipal code of ordinances.
§ 3-81. Sales to drunkards and incompetents prohibited. [Ord. No.
550, § V, 8-28-1979]
No licensee, his agent or employees, shall sell, serve, dispense, or in any
way deliver alcoholic beverages to an incompetent, to any habitual
drunkard, or to an intoxicated person. Whosoever shall in any way procure
or furnish alcoholic beverages for the use of any such person heretofore in
this section named shall be deemed to have sold it to such person and to
have violated the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 3-82. Sanitary facilities. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979]
All premises licensed for the on-sale of alcoholic beverages shall provide
separate modern restroom facilities for men and women. Such restrooms
shall be equipped with running water, wash basin, soap, and paper towels,
and no retailer's license shall be issued unless the premises to be licensed
conforms to the sanitary, safety, and health requirements of the city and has
been approved by responsible health officials.
§ 3-83. Drinking in off-sale premises prohibited; deliveries
prohibited. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 771, 11-8-1994]
No person holding an off-sale license hereunder shall permit the
consumption of intoxicating beverages upon the licensed premises or the
opening of the container containing the alcoholic beverages, the same
§ 3-80 WILLISTON CODE § 3-83
AO:68
being the original package in which the sale is made on the premises
where sold. All sales of intoxicating beverages made by a licensee holding
an off-sale license shall be completed upon the licensed premises by the
delivery of the container containing the intoxicating beverages sold to the
purchaser upon such premises for removal from the premises in its original
package. No delivery shall be made by any person holding an off-sale
license to any person or to any premises or any location or point other than
that licensed hereunder. Notwithstanding the restrictions contained herein,
a licensed off-sale retailer may permit the sampling, without charge, of
alcoholic beverages with an alcoholic content not exceeding 24% by volume,
upon the licensed premises, but no more often than four two-day events per
month.
§ 3-84. Possession of unstamped and untaxed liquor unlawful. [Ord.
No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979]
No intoxicating liquor shall be permitted to be owned, held or possessed
upon any licensed premises or by any person to whom a license for the
retail sale of liquor has been issued unless the stamp tax as provided by the
Liquor Control Act of the state has been properly affixed to the containers
thereof and unless the taxes on such intoxicating liquor have been paid. The
possession of any container of intoxicating liquor, which container does not
bear the proper stamps issued by the state pursuant to the Liquor Control
Act of the state shall be deemed to be illegal and a violation of this article.
§ 3-85. Purchase from unlicensed wholesalers prohibited and
unlawful. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979]
No licensee hereunder shall purchase, have or possess any intoxicating
beverages unless such licensee shall have purchased the same from a
wholesaler duly licensed pursuant to the laws of the state.
§ 3-86. Records of licensee. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979]
Each licensee hereunder shall keep on file all invoices covering purchases
by him of intoxicating liquor and beer showing the name and state license
number of the wholesaler. Each licensee hereunder shall also keep a book
showing the kinds and quantities of all liquor and beer purchased, together
with the name and state license number of the wholesaler selling such
liquor and beer to the licensee. Such records shall be retained in possession
of the licensee and at all times shall be open to inspection by any police
officer or peace officer of the state.
§ 3-87. Interior furnishings of off-sale licensed premises. [Ord. No.
550, § V, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 801, 8-12-1997]
No licensee for the sale of off-sale liquor shall maintain, or suffer to be
constructed or maintained or placed in the room or premises licensed any
side room, booth, or other enclosure whatsoever, nor shall there be kept
therein any tables or other articles for the accommodation of customers
§ 3-83 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-87
AO:69
or others, other than that the licensee may maintain therein necessary
shelving and plain counter to accommodate purchasers and the licensee
or his assistants. No licensee for the sale of off-sale intoxicating beverages
shall allow consumption of such off-sale beverages on the licensed premises
unless otherwise specifically provided herein.
§ 3-88. Limitation on size of container or receptacle on premises
licensed for on-sale. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979]
No licensee for the on-sale of liquor shall keep or maintain upon the licensed
premises any container or receptacle, corked or sealed by the manufacturer,
and containing intoxicating liquor, excluding beer as herein defined, which
is smaller than 24 ounces in size.
§ 3-89. Posting. [Ord. No. 550, § V, 8-28-1979]
Licenses issued to licensees hereunder shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in the premises for which the license is sought.
§ 3-90. Special permits for eating establishments. [Ord. No. 698,
6-23-1987]
§ 3-91. through § 3-100. (Reserved)
(a) The board of city commissioners may by special permit authorize an onsale
alcoholic beverage license holder who operates an eating
establishment to engage in the sale of beer and wine in conjunction
with the sale of prepared meals on Sunday between the hours of 12:00
noon and 9:00 p.m. for consumption only in that part of the eating
establishment habitually used for the serving of prepared meals. As
used in this section, "eating establishment" means a restaurant or other
commercial establishment that is licensed to engage in the sale of
alcoholic beverages at retail pursuant to the provision of the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Williston, and which derives 50% or more of
its annual gross receipts from the sale of prepared meals and not
alcoholic beverages. The annual fee for the permit shall be the sum of
$150 per year, payable in advance.
§ 3-87 WILLISTON CODE § 3-91
AO:70
ARTICLE VI
Approval Required
§ 3-101. Applications approved by board of city commissioners.
[Ord. No. 550, § VI, 8-28-1979]
Any application, whether for the sale of beer or the sale of liquor or other
alcoholic beverages, whether on-sale or off-sale, must be approved by the
board of city commissioners before a license shall be issued.
§ 3-102. through § 3-107. (Reserved)
§ 3-101 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-102
AO:71

ARTICLE VII
Inspection of Premises
§ 3-108. Determination of general conditions. [Ord. No. 550, § VII,
8-28-1979]
Prior to acting upon any application received for a liquor or beer license,
a transfer of location of any such existing license, or an application for
a renewal of any existing liquor or beer license, it shall be the policy of
the board of city commissioners to require a complete inspection of the
building or plans, when new construction, where the proposed business
is to be conducted, or is being conducted, whichever is applicable. As
applications for a transfer of location of an existing beer or liquor license, or
applications for a new liquor or beer license, or applications for renewal of
existing beer or liquor licenses, are received at the office of the city auditor,
such applications shall be immediately referred to the building inspector
as to the proposed site location and structure thereon, where a structure
exists upon the site, who shall then fully and completely examine the
proposed structure on the stated location. The building inspector shall, in
his discretion, require such other city inspectors such as the fire inspector
or the health inspector, as he deems necessary to join with him in the
examination of the structures described in the application to determine the
general condition of the structure upon such site, including the soundness
of the building, the availability of light, air, general sanitation facilities and
such other items as are normally considered in determining general safety
of a structure.
Reports of the building inspector and such other inspectors shall thereafter
be submitted to the board of city commissioners for consideration along
with the license application. No license shall be issued or transferred by
the board of city commissioners, including any renewal licenses, for any
establishment when it is found that the structure is not sufficient for the
general welfare and safety of the general public.
In addition, no retailer's license shall be issued unless the premises to be
licensed conforms to the sanitary, safety, and health requirements of the city
and has been approved by the responsible health officials.
§ 3-109. through § 3-114. (Reserved)
§ 3-108 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-109
AO:73

ARTICLE VIII
Transferability
§ 3-115. Application and approval required. [Ord. No. 550, § VIII,
8-28-1979; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 11-12-1991]
No license issued hereunder shall be transferable during the calendar year
without payment of new license fees except to a representative of the estate
of a deceased license holder. No change in location shall be permitted
without first making application and receiving the approval of the board
of city commissioners. A license holder may apply to the board of city
commissioners to change the classification of his license as listed in Article
III of this chapter without payment of additional license fees, provided the
applicant meets all requirements for such new license and provided such
license is available. A public hearing shall not be required in transfers of
license except in the case of a change of location.
Transfers taking place during the year, unless otherwise exempt as noted in
this chapter, shall require payment of fees by the new applicant. Such fees
shall be prorated by the number of months remaining in the year.
§ 3-116. through § 3-121. (Reserved)
§ 3-115 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-116
AO:75

ARTICLE IX
Term of Licenses
§ 3-122. Annual periods. [Ord. No. 550, § IX, 8-28-1979; Ord. No.
1049, 4-25-2017]
All licenses under this chapter shall run for annual periods commencing
January 1 of each year and terminating on December 31 of the same year.
§ 3-123. through § 3-128. (Reserved)
§ 3-122 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-123
AO:77

ARTICLE X
Revocation and Suspension
§ 3-129. Causes and reasons enumerated. [Ord. No. 550, § X,
8-28-1979]
(a) Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, cancelled or
suspended for the following causes and reasons:
(1) The death of the licensee; provided, however, that such license
shall not terminate until the 13th day of June following the date of
death of such licensee if, within 30 days of date of death, the
surviving widow or widower or an adult member of the deceased
licensee's family or the personal representative of the estate files
with the city auditor a new application to be approved or
disapproved by the city commission.
(2) When the licensee ceases business at the location licensed and a
permit for change of location is denied.
(3) When the licensee be adjudged bankrupt.
(4) When the licensee has been convicted of the violation of any
provision of this chapter or a felony under the laws of the United
States, this state or of any other state of the United States.
(5) When the licensee (or the individual deemed "manager" in the case
of a partnership, an unincorporated association, or a corporation)
ceases to be a legal and bona fide resident of the city.
(6) When the license or permit of the licensee from the United States
Government or from the state to sell intoxicating beverages has
been terminated or revoked.
(7) When the business of the licensee at the location licensed shall be
conducted in violation of health or sanitary regulations or other
ordinances of the city.
(8) When the licensee has made false statements in his application for
license, or has supplied false information or false representations
in the application process.
Such causes as hereinbefore described shall not be deemed to be
exclusive and such license may be terminated at any time by the
board of city commissioners and such license revoked or suspended
for any cause deemed by the board to be sufficient cause and
justified by reason of public health or public morals. Such
termination shall be subject only to review by the courts of the
state. When any license is revoked or the licensee voluntarily
ceases his business, no portion of the license fee previously paid
shall be returned to the licensee or to anyone claiming under or
through him.
§ 3-129 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-130
AO:79
§ 3-130. Revocation upon ceasing of business. [Ord. No. 713,
6-28-1988; Ord. No. 813, 5-11-1999]
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be canceled or revoked 180
days after the licensee ceases doing business or at the end of the calendar
year in which the licensee ceases doing business, whichever occurs later.
The license shall not be revoked or canceled if the licensee has a pending
application to change location and begins doing business at the new
location within 180 days of approval of the new location. The license
furthermore shall not be revoked or canceled if, within 180 days of ceasing
business or having a new license or transfer approved, the licensee has
obtained a building permit to repair, renovate or construct a premises to
be licensed and continuously and actively pursues such repair, renovation
or construction resulting in being open for business within one year from
ceasing business or from the date the license was approved. The license fee
must be paid in full even if the licensee is not doing business as provided
above.
§ 3-131. through § 3-135. (Reserved)
§ 3-130 WILLISTON CODE § 3-131
AO:80
ARTICLE XI
Cashing of Certain Checks Prohibited
§ 3-136. Checks paid for relief purposes prohibited. [Ord. No. 550,
§ XI, 8-28-1979]
No licensee hereunder shall cash any bank check, voucher, order or
document of any kind drawn by the William County Social Service Center,
or any state or federal agency in payment of wages made for work done
on any so-called relief project, or for relief purposes, which by its terms
authorizes or permits any person presenting such bank check, voucher,
order or document to receive payment of money.
§ 3-137. through § 3-139. (Reserved)
§ 3-136 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-137
AO:81

ARTICLE XII
Public Hearing shall be Held on License Application
§ 3-140. Notice of hearing; considerations for application approval.
[Ord. No. 550, § XII, 8-28-1979; Ord. No. 745, § 1, 11-12-1991; Ord.
No. 859, 11-26-2002]
Upon receipt of any new applications for beer licenses or for liquor licenses
or applications involving the change in location for an existing license,
the board of city commissioners shall hold a public hearing regarding the
application.
When the board of city commissioners calls a public hearing on any such
license application, notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the
city two times, the first publication to be at least 10 days before the hearing
date set for the hearing of said application.
(a) At the time of the hearing the board of city commissioners may consider
among other things the following factors:
(1) The convenience of police regulation.
(2) Public health and sanitation.
(3) Proximity of other licensed businesses.
(4) Proximity of schools, churches, funeral homes, public buildings, or
buildings used by or for minors.
(5) Any protests of neighboring property owners or occupants.
(6) Zoning regulations.
(7) Proposed on/off sale or both of licensee.
(8) Interference with neighboring property.
(9) Interference with or proximity to residential property, including
property which is zoned residential but which may not presently
have a residence upon it.
(10) Suitability of premises for sale of beer, liquor, or other alcoholic
beverages.
(11) Public convenience and necessity.
(12) Whether the proposed location of the applicant is in harmony with
the public interest and welfare of the community.
Input received at such public hearing shall not be binding in any
way upon the board of city commissioners but shall be used as
additional input in deciding whether or not to issue the license.
§ 3-140 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-141
AO:83
§ 3-141. Actual notice to residential property owners within 150
feet of on-sale premises. [Ord. No. 859, 11-26-2002]
No on-sale license shall be issued to any location within 150 feet of
residential zoned property without proof that the owners of property within
150 feet of the lot line of the premises to be licensed have been notified of
the hearing no less than five days prior to the hearing either by a signed
acknowledgment, certified mail, or affidavit that the owner refused such
certified mail or refused to sign an acknowledgment of the notice of the
hearing.
§ 3-142. through § 3-144. (Reserved)
§ 3-141 WILLISTON CODE § 3-142
AO:84
ARTICLE XIII
Alleged Violation
§ 3-145. Notice of hearing. [Ord. No. 550, § XIII, 8-28-1979]
Any person having information that a retailer of alcoholic beverages
licensed by the city has violated any provisions of this chapter may file with
the city, attorney an affidavit specifically setting forth such violation. Upon
receipt of such affidavit, the city attorney shall cause the matter to be set
for hearing not later than the next regular meeting of the board of city
commissioners. A copy of the affidavit and notice of hearing shall be mailed
to the licensee by registered or certified mail not less than five days before
such hearing, and in the event the date of receipt of such affidavit does not
permit said required five days' notice, then such hearing before the board
of city commissioners will be held at its next following regular meeting or a
special meeting called by it.
§ 3-146. through § 3-148. (Reserved)
§ 3-145 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-146
AO:85

ARTICLE XIV
Penalties
§ 3-149. Penalties stated. [Ord. No. 550, § XIV, 8-28-1979]
Whenever in this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or a violation, or whenever in this chapter the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no
specific penalty is provided therefore, any person upon conviction for the
violation of any such provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding $500, by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, for each such offense. In the construction and
interpretation of this article, the revocation of a license or permit shall not
be considered as a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being
enforced.
§ 3-150. Administrative fees and suspension or revocation of license
to sell alcoholic beverages. [Ord. No. 854, 3-26-2002; Ord. No. 895,
6-26-2007; Ord. No. 1101, 4-23-2019]
(a) The license granted under this chapter shall be affected or suspended
by the city, for an illegal sale of an alcoholic beverage to minors, or for a
violation of any other similar provision of this chapter, city ordinance or
state law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors.
(b) The City of Williston mandates that all servers of alcohol shall receive
alcohol server training within 90 days of employment. All liquor
establishment managers must keep a copy of each employee's card on
file at the establishment along with date of hire.
(c) Penalties for violating the above shall be applied and assessed to the
license holder under whom the sale took place as follows:
(1) First offense. A mandatory $750 administrative fee.
(2) Second offense. For a second offense within 60 months of the date
of the first offense, a mandatory $2,500 administrative fee and a
mandatory review by the liquor committee who may recommend a
hearing before the city commission to suspend or revoke the
license.
(3) Third offense. For a third offense within 60 months of the date of
the first offense, a mandatory administrative fee of not less than
$2,500 and a mandatory review by the liquor committee who may
recommend a hearing before the city commission to suspend or
revoke the license.
(4) Any additional subsequent offense within 60 months of the first
offense shall subject the license holder to an administrative fee of
not less than $2,500 and to a hearing to revoke the license
pursuant to sections 3-145 and 3-129 of this chapter.
§ 3-149 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-150
AO:87
(d) The above penalties, subsections (c)(1)-(4), shall automatically be
imposed by the auditor upon receiving a copy of the judgment of
conviction for sales to a minor. The licensee has the right to appeal such
penalty to the board of appeals.
(e) The penalties set forth in this section are in addition to the City of
Williston's authority to suspend or revoke a liquor license, after
hearing, for licensee's violation of any city ordinance or state law
regarding liquor sales or for licensee's failure to cooperate with law
enforcement.
§ 3-150 WILLISTON CODE § 3-150
AO:88
ARTICLE XV
Entertainment and Live Performances Upon Alcoholic Beverage
Licensed Premises
§ 3-151. Purpose; authority and determinations. [Ord. No. 1034,
1-26-2016]
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate alcohol beverage licensed
premises in relation to adult entertainment establishments in order to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the
City of Williston, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to
prevent the deleterious secondary effects and concentrations of adult
entertainment establishments within the City of Williston. The
provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any
communicative materials, including any sexually oriented materials.
Further, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by
the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to
their intended market. Neither it is the intent nor effect of this
ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(b) Whereas, the City of Williston has explicit authority under Section
40-05-01(29) of the North Dakota Century Code to adopt regulations
governing the sale of alcohol beverages within city limits; and
Whereas, the City has general police powers set forth in Chapter 40-05
of the North Dakota Century Code to act for the good order of the City
of Williston, for its commercial benefit, and for the health, safety and
welfare of the public and may carry its powers out by regulation or
suppression;
Whereas, by adopting this ordinance, the City does not intend to
regulate obscenity, as nudity in and of itself is not obscene;
Whereas, the City declares its intent to address the secondary effects of
live nude dancing, as defined in this chapter, in liquor licensed premises
within City limits; and
Whereas, the liquor licensed establishments featuring live nude
dancing have:
(1) Caused depreciation in surrounding property values near these
establishments;
(2) Harmed the economic welfare of communities;
(3) Negatively affected the quality of life of communities, including the
City of Williston;
§ 3-151 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-151
AO:89
(4) Increased criminal and other offensive activity in other
communities facing these same issues;
(5) Increased criminal activity in our own community, as evidenced by
the police reports and police call logs that were provided to City
Commission members as they contemplated action on the
secondary effects of nude dancing in liquor-licensed
establishments; and
(6) Disrupted the peace and order of these communities, and our own
community as police resources are diverted a disproportionate
period of time to address recurring issues at these live nude
dancing liquor licensed establishments.
These secondary effects are detrimental to the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Williston.
Whereas, the City recognizes that the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution is applicable to the states through the
14th Amendment of the United States Constitution and further
recognizes that the United States Supreme Court has held that
nude dancing is expressive conduct entitled to limited protection
under the First Amendment of the US Constitution; and
Whereas, the Commission further recognizes that freedom of
speech and expression are amongst our most precious and highly
protected rights and wishes to act consistently with protection of
those rights as they enact these regulations; and
Whereas, however, the Commission is aware, based on the effects
felt in our community and those experienced in other communities,
that liquor licensed establishments featuring live nude dancing
may and do generate secondary effects which the Commission
believes are detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare;
and
Whereas, based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in studies and
local police reports made available to the board, and on findings
incorporated in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S.
277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41
(1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/
PBS, Inc. V. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 US. 560 (1991); Thomas v. Chicago Park District,
122 S. Ct. 775 (2002); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972);
City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002);
McCrothers Corp. v. Mandan, 2007 ND 28, 728 N.E. 2d 124 (2007);
City of Chicago v. Poo Bah Enterprises, Inc., 865 N.E. 2d 390 (III.
2006) and other cases; and reports of secondary effects occurring
in and around adult entertainment establishments, including, but
not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston,
Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove,
§ 3-151 WILLISTON CODE § 3-151
AO:90
California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin,
Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma County, Oklahoma;
Cleveland, Ohio; Dallas, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; St. Croix County,
Wisconsin; Bellevue, Washington; Newport News, Virginia; New
York, New York; Phoenix, Arizona; and from summaries of several
of the foregoing secondary effects report; the board finds:
(1) Employees of unregulated sexually oriented businesses,
especially live nude dancing establishments, are at risk of
engaging in certain types of illicit and illegal sexual behavior at
a higher incidence than employees of other establishments.
(2) Sex acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, occur
at unregulated sexually oriented businesses, especially those
which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for
viewing films or videos or live nude dancing and/or sexually
oriented shows.
(3) Patrons frequent these types of establishments with the
purpose of soliciting and engaging in certain illicit and illegal
sexual acts within the premises of the sexually oriented
businesses. These acts and solicitation often occur over the
exchange of money.
(4) The Office of the Texas Attorney General presented a report to
the Texas Legislature in March 2013 regarding the
relationship between human trafficking and sexually oriented
businesses. The increase in human trafficking in the Bakken
region is something state and local officials are acutely aware
of and taking steps to combat.
(5) Research supports the finding that sexually oriented
businesses that serve alcohol or that are located near liquorserving
businesses pose "larger and qualitatively different
ambient public safety hazards" than other establishments. The
Illinois Supreme Court, after reviewing available research,
found that "Victims become more vulnerable because of
alcohol's debilitating effects, thus creating an attractive
situation for potential offenders." City of Chicago v. Pooh Bah
Enterprises, Inc. et al. (III. 2006). Research found that patrons
of sexually oriented businesses are reluctant to involve or
contact law enforcement when victimized. Testimony of Dr.
Richard McCleary, a professor at the University of California,
Irvin, and Professor Lori Sexton to the Illinois State Senate
Public Health Committee in March 2012 in support of SB 3348.
Dr. McCleary is a nationally recognized expert on sexually
oriented businesses. He's been studying secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses and the sexually oriented
business industry since the 1980s. He and Professor Lori
Sexton proffered written testimony in March 2012 to the
Illinois State Legislature discussing the impact of alcohol,
§ 3-151 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-151
AO:91
crime, and sexually oriented businesses when the legislature
was contemplating creating a program to offer Grants to
combat sexual assaults and sexual violence.
(6) Between mid-2013 and June 2015 there were 200 incidents at
the two strip clubs located within City limits that the Williston
Police Department responded to.
a. The following is a summary of the types of calls and
incidents that the Williston Police Department responded
to:
1. The following criminal violations occurred: murder
(2), fights/assaults, DUI, disorderly conduct, unruly
and intoxicated patrons, hit and run calls, theft of
property calls (including stolen vehicles), welfare
checks, traffic violations, junk ordinance violations,
minors admitted to the establishments, minors being
served alcohol.
2. Of the fight/assault calls, almost all involved
intoxicated individuals. For example, in September
2014, there was a fight between overly intoxicated
individuals outside one of the strip clubs. One
individual was pushed and struck his head. The head
injury resulted in permanent brain damage.
3. A review of the police reports of the incidences at the
adult entertainment venues within City limits shows
that over 90% of these incidences involved alcohol.
b. A review of the police reports of the incidences at the adult
entertainment venues within City limits shows that over
90% of these incidences involved alcohol.
(7) The Office of the Texas Attorney General presented a report to
the Texas Legislature in March 2013 regarding the
relationship between human trafficking and sexually oriented
businesses. The increase in human trafficking in the Bakken
region is something state and local officials are acutely aware
of and taking steps to combat.
(8) A limited study was done by The Freedom and Justice Center
for Prostitution Resources. A program of the Volunteers of
America of Minnesota. The Survey Data was analyzed on the
Statistical Program for Social Sciences. 100% of the women
involved in the study reported incidences of physical abuse in
the strip club at which they were working. 100% of the women
involved in the study reported sexual abuse in the strip club at
which they were working. 100% of these incidences went
unreported to law enforcement.
§ 3-151 WILLISTON CODE § 3-151
AO:92
(9) The City of St. Marys, Georgia published a Digest of Research.
The Evidence of Relationships Between Adult-Oriented
Businesses and Community Crime and Disorder.
(10) Eric S. McCord and Richard Tewksbury of the Department of
Justice Administration at the University of Louisville, KY
published an article in Crime & Delinquency addressing if
sexually oriented businesses in communities is related to
increased levels of crime. Their study revealed that "sexually
oriented businesses are associated with much higher rates of
all types of offenses in the immediate vicinity of the business
and continue to have significant effects on crime levels as one
moves further from the business." Crime & Delinquency 59(7),
1108-25(2012).
(11) Offering and providing unregulated space encourages unsafe
and unsanitary acts, which create public health issues and
possibly even health code violations.
(12) The National Health Research and Development Program of
Health Canada published a Final Report on Erotic/Exotic
Dancing: HIV-Related Risk Factors detailing the sexual health
issues that exist in live nude dancing establishments.
(13) Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in adult entertainment establishments.
(14) According to the best scientific evidence, sexually transmitted
diseases and infections are principally transmitted through
sexual acts. Sex acts at adult entertainment establishments is a
real concern.
(15) According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, 1.1 million people
are living with HIV in the US. 76% diagnosed are male and
24% female. 84% of new HIV infections of women occur
through heterosexual sex. The majority of all new infections
across all races and genders resulted from sexual contact. In
2010 there were 47,500 new HIV infections in the US.
(16) According to the CDC, there were 1.4 million reported cases of
Chlamydia in the US in 2013.
(17) There were over 333,000 reported cases of Gonorrhea in the
US in 2013 according to the CDC.
(18) Sanitary conditions in some adult oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because of the activities conducted there
are conducted in an unhealthy fashion, and, in part, because of
the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the
owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain their facilities.
§ 3-151 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-151
AO:93
§ 3-152. Entertainment and live performances upon the licensed
premises. [- Ord. No. 1034, 1-26-2016]
(19) Numerous studies and reports have shown that semen is found
in the areas of adult entertainment establishments where
persons view adult oriented films and live nude shows, like the
live nude shows that take place at the adult establishments in
Williston; and
Whereas, the Commission finds that the consumption of
alcoholic beverages exacerbates these negative secondary
effects; and
Whereas, the Commission desires to minimize, prevent and
control these negative secondary effects and thereby protect
the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and
Whereas, the Commission is also aware that Courts in North
Dakota and in the United States Eighth Circuit Court of
Appeals have found that there is no constitutionally protected
right to consume or sell alcohol while watching or offering live
nude dancing; and
Whereas, the Commission has received and contemplated
studies regarding the secondary effects of nude dancing in
communities, judicial opinions, ordinances from other
communities, and City of Williston police reports and police
call logs while determining a course of action; and
Whereas, the Commission has determined that an ordinance
prohibiting live nude dancing in liquor licensed establishments
promotes the substantial goal of minimizing, preventing, and
controlling the negative secondary effects associated with such
activity; and
Whereas, the Commission has also determined that an
ordinance prohibiting live nude dancing in liquor licensed
establishments is the least restrictive means of regulating such
negative secondary effects, staying mindful of not infringing
on any more protected speech than is necessary to achieve
its lawful interest in regulating the adverse secondary effects
of live nude dancing that are exacerbated by the sale and
consumption of alcohol in such establishments that offer live
nude dancing.
(a) Definitions for the purposes of this title:
(1) ENTERTAINMENT - Means all forms and types of performing or
entertaining for patrons on licensed premises without regard to
whether such entertainment is provided by means of live
performances or manually operated or electronic systems designed
for stereophonic playback of prerecorded signals; provided,
§ 3-151 WILLISTON CODE § 3-152
AO:94
however, that entertainment shall not be deemed to include the use
of any television, radio or coin-operated music machine subject to
the restrictions in this section.
(2) LIVE PERFORMANCES - Means any person who for consideration,
monetary or otherwise, performs in person on a licensed premises
as a singer, musician, dancer, comedian, model, or any other type of
entertainer.
(3) ADULT CABARET - Means any commercial premises or private club
to which any member of the public or club member is invited or
admitted, and where an entertainer provides live entertainment or
activity as defined in adult entertainment.
(4) ADULT ENTERTAINMENT - Means:
a. Any exhibition, performance or dance of any type conducted in
any premises where such exhibition, performance, or dance
involves a person who performs in such clothing or sheds
clothing to a point where the area below the top to the bottom
of the areola of a female breast or any portion of pubic area,
anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals are covered by opaque
material, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view
which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female
breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic
region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genital, or human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered; and/or
b. Any exhibition, performance, or dance which includes any of
the following:
1. The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law; and/or
2. The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of
the breast, buttock, anus, or genitals; and/or
3. The actual or simulated display of the pubic hair, anus,
vulva, or genitals or the nipples of the female; and/or
4. Appearances, entertainment or performances of any type
consisting of or containing any nude performer or topless
female dancer; and/or
c. Any exhibition, performance or dance which is intended to
sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is
conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the
premises activity. This includes, but is not limited to, any such
exhibition, performance or dance performed for, arranged
§ 3-152 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-152
AO:95
with, or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public
on the premises at that time, which separate consideration
paid, either directly or indirectly, for such performance,
exhibition or dance and which is commonly referred to as table
dancing, couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private
dancing, or straddle dancing.
(b) No alcohol beverage licensee under this chapter shall permit adult
entertainment or an adult cabaret on the licensee's premises. The
licensing procedure for cabarets shall be governed by the provisions of
Chapter 9 of the Williston Code of Ordinances.
(c) No entertainment on an alcoholic beverage licensed premises shall
contain:
(1) The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or
any sexual acts prohibited by law;
(2) The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;
(3) The actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or
genitals, or the nipples of a female;
(4) Appearances, entertainment or performances of any type
consisting of or containing any nude performance or nude dancer,
or topless female dancer.
a. NUDE PERFORMER or NUDE DANCER - Means any person or
performs or appears in attire such that any portion of the pubic
area, anus, vulva, or genitals is exposed to view or not covered
with an opaque material.
b. TOPLESS FEMALE PERFORMER or TOPLESS FEMALE
DANCER - Means any female who performs or appears in attire
such that any portion of her breasts below the top of the areola
is exposed to view or not covered with an opaque material.
These restrictions apply to all alcoholic beverage licensed
premises whether or not they have a cabaret license.
(d) No entertainment on a licensed premises shall be provided by means of
television or video cassettes or digital streaming if the content of that
entertainment depicts the acts prohibited in this section.
(e) A licensee shall have the duty and responsibility to make available for
inspection by a member of the police department an identification card,
such as a driver's license, containing a photograph and the age of all
entertainers or performers on the licensed premises. The licensee shall
not permit a person to make a live performance on the licensed
premises if the licensee is not able to obtain the required identification
from the performer.
§ 3-152 WILLISTON CODE § 3-152
AO:96
§ 3-153. Application of prohibited entertainment and live
performances to extraterritorial jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 1034,
1-26-2016]
Section 3-152 and any related licensing and zoning ordinances shall apply
to all territory within the corporate limits of the City and, as permitted by
state law to such outlying contiguous territory without the corporate limits
within which the City may exercise its police and zoning jurisdiction, as
defined by law.
§ 3-154. Penalty for violation of chapter. [Ord. No. 1034, 1-26-2016]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the terms of this article is guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject to the
penalties as described under state law for Class B misdemeanors.
Such a penalty should be in addition to the authority of the board to suspend
or revoke an alcoholic beverage license pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
(f) If any licensee, or any agent, servant or employee shall violate any
provision of this section, the license of such premises may be revoked
for cause in accordance with the procedures established pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 3-152 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-154
AO:97
Chapter 4
ANIMALS AND FOWL
§ 3-154 WILLISTON CODE § 3-154
AO:98
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 4-1. Definition. [Ord. No. 452, Art. V, § 4.29, 3-18-1969; Ord. No.
777, 6-13-1995; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
The word "animal" or "animals," when used in this chapter, means any
animal, domesticated or wild. An "animal unit" is one mature animal and
its offspring until such offspring is no longer dependent upon the mature
animal for survival. For purposes of this ordinance, this definition of animal
unit shall govern and not that definition found in the Williston Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 4-2. Raising and keeping of animals generally. [Ord. No. 452, Art.
V, § 4.30, 3-18-1969; Ord. No. 777, 6-13-1995; Ord. No. 1081,
8-28-2018]
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep any live animal within the City limits except
as described in this article.
(1) The following animals may be kept within the City limits of
Williston.
a. Domestic dogs and cats, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
b. Common indoor pets, such as aquarium fish, nonpoisonous
reptiles and amphibians, and other common indoor pets and
animals such as hamsters, mice, birds, which animals shall
remain indoors at the owner's residence or business, and up to
two pet rabbits and their offspring until the offspring are not
dependent upon the mature animal for survival, which rabbits
may be kept in an outdoor hutch and pen which is sanitary and
kept odor free.
c. A horse, mule, jackass, goat, or other animal kept as a family
pet may be kept within the following zoning districts: Rural
Residential Estate (R-1E), provided there is a minimum of five
acres available for the first four animal units, and no more than
one additional animal unit per acre of land over five acres. Two
animal units referred to in this paragraph may be kept in an
Agricultural (A) or Rural Residential (R1-A) zoning district, if a
special permitted use is obtained pursuant to the zoning
ordinances and there is a minimum of three acres with one
additional animal unit allowed for each acre over three.
d. The City commission, by resolution, may allow temporary or
seasonal keeping of animals or livestock when the City
commission determines that it is in the best interests of the
City to allow such keeping of animals within the City limits for
a seasonal or temporary duration not to exceed six months.
§ 4-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2
AO:99
§ 4-3. Domestic fowl. [Ord. No. 452, Art. II, § 4.6, 3-18-1969; Ord.
No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys,
pigeons or other domestic fowl within the City limits, except newly hatched
fowl held for sale by a dealer of them.
§ 4-4. Animals at large. [Ord. No. 452, Art. V, § 4.31, 3-18-1969; Ord.
No. 685, 1-5-1987; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018; Ord. No. 1081,
8-28-2018]
e. The City commission may, by resolution, after notice to
property owners within 150 feet of the applicant's property
and after public hearing, allow the use of Agricultural (A)
property for livestock purposes on such conditions as the
commission deems appropriate. It must be stated in the
resolution that such use is of lower priority and may be
terminated by the commission at any time, and the commission
shall terminate such use if any problem with health, safety,
odor, or noise develops regardless of the fact that adjacent or
surrounding development moves to an area where such use is
being allowed.
f. Any animal for exhibition or display purposes such as fairs,
circuses, animal displays, or special exhibitions, which displays
or exhibitions do not exceed seven days annually, including the
use of horses or other trained animals in parades.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the owner or person having custody or
responsibility for the care of an animal, as defined in this article, to
permit or allow the same to be at large on the streets, avenues, alleys,
parks or other public grounds within the City limits, or to be tethered or
staked in such a manner as to go upon any street, sidewalk or crosswalk
or public grounds within the City.
(b) This section does not prevent animals from being led, driven or ridden
while under physical control on highways, streets and alleys within the
City limits nor from participating in sanctioned parades, shows or
performance trials.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any domesticated pet animal to run at large
upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, public ways, school
grounds, mobile home courts, or upon the private premises of any
person other than the owner or keeper of the animal within the City.
Any such animal found running at large by the City Animal Control
Officer or by any police officer of the City shall be seized and
impounded, and may be claimed by the owner by paying to the City the
fees, maintenance costs and any necessary veterinary costs as provided
in this chapter.
§ 4-2 WILLISTON CODE § 4-5
AO:100
§ 4-5. Cruelty to animals. [Ord. No. 452, Art. I, § 4.4, 3-18-1969;
Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018; amended 2-11-2020 by Ord. No. 1110]
Every person who shall willfully 1) torture, torment, deprive of necessary
food or water or cruelly beat any animal or 2) harmfully and knowingly
expose any animal to heat or cold shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to the penalties provided for in this Code. Restitution shall
specifically include veterinarian care and impound fees.
§ 4-6. Animals declared a nuisance. [Ord. No. 452, Art. V, § 4.31,
3-18-1969; Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4.10, 3-18-1969; Ord. No. 1081,
8-28-2018]
The keeping of animals which causes offensive odor or noise or which
otherwise annoys persons or which attracts vermin or creates a hazard or
danger to the health or welfare of any person is a nuisance. The nuisance
shall be an offense irrespective of whether such offense occurs on the
property of the offender.
§ 4-7. Disposition of dead animals. [Ord. No. 452, Art. I, § 4.4,
3-18-1969; Ord. No. 642, 5-28-1985; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
No owner or person having custody or responsibility for the care of any
animal which has died shall abandon or allow the same to lie on any public
ground, street, lane, alley or any private lot or place within the City limits,
nor shall any person throw or discard any dead animal or decayed animal
matter into any pool of water or trash bins in the City. Dead animals must
be taken to a licensed veterinary clinic, the City landfill, or a site designated
at the discretion of the Chief of Police for proper disposal. The expense of
burying or removing any dead animal shall be a charge against the owner
or person having custody or responsibility for the care of the same.
(a) Any dog, cat or other domesticated pet within the City limits is a public
nuisance which:
(1) Frequently frightens, annoys, barks at or chases any person or
vehicle;
(2) If a female, is in heat and not continually confined indoors by its
owner;
(3) Is more than six months old and has not been vaccinated or
inoculated against rabies;
(4) Does not have on a collar and registration license tag as required
under the provisions of this chapter;
(5) By loud and frequent noise, including: yelping, barking, howling, or
yowling, annoys any person; or
(6) Damages any property not the property of its owner.
§ 4-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8
AO:101
§ 4-8. Pet shops and kennels. [Ord. No. 777, 6-13-1995; Ord. No.
1081, 8-28-2018]
§ 4-9. Pet solid waste — Collection and disposal. [Ord. No. 841,
10-24-2000; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
Every owner or person having control of a domesticated pet animal shall
collect and properly dispose of the animal's solid waste when eliminated.
It is an offense subject to a fee of $25 to allow a domesticated pet animal
to eliminate solid waste on another's private property without permission,
or upon boulevards, parks, school property, or other property used for
education purposes, and fail to properly collect and dispose of such waste.
Prosecution for such offense may only be brought upon complaint signed by
the person who observed the violation.
§ 4-10. Vicious animals. [Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
(1) License required. It shall be unlawful to operate a kennel, or pet shop
anywhere in the City without first securing a license from the City
auditor's office. The annual fee for such license shall be set by
resolution. Kennel licenses shall be in effect, regardless of the date of
issuance, until the following 31st day of December. Kennels may only be
established in areas as designated by the zoning code of the City.
(2) Definitions. The terms "kennels" and "pet shops" shall be construed to
include any establishment for the raising, training, boarding, grooming
or selling of dogs, cats, birds, mice, rats, or other small animals for hire
or profit, or where more than three dogs or cats are harbored or kept.
The keeping and selling of one litter or offspring per year of a family pet
shall be exempt.
(3) Sanitation. Every place used as a kennel or pet shop shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition, and no refuse or waste material shall be
allowed to remain thereon for more than 24 hours. All animals shall be
humanely treated; and any animal having any disease shall be properly
isolated and treated. As a condition of its license, all licensees shall be
deemed to have agreed to allow inspection of the kennel or pet shop at
any time by any Animal Control Officer or other law enforcement officer
of the City or an employee of the State Health Department or the Upper
Missouri District Health Unit. Refusal to allow such inspection shall be
considered grounds for revocation, termination, or refusal to renew the
pet shop or kennel license.
(a) A vicious animal is one which bites, attempts to bite, or threatens bodily
injury to any person or animal while the person or animal is not at the
time trespassing on the property of the animal's owner or doing damage
or injury to the person or property of the owner.
(b) Every person who shall knowingly keep, harbor, or shelter a vicious
animal within the City limits shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
subject to the penalties provided for in this Code.
§ 4-8 WILLISTON CODE § 4-10
AO:102
§ 4-11. Rabid animals. [Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4.16, 3-18-1969; Art.
IV, § 4.28, 3-18-1969; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
§ 4-12. Classification and penalties. [Added 2-11-2020 by Ord. No.
1110]
Violation of §§ 4-5, 4-6, 4-8, 4-10, 4-11, 4-29, and 4-89 shall be Class B
misdemeanors. All other violations shall be classified as infractions, with a
fee schedule established by resolution.
§ 4-13. through § 4-18. (Reserved)
(c) Any animal found to be vicious may be destroyed or may be removed
from the City limits of the City of Williston.
(a) The owner of any animal which has contracted rabies, been subjected to
the same, suspected of having rabies or bitten any person shall, upon
demand of the police department or the health officer, surrender the
animal to the police department to be held in quarantine for
observation for a period determined by the health officer. If, upon
examination, any animal is found to be infected with rabies, the animal
shall be disposed of as directed by the health officer.
(b) No person shall knowingly keep or harbor any animal infected with
rabies or any animal known to have been bitten by a rabid animal, nor
fail to report to the police or to the health officer the existence of an
animal which he knows to be so infected or exposed to infection.
§ 4-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-13
AO:103

ARTICLE II
Dogs and Cats
§ 4-19. Definitions. [Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4.7, 3-18-1969; Ord. No.
720, 8-22-1989; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
As used in this chapter:
AT LARGE — Not under the immediate control of the owner by leash, fence
or other physical restraint.
CAT — Male and female felines, whether neutered or spayed or not.
DOG — Male and female canines, whether neutered or spayed or not.
LEASH — A cord, chain or physical restraint apparatus which holds the dog
a distance of not more than six feet from the owner.
OWNER — Any person or member of the immediate family or household
owning or having custody or responsibility of the care of a dog or a cat.
§ 4-20. License — Required. [Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4.8, 3-18-1969;
Ord. No. 784, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
§ 4-21. Same — Inoculation or vaccination. [Ord. No. 452, Art. III,
§ 4.8, 3-18-1969; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
At the time application is made for the registration license required in
this article, the owner shall state upon a form provided for such purpose
their name and address, description of the dog or cat and date of rabies
inoculation or vaccination. No registration license or renewal of a license
shall be issued for any dog more than six months of age unless a certificate
signed by a qualified veterinarian is filed with the application, showing that
the animal described in the application has been inoculated or vaccinated
against rabies and that such vaccination is current.
§ 4-22. (Reserved)
§ 4-23. Dog and cat tags and licenses. [Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4.9,
3-18-1969; Ord. No. 642, 5-28-1985; Ord. No. 651, 8-13-1985; Ord.
No. 784, 8-22-1995; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
(a) All dogs and cats more than six months old, kept within the City limits,
shall be registered and licensed within 30 days of being brought into
the City.
(b) The provisions of this section do not apply to animals kept temporarily
within the City limits nor to animals brought into the City to participate
in sanctioned parades, shows or performance trials nor to a service
animal, which is any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually
trained to provide assistance to an individual with a disability, nor to
animals owned by the City of Williston or any other political subdivision.
§ 4-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-23
AO:105
§ 4-24. (Reserved)
§ 4-25. (Reserved)
§ 4-26. (Reserved)
§ 4-27. (Reserved)
§ 4-28. (Reserved)
§ 4-29. Number of dogs and cats - Limitation. [Ord. No. 1081,
8-28-2018]
(a) Upon payment of the registration license fee and compliance with the
provisions of § 4-21, the Chief of Police shall issue to the applicant a
registration and license identification tag. The registration license shall
be in effect for the life of the animal.
(b) Every owner shall provide each dog or cat licensed with a collar to
which the registration license tag must be affixed and shall see that the
collar and tag are worn constantly when off the premises where it is
kept.
(c) In case a tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate tag will be issued by the
Chief of Police upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of
the registration license fee and payment of $0.50 for the duplicate.
(d) License tags are not transferable from one animal to another, and no
refund shall be made on an animal license fee because of the death or
loss of an animal or because the animal or its owner leaves the City
before expiration of the registration license period.
(e) Any person having upon their premises or property custody or
responsibility for more than three dogs or cats more than one year old
for the purpose of housing, grooming, breeding, boarding, training or
selling such dogs shall register and license their premises or property
as a kennel.
(a) It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own, or in any way possess more
than three dogs and cats over one year of age upon or about the
premises of any dwelling unit within the City limits of Williston.
(b) Exception. A person may register as an animal foster care recipient at
an animal rescue shelter to keep more than three dogs and cats as part
of a qualified home used by organizations for rescue or sheltering of
abandoned or lost animals. For purposes of this section, a "qualified
home" shall mean a home which has received written approval to house
abandoned or lost animals by or on behalf of a bona fide organization
involved in the rescue or sheltering of abandoned or lost animals, and
which organization has been approved and designated as such by the
City commission. The registration will be granted for such 'foster care'
§ 4-23 WILLISTON CODE § 4-29
AO:106
§ 4-30. through § 4-56. (Reserved)
of animals provided there have been no violations of the provisions
of this chapter resulting in an administrative penalty, infraction, or
criminal violation being imposed on the holder of said registration.
§ 4-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-30
AO:107

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)
ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-30
AO:109

ARTICLE IV
Impoundment
DIVISION 1. Generally
§ 4-57. Designation of pound. [Ord. No. 452, Art. I, § 1, 3-18-1969;
Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
The Board of City Commissioners shall designate a pound area, with
buildings, for the impounding of animals as provided by this chapter. Such
facility shall be listed as a separate budget item but will be under the
direction and control of the Chief of Police.
§ 4-58. Animal control officer. [Ord. No. 452, Art. I, § 4.2, 3-18-1969;
Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
The Chief of Police shall designate an Animal Control Officer who shall
exercise the powers and perform the duties provided for in this chapter. In
the absence of the Animal Control Officer or in the event of their inability to
act, the Chief of Police or any police officer designated by the Chief of Police
shall exercise the powers and perform the duties conferred on the Animal
Control Officer.
§ 4-59. Same — Duties generally. [Ord. No. 452, Art. I, § 4.3,
3-18-1969; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
The Animal Control Officer shall have charge of the City pound and shall
cause the provisions of this chapter to be enforced, under the direction of
the Chief of Police.
§ 4-60. through § 4-66. (Reserved)
DIVISION 2. Dogs and Cats
§ 4-67. Impounding — Generally. [Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4.13,
3-18-1969; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
It is the duty of every police officer to apprehend any dog or cat found at
large or found to be a public nuisance as provided in this article, and to
impound such dog or cat in the City pound or other suitable place. Upon
receiving any dog or cat, the Animal Control Officer shall make a complete
registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such dog and, if licensed, the
tag number, and the name and address of the owner.
§ 4-68. Same — Vicious animals. [Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4.14,
3-18-1969; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
(a) Whenever any person makes a complaint in writing and verified under
oath before the municipal judge that any person is keeping, harboring
or sheltering a vicious animal within the City limits, the judge shall
issue a warrant of arrest or a summons directed to the owner of the
§ 4-57 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-68
AO:111
§ 4-69. Same — Notice to owner. [Ord. No. 452, Art. III, § 4.15,
3-18-1969; Ord. No. 518, 4-13-1976; Ord. No. 530, 3-22-1977; Ord.
No. 642, 5-28-1985; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018; amended 2-11-2020
by Ord. No. 1110]
Not later than the day after the impounding of any animal, the owner shall
be notified of the taking of the animal(s). If the owner is unknown, written
notice shall be posted at the police headquarters or on the City of Williston
website, describing the animal and the place and time of taking. Except
as provided in § 4-68, the owner of any animal so impounded may reclaim
it upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid, and all costs and charges
incurred by the City in impounding and maintenance of the dog, including
any required veterinary care.
§ 4-70. Same — Disposition of unclaimed dogs. [Ord. No. 452, Art.
III, § 4.16, 3-18-1969; Ord. No. 518, 4-13-1976; Ord. No. 642,
5-28-1985; Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
It is the duty of the Animal Control Officer or any other person designated
by the Chief of Police to keep all seized animals impounded for a period of
five days from the date of notice to the owner or first posting of notice as
provided by § 4-69. If, at the expiration of five days from the date of notice to
the owner or the first posting of notice, the animal has not been claimed, it
may be destroyed by the police or given to any person who will permanently
remove it from the City or who is willing to continue to register and license
it.
§ 4-71. through § 4-81. (Reserved)
animal who shall be brought or appear before the judge for trial upon
such charges. If the person accused is found guilty, the judge, in
addition to other penalties provided in this Code, shall issue an order
directing the owner to forthwith surrender the animal to the police
department, and failure to do so constitutes a violation of this Code. In
the event the owner fails to surrender the animal, the animal shall be
seized by the police.
(b) When an animal is seized, it shall be impounded in the City pound for a
period of 10 days, at the end of which time the owner of the animal may,
if the animal is found not to be rabid, make arrangements to
permanently remove it from the City, and if the owner fails to do so
within such time, the animal may be destroyed by the police or given to
any person who will permanently remove it from the City.
§ 4-68 WILLISTON CODE § 4-71
AO:112
ARTICLE V
Fees
§ 4-82. Impounding and licensing fees. [Ord. No. 642, 5-28-1985;
Ord. No. 1081, 8-28-2018]
All fees for the impounding and licensing of animals and the licensing
of kennels shall be established by resolution by the Board of City
Commissioners. A list of the fees shall be filed with the City auditor, Chief of
Police, and City Animal Control Officer.
§ 4-83. through § 4-88. (Reserved)
§ 4-82 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-83
AO:113

ARTICLE VI
Pit Bull Dogs
§ 4-89. Pit bull dogs: keeping prohibited. [Ord. No. 687, 2;
2-4-1987]
It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the
corporate limits of the City of Williston, North Dakota, any pit bull dog;
provided, that pit bull dogs registered with the City on or before the first
day of March, 1987 may be kept within the City subject to the standards
and requirements set forth in § 4-90 of this article. "Pit bull dog" is defined
to mean:
§ 4-90. Keeping of registered pit bulls. [Ord. No. 687, 2, § 2-4-1987;
Ord. No. 1069, 10-24-2017; Ord. No. 1100, § 2-26-2019]
(a) The bull terrier breed of dog.
(b) Staffordshire bull terrier breed of dog;
(c) The American pit bull terrier breed of dog;
(d) The American Staffordshire terrier breed of dog;
(e) Dogs of mixed breed or of other breeds than above listed which breed
or mixed breed is known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers;
(f) Any dog which has the appearance and characteristics of being
predominantly of the breeds of bull terrier, Staffordshire bull terrier,
American pit bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, any other
breed commonly known as pit bulls, pit bull dogs or pit bull terriers, or
a combination of any of these breeds.
(a) The provisions of § 4-89 of this article are not applicable to owners,
keepers or harborers of pit bull dogs registered with the City of
Williston on or before the first day of March 1987, the effective date of
this article. Further, the provisions of this article are not applicable to
owners, keepers or harborers of pit bull dogs registered with the City of
Williston, who qualify as having a disability or require an animal
pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act or federal or state fair
housing laws. All pit bull dogs shall be registered with the City of
Williston and shall be subject to the following standards, except to the
extent the standards violate the Americans with Disabilities Act or Fair
Housing Act of an individual with a disability:
(1) Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit a registered pit bull dog
to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed
with a leash no longer than four feet in length. No person shall
permit a pit bull dog be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash
outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of
the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such
as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all pit bull dogs on a
§ 4-89 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-90
AO:115
leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling
device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other
animals.
(2) Confinement. All registered pit bull dogs shall be securely confined
indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except
when leashed and muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or
structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the
sides. All structures used to confine registered pit bull dogs must
be locked with a key or combination lock when such animals are
within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or
floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the house pit
bull dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of
the City. All such structures must be adequately lighted and
ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(3) Confinement indoors. No pit bull dog may be kept on a porch, patio
or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to
exit such building on its own volition. In addition, no such animals
may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or
when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle
preventing the dog from exiting the structure.
(4) Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit bull dogs
within the City shall within 10 days of the effective day of this
article display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily
readable by the public using the words "Beware of Dog." In
addition, a similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or
pen of such animal.
(5) Insurance. All owners, keepers or harborers of registered pit bull
dogs must within 10 days of the effective date of this article provide
proof to the City auditor of public liability insurance in a single
incident amount of $50,000 for bodily injury to or death of any
person or persons or for damage to property owned by any persons
which may result from the ownership, keeping or maintenance of
such animal. Such insurance policy shall provide that no
cancellation of the policy will be made unless 10 days' written
notice is first given to the Williston City Auditor.
(6) Identification photographs. All owners, keepers or harborers of
registered pit bull dogs must within 10 days of the effective date of
this article provide to the City auditor two color photographs of the
registered animal clearly showing the color and approximate size of
the animal.
(7) Reporting requirements. All owners, keepers or harborers of
registered pit bull dogs must within 10 days of the incident, report
the following information in writing to the City auditor as required
hereinafter:
a. The removal from the City or death of a registered pit bull dog;
§ 4-90 WILLISTON CODE § 4-90
AO:116
b. The birth of offspring of a registered pit bull dog;
c. The new address of a registered pit bull dog owner should the
owner move within the corporate City limits.
(8) Sale or transfer of ownership prohibited. No person shall sell,
barter or in any other way dispose of a pit bull dog registered with
the City to any person within the City unless the recipient person
resides permanently in the same household and on the same
premises as the registered owner of such dog; provided that the
registered owner of a pit bull dog may sell or otherwise dispose of a
registered dog or the offspring of such dog to persons who do not
reside within the City.
(9) Animals born of registered dogs. All offspring born of pit bull dogs
registered with the City must be removed from the City within six
weeks of the birth of such animal.
(10) Irrebuttable presumptions. There shall be an irrebuttable
presumption that any dog registered with the City as a pit bull dog
or any of those breeds prohibited by § 4-89 of this article is in fact a
dog subject to the requirements of this section.
(11) Failure to comply. It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or
harborer of a pit bull dog registered with the City of Williston to fail
to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this
article. Any dog found to be the subject of a violation of this article
shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. In
addition, failure to comply will result in the revocation of the
license of such animal resulting in the immediate removal of the
animal from the City.
(12) Violations and penalties. Any person violating or permitting the
violation of any provision of this article shall upon conviction in
municipal court be fined a sum not more than $500. In addition to
the fine imposed the court may sentence the defendant to
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days.
In addition, the court shall order the registration of the subject pit
bull revoked and the dog removed from the City. Should the
defendant refuse to remove the dog from the City the municipal
court judge shall find the defendant owner in contempt and order
the immediate confiscation and impoundment of the animal. Each
day that a violation of this article continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person
who violates this article shall pay all expenses, including shelter,
food, handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the
enforcement of this article.
§ 4-90 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-90
AO:117
Chapter 5
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
§ 4-90 WILLISTON CODE § 4-90
AO:118
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 5-1. through § 5-10. (Reserved)
§ 5-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1
AO:119

ARTICLE II
Building Code3
§ 5-11. Adoption by reference. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No.
769, 9-13-1994]
The regulations contained in the State Building Code adopted under
N.D.C.C. § 54-21.3-03 are hereby adopted as the regulations governing the
construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of buildings
and other structures within the jurisdiction of the City of Williston, North
Dakota; and it shall be unlawful to erect, construct, alter, move, demolish,
repair or use any building or structure within the jurisdiction of the City in
violation of, or without complying with the appropriate provisions of said
regulations. Copies of such code shall be kept on file in the City Auditor's
office for inspection and three copies shall be furnished to the City Building
Official.
§ 5-12. Definitions. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
§ 5-13. Williston Commercial Building Code.
§ 5-13.1. Amendments. [Ord. No. 997-A §§ 1-5, 5-27-2014]
(1) Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the building code adopted
in this article, it shall be held to mean the City of Williston, North
Dakota.
(2) Wherever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the building code, it
shall be held to mean the attorney for the City of Williston, North
Dakota.
(a) Section 105.2 Work exempt from permit be amended, and as amended
be enacted as follows:
Sec. 105.2. Work exempt from permit.
Exemptions from permit requirements of this code shall not be
deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner
in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws or
ordinances of this jurisdiction. Permits shall not be required for the
following:
Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor
area is not greater than 120 square feet (11 m2).
2. Fences not over 8.5 feet in height.
3. Oil derricks.
3. Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article II include Ordinance Nos. Code 1957,
377, 438, 488, 517, 546, 553, 558, 566, 599, 646.
§ 5-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-13.1
AO:121
4. Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall,
unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or IIIA
liquids.
5. Water tanks supported directly on grade if the capacity is not
greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and the ratio of height to
diameter or width is not greater than 2:1.
6. Sidewalks and driveways.
7. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and
similar finish work.
8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
9. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R-3
occupancy that are less than 24 inches (610 mm) deep, are not
greater than 5,000 gallons (18,925 L) and are installed entirely
above ground.
10. Shade cloth structures constructed for nursery or agricultural
purposes, not including service systems.
11. Swings and other playground equipment accessory to detached
one- and two-family dwellings.
12. Window awnings in Group R-3 and U occupancies, supported by
an exterior wall that do not project more than 54 inches (1,372
mm) from the exterior wall and do not require additional support.
13. Nonfixed and movable fixtures, cases, racks, counters and
partitions not over five feet nine inches (1,753 mm) in height.
(b) Section 107.3.1 Approval of construction documents be amended, and
as amended be enacted as follows:
Sec. 107.3.1. Approval of construction documents.
When the building official issues a permit, the construction
documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as "Reviewed
for Code Compliance." One set of construction documents so
reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set
shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work
and shall be open to inspection by the building official or a duly
authorized representative.
(c) Section 406.3.4 Separation, be added, and as added be enacted as
follows:
Sec. 406.3.4. Separation.
Separations shall comply with the following:
§ 5-13.1 WILLISTON CODE § 5-13.1
AO:122
§ 5-14. Williston Residential Building Code.
§ 5-14.1. Amendments. [Ord. No. 997-B §§ 1-5, 5-27-2014]
1. The private garage shall be separated from the dwelling unit and
its attic area by means of gypsum board, not less than 1/2 inch
(12.7 mm) in thickness, applied to the garage side. Garages beneath
habitable rooms shall be separated from all habitable rooms above by
not less than a 5/8-inch (15.9 mm) Type X gypsum board or equivalent
and 1/2-inch (12.7 mm) gypsum board applied to structures
supporting the separation from habitable rooms above the garage.
Door openings between a private garage and the dwelling unit shall
be equipped with either solid wood doors or solid or honeycomb core
steel doors not less than 13/8 inches (34.9 mm) in thickness, or doors
in compliance with Section 716.5.3 with a fire protection rating of not
less than 20 minutes. Openings from a private garage directly into a
room used for sleeping purposes shall not be permitted. Doors shall
be self-closing and self-latching.
(d) Section 1510 Reroofing be added, and as added be enacted as follows:
Sec. 1510. Reroofing.
The City of Williston adopts and incorporates Appendix N of the 2012
International Building Code into the City's Building Code.
(e) Section 3109 Swimming Pool Enclosures and Safety Devices be added,
and as added be enacted as follows:
Sec. 3109. Swimming pool enclosures and safety devices
The City of Williston adopts and incorporates Appendix O of the 2012
International Building Code into the City's Building Code.
(a) Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit be amended, and as amended
be enacted as follows:
Sec. R105.2. Work exempt from permit.
Permits shall not be required for the following. Exemption from permit
requirements of this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization
for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of
this code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Building:
1. One-story detached accessory structures used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed 120 square feet (18.58 m2).
2. Fences not over 8.5 feet (2,134 mm) high.
3. Retaining walls that are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge.
§ 5-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-14.1
AO:123
4. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or
width does not exceed two to one.
5. Sidewalks and driveways.
6. Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and
similar finish work.
7. Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than 24 inches (610 mm)
deep.
8. Swings and other playground equipment.
9. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall which do not project
more than 54 inches (1,372 mm) from the exterior wall and do not
require additional support.
10. Decks not exceeding 200 square feet (18.58 m2) in area, that are
not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade at any point, are not
attached to a dwelling and do not serve the exit door required by
Section R311.4.
(b) Section 302.5.1 Opening protection be amended, and as amended
be enacted as follows:
Sec. 302.5.1. Opening protection.
Openings from a private garage directly into a room used for sleeping
purposes shall not be permitted. Other openings between the garage
and residence shall be equipped with solid wood doors not less than
13/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, solid or honeycomb-core steel doors
not less than 13/8 (35 mm) thick, or twenty-minute fire-rated doors,
equipped with self-closing device.
(c) Section R312.1.1 Where required be added, and as added be
enacted as follows:
Sec. R312.1.1. Where required.
Guards shall be located along open-sided walking surfaces, including
stairs, ramps, and landings that are located more than 30 inches (762
mm) measured vertically to the floor or grade below at any point within
36 inches (914 mm) horizontally to the edge of the open side. Insect
screening shall not be considered as a guard.
(d) Section R403.1.4.1 Frost protection be added, and as added be
enacted as follows:
Sec. R403.1.4.1. Frost protection.
Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers
and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall be
protected from frost by one or more of the following methods:
1. Extended below the frost line specified in Table R301.2.(1);
2. Constructing in accordance with Section R403.3;
3. Constructing in accordance with ASCE 32; or
§ 5-14.1 WILLISTON CODE § 5-14.1
AO:124
§ 5-15. City Building Official — Office established. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989; Ord. No. 836, 8-8-2000]
§ 5-16. Same — Qualifications. [Ord. No. 72, 11-14-1989]
To be eligible to appointment, the candidate for the position of City Building
Official shall have qualifications acceptable to the Board of City
Commissioners, preferably with experience as an architect, structural
engineer, building official, or superintendent of building construction. He
shall be in good health and physically capable of making the necessary
examinations and inspections. He shall not have any interest whatever,
directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material, process or
device, entering into or used in or in connection with building construction,
alterations removal and demolition.
§ 5-17. Same — Duties generally. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord.
No. 812, 4-13-1999]
4. Erected on solid rock.
Exceptions:
1. Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 600
square feet (56 m2) or less, of light-frame construction, with an eave
height of 10 feet (3,048 mm) or less shall not be required.
2. Protection of freestanding accessory structures with an area of 400
square feet (37 m2) or less, of other than light-frame construction, with
an eave height of 10 feet (3,048 mm) or less shall not be required.
3. Decks not supported by a dwelling need not be provided with
footings that extend below the frost line. Footings shall not bear on
frozen soil unless the frozen condition is permanent.
(e) Section R907 Reroofing be added, and as added be enacted as
follows:
Sec. R907. Reroofing.
The City of Williston hereby adopts Appendix R of the 2012 I.R.C. in its
entirety.
(1) The office of the City Building Official is hereby created, and the
executive official in charge shall be known as the City Building Official.
(2) The City Building Official shall be appointed by the Board of City
Commissioners.
(3) During the temporary absence or disability of the City Building Official,
the appointing authority shall designate an acting City Building Official.
(1) The City Building Official shall devote adequate time to the duties of his
office. He shall receive applications required by this code, issue permits
and furnish the prescribed certificates. He shall examine premises for
§ 5-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-17
AO:125
§ 5-18. through § 5-20. (Reserved)
§ 5-21. Issuance of permits — Declaration of policy. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
In order to provide for adequate ingress and egress to streets, open spaces
for light and air, avoid congestion of population, provide for traffic, utilities,
access of fire-fighting apparatus and improve the public health, safety
and general welfare of the jurisdiction of the City, it is hereby declared
necessary to require certain requisites for issuance of a building permit.
§ 5-22. Contractors — State license and insurance required. [Ord.
No. 726, 11-14-1989]
which permits have been issued and shall make necessary inspections
to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that
construction is prosecuted safely. He shall enforce all provisions of
the building code. He shall, when requested by proper authority, or
when the public so requires, make investigations in connection with
matters referred to in the building code and render written reports on
the same. To enforce compliance with law, to remove illegal or unsafe
conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction or
to require adequate exit facilities in buildings and structures, he shall
issue notices or orders as may be necessary.
(2) Inspections required under the provisions of the building code shall be
made by the City Building Official or his duly appointed assistant. The
City Building Official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized
inspection services, after investigation of their qualifications and
reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the building code
shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and
certified to by a responsible officer of such service.
(3) The City Building Official shall keep comprehensive records of
applications, of permits issued, of certificates issued or inspections
made, or reports rendered, and of notices or orders issued. He shall
retain on file copies of required plans and all documents relating to
building work so long as any part of the building or structure to which
they relate may be in existence.
(4) All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed
from the office of the City Building Official without his written consent.
(5) The City Building Official shall make written reports to his immediate
superior once each month, or more often if required, including
statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated.
(6) The City Building Official shall also serve as plumbing inspector, if no
other provisions for a plumbing inspector are made.
§ 5-17 WILLISTON CODE § 5-22
AO:126
§ 5-23. Permit fees — Generally. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No.
822, 3-28-2000]
No permit nor any amendment thereof as required by the building code
shall be issued until the prescribed fee has been paid or suitable
arrangements have been made for payment. No permit shall be issued
to any contractor who has an amount overdue for prior permits. The
procedures for billing permits shall be adopted by the City Building Official
and require that any contractor who does not pay for a permit at the time
it is picked up will have 30 days to pay the invoice for all permits issued to
such contractor. The fee for any permit shall be established by resolution by
the Board of City Commissioners. The building official shall have the right
to refuse to charge to any contractor who has failed in the past to make full
payment of a properly billed permit fee within 30 days of such billing being
sent.
§ 5-24. (Reserved)
§ 5-25. Effect of other ordinances. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be cumulative and
supplemental to existing ordinances, and in interpreting and applying the
provisions of this article, they shall be held to be the minimum for the
promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity
and general welfare, and such provisions are intended to be cumulative
and supplemental to the zoning ordinances and other ordinances of the
City relating to the use of buildings or premises, and shall not interfere
with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or agreements between
parties, and wherever the provisions of this chapter impose greater
restrictions as to use, or require stricter building requirements that those
required by the zoning ordinance, or other ordinances, the provisions of this
article shall control.
(a) The City Building Official shall issue building permits only to persons
licensed and bonded as contractors by the State of North Dakota.
(1) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the contractor shall file
with the City Building Official a copy of the contractor's license or
renewal which includes the class of license held by the contractor,
and the date on which the license was issued or renewed.
(2) The City Building Official shall further require the contractor to
show proof of liability insurance in the sum of at least $100,000 for
injury or death to one person and $300,000 for injury or death for
more than one person in any accident and $100,000 for property
damage in any one accident arising out of the operation of the
applicant's business.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the City Building Official from
issuing a building permit to any person owning property for work
on his own property.
§ 5-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-26
AO:127
§ 5-26. (Reserved)
§ 5-27. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Wherever in the building regulations it is provided that anything must be
done to the approval of, or subject to the direction of the City Building
Official or any other officer of the City, this shall be construed to give such
officer only the discretion of determining whether the rules and standards
established by ordinance have been complied with; no such provision shall
be construed as giving any officer discretionary powers as to what such
regulations or standards shall be, or power to require conditions not
prescribed by ordinance or to enforce ordinance provisions in an arbitrary
or discriminatory manner.
§ 5-28. Standards. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 812,
4-13-1999; Ord. No. 863, 2-11-2003]
All work on the construction, alteration and repair of buildings and other
structures shall be performed in a good, workmanlike manner according to
accepted standards and practices in the trade. The provisions of the State
Building Code as adopted by the State of North Dakota shall be considered
to be standard and acceptable practice for all matters concerning building
construction not otherwise provided for by ordinance.
§ 5-29. Permit required. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 863,
2-11-2003]
It shall be unlawful to construct any building or structure, other than a
fence, in the jurisdiction of the City where the cost of such construction
exceeds $2,000, or to alter or remodel any building or structure so as to
change the bearing walls, beams, supports, without having first secured a
permit therefor, or in violation of the terms of such permit or in violation
of the terms of this article. Notwithstanding this section, all work on
commercial buildings and replacement or relocation of required exits
requires a permit.
§ 5-30. Jurisdictional area. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
The administration and enforcement of the building code shall include the
"jurisdictional area" within which the City has zoning jurisdiction under
the provisions of Chapter 40-47, and Chapter 40-48 of the North Dakota
Century Code.
§ 5-31. Subsequent amendments, supplements, rules and additions.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 863, 2-11-2003]
The provisions of the State Building Code may be amended, supplemented,
added to and modified; this article shall be implemented by and may be
amended by rules promulgated by the State of North Dakota Construction
Superintendent, pursuant to the authority vested in him through Section
54-21-193.03 of the North Dakota Century Code, and by subsequent
§ 5-26 WILLISTON CODE § 5-31
AO:128
amendments approved by the membership of the International Code
Council, provided that copies of any such amendments, rules promulgated,
and modifications shall be kept on file in the City Auditor's office for
inspection and provided further that three copies shall be furnished to the
building official.
§ 5-32. Regulating the design and construction of metal buildings.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 863, 2-11-2003]
§ 5-33. through § 5-35. (Reserved)4
§ 5-36. Same — Soil types and bearing capacities. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
(a) Section 5-11 of this Code adopting a building code shall be amended to
include the following regulations:
(1) Metal buildings shall have straight sidewalks, which are erected at
a 90° angle to the building foundation.
(2) All siding on metal buildings shall be colored by using a
manufactured process.
(3) All metal buildings shall have a minimum wind load of at least 80
miles per hour wind load and a minimum live roof load of at least 30
pounds per square foot.
(1) All submittals for plan examination of monolithic slabs for buildings or
structures, and for the alteration of a permanent structure which
requires changes in foundation loads and distribution, shall have the
soil types and bearing capacities and foundations shown on the plans.
Sufficient records and data to establish the soil character, nature and
load-bearing capacity shall be available to the department upon
request.
(2) Bearing capacity of soil shall be determined by one of the following
methods:
a. Verified. The soil shall be subjected to field or laboratory tests to
determine its bearing capacity. A report certified by a registered
architect or registered professional engineer, shall be available to
the department upon request.
b. Presumptive.
1. The type of soil under buildings shall be assigned a value not
exceeding the bearing capacity, in pounds per square foot, as
specified by Table I. The type of soil shall be determined by
4. Editor's Note: Former sections 5-33-195-35 pertaining to monolithic concrete slab floor
for pre-engineered buildings, previously codified herein and containing portions of
Ordinance No. 726, were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance No. 863, adopted
February 11, 2003.
§ 5-31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-36
AO:129
exploration made at or adjacent to the site. The actual loading
of the soil shall not exceed the specified bearing capacity
unless verified by a written report [as explained in paragraph
(a) above].
Table I
Presumptive Soil Bearing Values
Type of Soil PSF
1. Wet soft clay; very loose silt; silty
clay
Verified method Ind
53.21(1)
2. Loose fine sand; medium clay; loose
sandy clay soils
2,000
3. Stiff clay; firm inorganic silt 3,000
4. Medium (firm) sand; loose sandy
gravel; firm sandy clay soils; hard
dry clay
4,000
5. Dense sand and gravel; very
compact mixture of clay, sand and
gravel
6,000
6. Rock 12,000
2. The presumed soil bearing values shall be confirmed by
exploring the type of soil to a depth of at least five feet below
the footings during or before construction. The designer shall
submit a report of confirmation to the department upon
request.
3. Where the bearing materials directly under a foundation
overlie a stratum having smaller allowable bearing values,
such smaller values shall not be exceeded at the level of such
stratum.
(3) No foundation of buildings or structures shall be placed upon
unprepared fill material, organic soil, alluvial soil or mud unless
evidence has been presented to the department showing that the
proposed load will be adequately supported. This evidence shall be in
the form of a written report and shall be based on soil analyses, load
tests or other acceptable criteria.
(4) Frost penetration.
a. Footings and foundations shall be placed below the frost
penetration level, but in no case less than 50 inches below adjacent
ground. Such footings shall not be placed over frozen material.
b. Exceptions.
§ 5-36 WILLISTON CODE § 5-36
AO:130
§ 5-36A. Family child day care and group child-care homes for
Group E occupancy requirements. [Ord. No. 810, 4-28-1998; Ord.
No. 863, 2-11-2003; amended 5-13-2019 by Ord. No. 1103]
1. The edges of monolithic slabs constructed on grade need not
be installed below the minimum frost penetration line provided
adequate measures have been taken to prevent frost forces
from damaging the structure.
2. Grade beams need not be installed to the minimum frost
penetration line, provided adequate measures are taken to
prevent frost forces from damaging the structure.
(1) All group child-care homes licensed as of December 31, 1997, shall be
allowed to continue to have up to 30 children in the day-care home as
long as it remains licensed by the State of North Dakota. The City of
Williston Building Official shall have the authority to require any
reasonable modification necessary to provide for the safety of children
in such homes, but such homes need not meet all the State Building
Code E Occupancy Requirements.
(2) Effective January 1, 1998, any newly licensed group child-care homes
shall comply with the E Occupancy Requirement of the State Building
Code as amended or as hereafter may be amended to conform to local
needs.
(3) The State Building Code is hereby amended to provide minimum
requirements for family child care and group child-care facilities being
provided for and housed in existing residential-type occupancies:
a. Interior finish of walls must be a minimum of one-half-inch gypsum.
Ceilings shall have a flame spread rating of not greater than Class I
(0-25) for required vertical exits and passways.
b. Draperies, hangings and other decorative materials suspended
from walls or ceilings shall be noncombustible or flame resistant.
The permissible amount of flame-resistant decorative wall
hangings shall not exceed 10% of the total wall and ceiling area.
c. Maximum floor area allowances per occupant must meet all state
requirements.
d. Exits shall meet the following requirements:
1. All required exits shall be located so as to be discernible and
accessible, with unobstructed access to lead directly to the
street or area of refuge that will not be obstructed or impaired
by fire, smoke or other cause.
2. Exterior exit doors must be a minimum of 36 inches.
§ 5-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-36A
AO:131
3. For 13 or more children, every floor area shall be provided with
two independent exits, to be as remote from each other as
practical.
4. Passageways, aisles and corridors shall have a minimum width
of 36 inches, unless the occupant load is 50 or more, in which
case the minimum width shall be 44 inches.
5. All exit corridors shall be enclosed in fire separation walls
having a fire resistant rating of one hour when serving an
occupant load greater than 30.
6. Each egress door shall be readily openable from the side from
which egress is to be made, without the use of a key or special
knowledge.
7. Interior exit stairways shall not be less than 36 inches wide;
and steps shall have a maximum of eight-inch rise and a
minimum four-inch rise and a minimum nine-inch tread. Stairs
shall have guards and handrails on one side. These stairways
are for occupancies of 50 or less.
8. Exit signs shall be installed according to the local Building
Codes.
e. All facilities shall be provided with one fire extinguisher for each
floor.
f. Automatic smoke detectors shall be installed in all sleeping rooms,
furnace and mechanical rooms and hallways.
g. Nineteen or more children in a home day care shall follow local city
codes under Group E occupancy.
h. All sleeping rooms must have at least one escape window meeting
egress codes.
i. In basement application, the furnace or equipment room must be of
one-hour separation with a fire-rated door.
§ 5-36A WILLISTON CODE § 5-36A
AO:132
ARTICLE III
Electrical Regulations5
§ 5-37. Adoption of laws, regulations and wiring standards of state.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
There are hereby adopted by the City, for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the installation, repair and alteration of electrical
facilities, those certain laws, regulations and wiring standards of North
Dakota adopted November 3, 1971, and the amendments thereto adopted
March 8, 1972. Three copies of said laws, regulations and wiring standards
of North Dakota as adopted November 3, 1971, and the amendments
adopted March 8, 1972, will be filed in the office of the City Auditor, and
said laws, regulations and wiring standards of North Dakota as adopted
November 3, 1971, and the amendments adopted March 8, 1972, are
hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this
section, and the provisions of said laws, regulations and wiring standards of
North Dakota as adopted November 3, 1971, and the amendments adopted
March 8, 1972, shall be controlling in the installation, repair and alteration
of any electrical work within the corporate limits of the City. The City will
hereby rely upon the state electrical inspector for all electrical inspections
and violations of this section.
§ 5-38. Installation permit for television mast — Required. [Ord. No.
726, 11-14-1989]
No person shall erect or install an outside television mast, tower or antenna
in the jurisdiction of the City without having first obtained a permit therefor
from the office of the City Building Official.
§ 5-39. (Reserved)
§ 5-40. Specifications for mast. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
(1) An Underwriters' Laboratories approved lightning arrestor or its
equivalent is required on all antenna lead-ins under this division unless
the lead-in is of the metal shield type with the metal shield properly
grounded.
(2) Lead-in conductors attached to buildings shall be so installed that they
cannot swing within two feet of conductors carrying 250 volts or less, or
within 10 feet of conductors carrying more than 250 volts.
The clearance between lead-in conductors and any conductor forming
part of a lightning rod system shall not be less than six feet. That part
of the lead-in that comes in contact with the building shall be supported
at intervals of not more than 15 feet apart.
5. Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article III include Ordinance Nos. Code 1957
and 473.
§ 5-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-40
AO:133
§ 5-41. Interference with broadcast or reception. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, install or operate, within the
corporate limits of the City, any appliance, device, apparatus or equipment,
the use or operation of which will cause or does cause high frequency or
other oscillations that interfere with radio or television broadcast reception
within the corporate limits of the City.
(3) Conductive supporting poles, masts or other structures supporting
antennae shall be permanently and effectively grounded with a
minimum of No. 10 copper or No. 8 aluminum wire. Poles or masts
which are themselves the sole antenna are exempt from this rule.
(4) No television mast, pole, tower or antenna shall be mounted or attached
to a chimney.
(5) Poles or masts over 12 feet in height must be guyed with three or more
wires to one position. Masts or poles 20 feet to 30 feet must be guyed to
a minimum of two positions with the uppermost guy wires to be within
two feet of the top of the antenna. The angle of the guys must not be
less than 30° from the vertical mast, and the wire used shall be of the
stranded rust-proof type. Anchors shall be of equal strength or stronger
than the combined wires connected to them. All guys fastened to the
ground shall be protected by a sufficient safety guard to a minimum of
eight feet vertically from the ground.
(6) All self-supporting towers, poles or masts shall be designed and
installed to withstand an actual wind velocity of 90 miles per hour.
(7) Metal supporting poles, masts, towers or other structures located on
buildings provided with lightning protection must have an
interconnection between the grounding conductors and the lightning
surge conductors.
(8) Plumbing vent stacks or natural gas piping shall not be used to ground
antenna masts, poles or towers; instead, all grounding conductors shall
be attached preferably to a cold water pipe supplied by an underground
water distribution system, with the water meter properly jumped.
Where not available, grounding conductors shall be attached to a
standard driven copper-weld ground rod six feet long or longer. No
pole, mast, tower or structure used to support antennae shall be so
located that in falling it might fall across a utility distribution line of
over 250 volts. The separation distance between the television antenna
support and the utilities distribution pole line carrying an access of 250
volts measuring along the ground line must be the height of the antenna
plus five feet.
(9) All towers, masts, poles or antennae attached to a building shall be
noncombustible and corrosive-resistant.
§ 5-40 WILLISTON CODE § 5-42
AO:134
§ 5-42. through § 5-52. (Reserved)
§ 5-42 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-42
AO:135

ARTICLE IV
Plumbing6
DIVISION 1. Generally
§ 5-53. through § 5-59. (Reserved)
DIVISION 2. Plumbing Code
§ 5-60. Adopted. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
The installation of, repair of and extension of all plumbing within the City
shall be in accordance with the minimum standards as set forth in the State
Plumbing Code of the State Board of Plumbing, a certified copy of which
shall be placed on file in the office of the City Auditor. The State Plumbing
Code is hereby made a part of this article. (Code 1988)
§ 5-61. Plumbing inspector. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No.
812, 4-13-1999]
The City Building Official shall be charged with the enforcement of this
article and the plumbing code, unless other provisions are made.
§ 5-62. Permits — Required. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Before any person or licensed plumber shall alter, remodel, repair, improve
or install any system of plumbing in any structure in the City of Williston,
he shall first make application to the building official for a permit to do such
work.
Before any licensed sewer and water installer or licensed plumber shall
excavate, lay, relay, tap or repair any water line or sewer pipe, or make any
connection with any water or sewer pipe within any alley, street or public
grounds within the City of Williston, he shall first make application to the
City Engineer for a permit to do such work.
§ 5-63. (Reserved)
§ 5-64. Same — Fees and insurance. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord.
No. 823, 4-11-2000]
Upon approval of an application for a permit under this division and
payment of an appropriate fee or suitable arrangements for payment have
been made, a permit shall be issued. No permit nor any amendment thereof
as required by the building code shall be issued to any contractor who has
an amount overdue for prior permits. The procedures for billing permits
shall be adopted by the City Building Official and require that any
contractor who does not pay for a permit at the time it is picked up will
6. Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article IV include Ordinance Nos. Code 1957,
505, 558, 566 and 680.
§ 5-53 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-64
AO:137
have 30 days to pay the invoice for all permits issued to such contractor.
The fee for any permit shall be established by resolution by the Board of
City Commissioners. The building official shall have the right to refuse to
charge to any contractor who has failed in the past to make full payment of
a properly billed permit fee within 30 days of such billing being sent.
§ 5-65. Covering work. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
No drainage or plumbing system or part thereof shall be covered until it
has been inspected, tested if required, and approved as prescribed in this
division.
§ 5-66. Notification. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
It shall be the duty of the plumber in charge of work to be inspected to
notify the proper administrative authority and the owner, or his authorized
agent, orally, by telephone, or in writing, not less than four working hours
before the work is to be inspected or tested.
§ 5-67. through § 5-68. (Reserved)
§ 5-69. Inspection fees. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Fees, as established by resolution by the Board of City Commissioners, shall
be paid for inspections required by the State Plumbing Code.
§ 5-70. through § 5-84. (Reserved)
DIVISION 3. License
§ 5-85. Master plumber's license — Required. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
No person shall install or connect any system of piping or apparatus or
equipment, designated in this division as "plumbing," or engage in or
conduct the business of plumbing, or do any work on the City sewers and
water mains in the City, without holding a master plumber's license for the
pursuit of such work, issued by the Board of City Commissioners, excepting
persons in the employ of the City or operating under a special contract with
the City for such work.
§ 5-86. Journeyman plumber's license — Required. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
Any person employed by a licensed master plumber to engage in the work
of plumbing, as defined in this division, shall be licensed as a journeyman
plumber by the City.
§ 5-64 WILLISTON CODE § 5-87
AO:138
§ 5-87. Apprentice plumber. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Nothing in this article shall prevent a person from serving as an apprentice
under a licensed plumber, and no master plumber shall allow an apprentice
to work at an installation unless such apprentice is working with a licensed
plumber on the job.
§ 5-88. (Reserved)
§ 5-89. Master and journeyman plumber's license — Application.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
§ 5-90. Sewer and water installer's license — Required. [Ord. No.
726, 11-14-1989]
No person shall install or connect any system of piping or apparatus or
equipment, hereinafter designated as plumbing, or do any work on the City
sewers and water mains in the City of Williston without holding a master
plumber's license or a sewer and water installer's license issued by the
Board of City Commissioners, excepting persons in the employ of the City
or operating under special contract with the City for such work.
§ 5-91. Same — Application. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
An application for a sewer and water installer's license shall be presented to
the Board of City Commissioners with the endorsement of the City Engineer,
and no person shall receive such license who shall not have first furnished
the City Engineer satisfactory evidence of his ability to ply the trade in
accordance with the requirements of the State Plumbing Code. An applicant
for a sewer and water installer's license must present a valid license from
the State Plumbing Board as evidence that he is qualified to work on the
City sewers and water mains.
§ 5-92. Master plumber's and sewer and water installer's licenses —
Insurance. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
No master plumber's license or sewer and water installer's license shall be
issued under this division until and unless the applicant for such license
deposits with the City Building Official a policy or copy thereof of liability
insurance. Said policy of liability insurance shall be acceptable to and shall
(1) An application for a master or journeyman plumber's license shall be
presented to the Board of City Commissioners with the endorsement of
the City Building Official, and no person shall receive such license who
shall not have first furnished the City Building Official with satisfactory
evidence of his ability to ply the trade in accordance with the State
Plumbing Code.
(2) An applicants for a master or journeyman plumber's license must
present a valid license from the State Plumbing Board as evidence that
he is qualified to engage in plumbing.
§ 5-87 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-92
AO:139
meet the approval of the Board of City Commissioners and shall be issued
by a company licensed to do business within the state, indemnifying the
applicant in the sum of at least $100,000 for injury or death to one person
and $300,000 for injury or death for more than one person in any one
accident and $100,000 for property damages in any one accident arising
out of the operation of the applicant's business. The policy of insurance
so deposited shall contain a clause obligating the company insuring the
same to give at least 10 days' written notice to the City Building Official
before cancellation or expiration thereof. The license for the operation of
said applicants shall expire upon the lapse or termination of said policy. A
certification of insurance shall be filed with the City annually to indicate
that the policy is effective.
§ 5-93. Plumber's and water and sewer installer's licenses —
Issuance. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
After proper application for license, favorable endorsement of the City
Building Official as designated in § 5-1989 of this article or favorable
endorsement of the City Engineer as designated in § 5-91 of this article and
favorable action by the Board of City Commissioners granting such license,
and payment of the license fee, the City Building Official shall issue a license
to engage in or conduct the business of plumbing to the person making
application for same.
§ 5-94. Same — Fees. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 863,
2-11-2003]
The license fee for plumbers shall be established by resolution by the Board
of City Commissioners. All plumbing licenses shall expire the first day of
March of each year.
§ 5-95. License card. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Each licensed plumber and sewer and water installer shall be furnished
each year with a license card by the City and such identification shall be
carried on his person at all times.
§ 5-96. Use of license by others; recordation of place of business.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
No person licensed to carry on the business of plumbing or to do any work
on the City sewers or water mains shall allow his name to be used by any
other person for the purposes of obtaining any permits or doing any work
under the license and every person shall have recorded in the office of the
building official his place of business and the names of all persons employed
by him.
§ 5-97. Failure to renew. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
If a master or journeyman plumber or sewer and water installer fails to
renew his license within 30 days of the date of expiration, it shall be
§ 5-92 WILLISTON CODE § 5-97
AO:140
necessary to make application through the regular procedure stated in this
division and pay the initial fee again.
§ 5-98. Revocation. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
The Board of City Commissioners shall have the right to revoke any annual
license issued by the City in case of violation of any of the ordinances,
rules and regulations governing plumbing, sewers, water mains and house
plumbing in the City.
§ 5-99. through § 5-109. (Reserved)
§ 5-97 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-99
AO:141

ARTICLE V
Fuel-Gas Piping Code7
§ 5-110. Adoption of regulations by reference. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989; Ord. No. 812, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 863, 2-11-2003]
The current edition of the State adopted Fuel and Gas Code, as adopted
by the State, is hereby adopted as the fuel-gas piping code for the City of
Williston for regulating the installation of fuel-gas piping in or in connection
to the erection, construction, enlargement, alternation, repair, moving,
removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height area,
and maintenance of all buildings or structures within the jurisdiction of the
City of Williston.
§ 5-111. Subsequent amendments, deletions and supplements.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 812, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 863,
2-11-2003]
Three copies of the fuel-gas piping code as contained within the current
edition of the State adopted Fuel and Gas Code as adopted by the State,
shall be on file and open for inspection to the public in the office of the
City Auditor of the City of Williston. Subsequent amendments, deletions, or
supplements to the State adopted Fuel and Gas Code are hereby adopted
and incorporated as fully set out at length provided that such amendments,
deletions, or supplements are filed with the City Auditor and said provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the jurisdictional limits held by the City
of Williston.
§ 5-112. License required. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation or business
of gas piping without first obtaining from the City of Williston a license to
do so.
§ 5-113. Insurance. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
No license shall be issued under this division until and unless the applicant
for license deposits with the City Building Official a policy or copy thereof
of liability insurance. Said policy of liability insurance shall be acceptable
to and shall meet the approval of the Board of City Commissioners and
shall be issued by a company licensed to do business within the state,
indemnifying the applicant in the sum of at least $100,000 for injury or
death to one person and $300,000 for injury or death for more than one
person in any one accident and $100,000 for property damages in any one
accident arising out of the operation of the applicant's business. The policy
of insurance so deposited shall contain a clause obligating the company
insuring the same to give at least 10 days' written notice to said City
Building Official before cancellation or expiration thereof. The license for
7. Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article V include Ordinance No. 677.
§ 5-110 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-113
AO:143
the operation of said applicant shall expire upon the lapse or termination of
said policy. A certification of insurance shall be filed with the City annually
to indicate that the policy is still effective.
§ 5-114. License fee. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
The license fee for fuel-gas piping shall be established by resolution by the
Board of City Commissioners.
§ 5-115. License card. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Each licensed fuel-gas installer shall be furnished each year with a license
card by the City and such identification shall be carried on his person at all
times.
§ 5-116. Failure to renew. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
If a fuel-gas installer fails to renew his license within 30 days of the date
of expiration, it shall be necessary to make application through the regular
procedure stated in this division and pay the initial fee again.
§ 5-117. Revocation. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
The Board of City Commissioners shall have the right to revoke any annual
license issued by the City in case of any violations of the fuel-gas piping
regulations.
§ 5-118. Permits — Required. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No.
863, 2-11-2003]
A permit shall be obtained prior to the installation, removal, alteration, or
repair of fuel-gas piping systems as required by the provisions of Chapter 3
of the State adopted Fuel and Gas Code.
§ 5-119. Permit fees. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 824,
4-11-2000]
No permit under this section shall be issued until the fee has been paid
or suitable arrangements have been made for payment of such fee. No
permit nor any amendment thereof as required by the building code shall be
issued to any contractor who has an amount overdue for prior permits. The
procedures for billing permits shall be adopted by the City Building Official
and require that any contractor who does not pay for a permit at the time
it is picked up will have 30 days to pay the invoice for all permits issued to
such contractor. The fee for any permit shall be established by resolution by
the Board of City Commissioners. The building official shall have the right
to refuse to charge to any contractor who has failed in the past to make full
payment of a properly billed permit fee within 30 days of such billing being
sent.
§ 5-113 WILLISTON CODE § 5-120
AO:144
§ 5-120. Notification. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
It shall be the duty of the person in charge of work to be inspected to notify
the proper administrative authority and the owner, or his authorized agent,
orally, by telephone, or in writing, not less than four working hours before
the work is to be inspected or tested.
§ 5-121. through § 5-201. (Reserved)
§ 5-120 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-121
AO:145

ARTICLE VI
Mechanical Installations8
DIVISION 1. Generally
§ 5-202. through § 5-208. (Reserved)
DIVISION 2. Uniform Mechanical Code
§ 5-209. Adopted — Generally. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No.
812, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 863, 2-11-2003]
The current edition of the State Adopted Mechanical Code, together with
Appendix A, as adopted by the State, is hereby adopted as the mechanical
code for the City of Williston for regulating the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, removal, demolition, conversion,
occupancy, equipment, use and maintenance of heating or ventilation
systems in all buildings or structures within the jurisdiction of the City of
Williston.
§ 5-210. (Reserved)9
§ 5-211. Subsequent amendments, deletions and supplements.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 863, 2-11-2003]
Three copies of the State Adopted Mechanical Code shall be on file and open
for inspection to the public in the office of the City Auditor of the City of
Williston. Subsequent amendments, deletions, or supplements to the State
Adopted Mechanical Code are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully set
out at length provided that such amendments, deletions, or supplements are
filed with the City Auditor and said provisions thereof shall be controlling
within the jurisdictional limits held by the City of Williston.
§ 5-212. (Reserved)
§ 5-213. Permit fees. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 825,
2-11-2000]
Upon approval of an application for a permit under this division, such
permit shall be issued when an appropriate fee is paid or suitable
arrangements for payment are made. No permit nor any amendment thereof
as required by the building code shall be issued to any contractor who has
an amount overdue for prior permits. The procedures for billing permits
shall be adopted by the City Building Official and require that any
contractor who does not pay for a permit at the time it is picked up will
8. Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article VI include Ordinance Nos. 484, 494,
558, 566 and 681.
9. Editor's Note: Former § 5-210, previously codified herein and containing portions of
Ordinance No. 726, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 863, adopted February
11, 2003.
§ 5-202 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-213
AO:147
have 30 days to pay the invoice for all permits issued to such contractor.
The fee for any permit shall be established by resolution by the Board of
City Commissioners. The building official shall have the right to refuse to
charge to any contractor who has failed in the past to make full payment of
a properly billed permit fee within 30 days of such billing being sent.
§ 5-214. through § 5-225. (Reserved)
DIVISION 3. License
§ 5-226. Master mechanic's license — Required. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
No person shall erect, install, alter, repair, relocate or replace any heating,
ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration systems, incinerators or other
miscellaneous heat-producing appliances, designated in this article as a
"mechanical system," or engage in such business, or do any such work
within the jurisdiction of the City without holding a master mechanic's
license for the pursuit of such work, issued by the Board of City
Commissioners.
§ 5-227. Journeyman mechanic's license — Required. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
Any person who is employed by a master mechanic and who does
mechanical work, as defined in this division, shall be licensed as a
journeyman mechanic by the City.
§ 5-228. Master and journeyman mechanic's licenses — Application.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
An application for a master or journeyman mechanic's license shall be
presented to the Board of City Commissioners with the endorsement of the
City Building Official, and no person shall receive such license who shall not
have first furnished to the City Building Official with satisfactory evidence
of his ability to ply the trade in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the mechanical code of the City for the conduct of such work.
§ 5-229. Qualifications generally. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
(1) A person must have three years as an apprentice mechanic and two
years as a journeyman mechanic, for a total of five years' experience in
the mechanical systems trade before applying for a master mechanic's
license.
(2) A person who is a graduate of a two year qualified trade school in
mechanical systems, and who has two years' experience as a
journeyman mechanic, may apply for a master mechanic's license.
(3) A person with one year at a qualified trade school in a mechanical
systems class, and one year as an apprentice mechanic, may apply for a
§ 5-213 WILLISTON CODE § 5-229
AO:148
§ 5-230. Other qualifications. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
When a mechanic applies for a different qualification from those specified
in this division, he shall furnish to the City Building Official a certificate of
his ability from his employer and references that may be deemed necessary
that the applicant is capable of applying the skills required.
§ 5-231. Insurance. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
No master mechanic's license shall be issued under this division until
and unless the applicant for such license deposits with the City Building
Official a policy or copy thereof of liability insurance. Said policy of liability
insurance shall be acceptable to and shall meet the approval of the Board
of City Commissioners and shall be issued by a company licensed to do
business within the state, indemnifying the applicant in the sum of at least
$100,000 for injury or death to one person and $300,000 for injury or
death for more than one person in any one accident and $100,000 for
property damages in any one accident arising out of the operation of the
applicant's business. The policy of insurance so deposited shall contain
a clause obligating the company insuring the same to give at least 10
days' written notice to the said City Building Official before cancellation
or expiration thereof. The license for the operation of said applicant shall
expire upon the lapse or termination of the said policy. A certification of
insurance shall be filed with the City annually to indicate that the policy is
effective.
§ 5-232. Issuance. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
After proper application for a license under this division, favorable
endorsement of the City Building Official and favorable action by the Board
of City Commissioners granting such license, and payment of the license
fee, the City Building Official shall issue a license to an applicant to ply the
trade of master or journeyman mechanic.
§ 5-233. Fees. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 863, 2-11-2006]
The fees for master and journeyman mechanic's licenses shall be
established by resolution by the Board of City Commissioners. All master
and journeyman mechanic's licenses shall expire on the first day of March
of each year.
§ 5-234. License card. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Each licensed mechanic shall be furnished each year with a license card by
the City and such identification shall be carried on his or her person at all
times.
journeyman mechanic's license; after two years' training as a licensed
journeyman mechanic, that person may apply for a master mechanic's
license.
§ 5-229 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-235
AO:149
§ 5-235. Licensee's name not to be used by others. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
No person licensed to carry on the business of mechanics or to do any
mechanical work in the City shall allow his name to be used by any other
person for the purpose of obtaining any permits or doing any work under
a license under this division, and every person shall have recorded in the
office of the City Building Official his place of business and the names of all
licensed mechanics employed by him.
§ 5-236. Failure to renew. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
If a master or journeyman mechanic fails to renew his license within 30 days
of the date of expiration, it shall be necessary to make application through
the regular procedures stated in this division and pay the initial fee again.
§ 5-237. Revocation. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
The Board of City Commissioners, after giving an opportunity to be heard,
shall have the right to revoke any annual license issued by the City in the
case of violation of any provision of this article, or rules or regulations
governing mechanics within the jurisdiction of the City.
§ 5-238. Apprentices. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Nothing in this division shall prevent a person from serving as an apprentice
under a licensed mechanic, and no licensed mechanic shall allow an
apprentice to work at an installation unless such apprentice is working with
a licensed mechanic on the job.
§ 5-239. through § 5-249. (Reserved)
§ 5-235 WILLISTON CODE § 5-239
AO:150
ARTICLE VII
Property Maintenance10
DIVISION 1. Generally
§ 5-250. through § 5-256. (Reserved)
DIVISION 2. Property Maintenance Code
§ 5-257. through § 5-266. (Reserved)
DIVISION 3. Dangerous Buildings
§ 5-267. Defined. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
(a) All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects
shall be deemed "dangerous buildings":
(1) Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members
lean, list or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing
through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its
base.
(2) Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33% or more
damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or
50% damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or
outside walls or covering.
(3) Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or
roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(4) Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as
to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals or the general
health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the City.
(5) Those which have become or are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe,
unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities
essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or
are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the
health, morals, safety or general welfare of those living therein.
(6) Those having inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic
or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes or
other means of communication.
(7) Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they
may fall and injure members of the public or property.
10.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article VII include Ordinance Nos. Code
1957, 462 and 634.
§ 5-250 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-267
AO:151
§ 5-268. Declared public nuisances. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
All dangerous buildings within the terms of § 5-267 are hereby declared
to be public nuisances and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished as
provided in this division.
§ 5-269. Enforcement — City Building Official. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
(8) Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary or
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the
people of this City.
(9) Those buildings existing in violation of any provision of the building
code of this City or any provision of the fire prevention code or
other ordinances of the City.
(a) The City Building Official shall:
(1) Inspect any building, wall, or structure about which complaints are
filed by any person to the effect that a building, walls or structure is
or may be existing in violation of this division.
(2) Inspect any building, wall or structure reported (as provided in §
5-273) by the fire or police departments as probably existing in
violation of the terms of this division.
(3) Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee and all
other persons having an interest in such building, as shown by the
records in the office of the register of deeds of the county, of any
building found by him to be a dangerous building within the
standards set forth in § 5-267 that: (a) The owner must vacate,
repair or demolish such building in accordance with the terms of
the notice and this division; (b) the owner or occupant must vacate
such building or may have it repaired in accordance with this
notice and remain in possession; provided that any person notified
under this paragraph to repair, vacate or demolish any building
shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding 60 days, as may
be necessary to do, or have done, the work or act required by the
notice provided for herein.
(4) Set forth in the notice provided for in paragraph (3) of this section a
description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement
of the particulars which make the building or structure a
dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in
such condition as to comply with the terms of this division within
such length of time, not exceeding 60 days, as is reasonable.
(5) Report to the Board of City Commissioners any non-compliance
with the notice provided for in paragraphs (3) and (4) of this
section.
§ 5-267 WILLISTON CODE § 5-269
AO:152
§ 5-270. Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
§ 5-271. Violations of this division. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
(6) Appear at all hearings conducted by the Board of City
Commissioners and testify as to the condition of dangerous
buildings.
(7) Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows:
"This building has been found to be a dangerous building by the
City Building Official. This notice is to remain on this building until
it is repaired, vacated or demolished in accordance with the notice
which has been given the owner, occupant, lessee or mortgagee
of this building and all other persons having an interest in said
building as shown by the records of the Register of Deeds of the
County of Williams. It is unlawful to remove this notice until such
notice is complied with."
(a) The following standards shall be followed in substance by the City
Building Official in ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
(1) If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will
no longer exist in violation of the terms of this division, it shall be
ordered repaired.
(2) If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it
dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its
occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
(3) In any case where a dangerous building is 50% damaged or
decayed or deteriorated from its original value or structure, it shall
be demolished, and in all cases where a building cannot be repaired
so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this division
it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a
fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this
division or any ordinance of the City or statute of the state, it shall
be demolished.
(1) The owner of any "dangerous building" who shall fail to comply with any
notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish such building given by any
person authorized by this article to give such notice or order shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and every day subsequent to such notice in
which the owner shall fail to comply with any notice or order as above
stated shall be deemed a separate offense.
(2) The occupant or lessee in possession who fails to comply with notice to
vacate and who fails to repair such building in accordance with any
notice given as provided for in this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and every day subsequent to such notice in which the
§ 5-269 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-271
AO:153
§ 5-272. Demolition permit. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
In all cases set forth in Chapter 5, Article VII, Division 3 of this Code
requiring demolition, the owner of such property shall first obtain a
demolition permit from the City Building Official.
§ 5-273. Bond requirements. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
For any building demolished within the jurisdiction of this chapter, all
debris and concrete foundation shall be removed, and any basement filled,
compacted and graded. The performance of the required improvements
and/or lot restoration shall be secured by a bond in an amount determined
to be sufficient by the City Building Official, the minimum bond to be not
less than $1,000. The bond shall be posted as guarantee that the alterations,
improvements, or restoration shall in all respects be complied with in a
manner sufficient to meet the requirements of this article, and that the
construction, improvements, alterations, or restoration will be completed
within the time period set forth. The form of the bond shall be cash,
cashier's check, corporate surety, or personal surety. In case of personal
surety, said bond shall be approved by the Board of City Commissioners.
§ 5-274. Reports — Fire, police and health departments. [Ord. No.
726, 11-14-1989]
All employees of the fire, police and health departments shall make written
reports to the City Building Official of all buildings or structures which
are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings as defined in §
5-267. Such reports must be delivered to the City Building Official within 24
hours of discovery of such buildings by any employee of the above-named
departments.
§ 5-275. Enforcement — City Attorney. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
occupant or lessee shall fail to comply with any notice or order as above
stated shall be deemed a separate offense.
(3) Any person removing the notice provided for in § 5-269(7) shall be
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(a) The City Attorney shall:
(1) Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices
provided for in § 5-269(3) and (4) and the order provided for in §
5-276(4).
(2) Appear at all hearings before the Board of City Commissioners in
regard to dangerous buildings.
(3) Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms
and provisions of this division.
§ 5-271 WILLISTON CODE § 5-276
AO:154
§ 5-276. Same — Board of City commissioners. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
§ 5-277. Mailing and posting of orders, etc., when owner absent
from City. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee or
mortgage of a dangerous building is absent from the City, all notices or
orders provided for in this division shall be sent by registered mail to the
owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest
in such building as shown by the land records of the Register of Deeds of the
county to the last-known address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates.
Such mailing and posting shall be deemed adequate service.
§ 5-278. Appeal from order of Board. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
(a) The Board of City Commissioners shall:
(1) Upon receipt of a report of the City Building Official as provided for
in § 5-269(5), give written notice to the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in such
building as shown by the records of the Register of Deeds of the
county, to appear before it on the date specified in the notice to
show cause why the building or structure reported to be a
dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated or demolished
in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the City
Building Official's notice provided for in § 5-269(3).
(2) Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the City Building
Official or the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or any other
person having an interest in such building as shown by the records
of the Register of Deeds of the county shall offer relative to the
dangerous building.
(3) Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant
to paragraph (2) as to whether or not the building in question is a
dangerous building within the terms of this § 5-267.
(4) Issue an order based upon findings of fact made pursuant to
paragraph (3) commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee
and all other persons having an interest in such building as shown
by the records of the Register of Deeds of the county to repair,
vacate, or demolish any building found to be a dangerous building
within the terms of this division; provided that any person so
notified, except the owners, shall have the privilege of either
vacating or repairing such dangerous building.
(5) Report to the City Attorney the names of all persons not complying
with the order provided for in paragraph (4) of this section.
§ 5-276 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-278
AO:155
§ 5-279. Failure to comply with order of Board. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
If the owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee fails to comply with the order
of the Board of City Commissioners, or fails to appeal to the district court
within 30 days as provided in § 5-278, the City through its officers and
employees shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated or
demolished as ordered by the Board of City Commissioners and shall cause
the costs of such repair, vacation or demolition to be charged against the
land on which such building existed by special assessment or as a municipal
lien, or shall cause such cost of removal to be levied as a special tax against
the land upon which such building stands or did stand or to be recovered in
a suit at law against the owner.
§ 5-280. City employees, etc., not personally liable. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
No officer, agent or employee of the City shall render himself personally
liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this
division. Any suit brought against any office, agent or employee of the City
as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties
under this division shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final
determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 5-281. (Reserved)
DIVISION 4. Property Maintenance 5-1Control Program
Established
11
(1) The Board of City Commissioners shall serve upon the owner, occupant,
mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in any
dangerous building ordered by the Board to be repaired, vacated or
demolished a copy of its order, such notice to be served upon such
owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee within 10 days after the issuance
of such order. Such owner, occupant, mortgagee or lessee shall
thereafter have 30 days from the date of the service of such order upon
him in which to appeal from such order to the district court of the
county, or to take such other legal steps to enjoin the enforcement of
such order as he may deem proper.
(2) Any person desiring to appeal from any order issued by the Board of
City Commissioners under and by virtue of this division shall file an
undertaking in the sum of at least $500, to be approved by the City
Auditor, and conditioned that the appellant will prosecute the appeal
without delay and will pay all costs that may be adjudged against him in
the district court. Such undertaking shall be payable to the City.
11.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 634, 882, 1001, 1054.
§ 5-278 WILLISTON CODE § 5-282
AO:156
§ 5-282. Property maintenance control program established. [Ord.
No. 1085, 6-26-2018]
The City has determined that control of tall grasses and noxious weeds
is necessary for the health and safety of City residents. There is hereby
established a program for the control of weeds and mowing of grasses
within the jurisdictional limits of the City. The control program, as
established, may operate in conjunction with any other control authority or
officer.
The Property Maintenance Board is hereby established. The Board shall
consist of three members appointed by the Board of City Commissioners
that are qualified electors residing within the City. Terms for all members of
the Board are for four years or until a successor is appointed and qualified.
Terms of appointment shall be staggered so as to allow no more than
two to expire each year. Terms of office shall begin on January 1. Board
members shall assume office at the first regular Board meeting following
the beginning of their term or at the first regular Board meeting following
their appointment if filling a vacancy. The Control Officer may serve as a
voting member of the Board if the Control Officer is qualified to do so.
The Board shall hear any appeal of a notice from the Control Officer. Timing
of the hearing and hearing procedures may be determined by the Board.
Any decision rendered by the Board may be appealed to the Board of City
Commissioners.
The City may also designate a Control Officer. The Control Officer shall
execute the duties and meet the requirements outlined herein.
§ 5-283. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1085, 6-26-2018]
As used in this article:
CONTROL — To prevent the spread of any noxious weed, designated by
the Control Officer, by seed or any other propagating part, and mowing of
grasses in excess of eight inches.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Control Officer, such officer's assistants, and
the Board.
CONTROL OFFICER — The person or persons appointed or designated by
the Board of City commissioners to be responsible for the operation and
enforcement of this article within the City.
ERADICATE OR ERADICATION — To destroy a plant so that it is not viable.
LANDOWNER — Any owner of Federal, State, municipal or private land,
under statutory authority or otherwise, but does not include a lessee, renter,
tenant, operator or an owner of any easement or right-of-way.
NOXIOUS WEED — Any plant propagated by either seed or vegetative parts
which is determined by the Control Officer after consulting with the State
cooperative extension service, or the Board after consulting with the County
§ 5-282 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-283
AO:157
extension agent, to be injurious to public health, land or other property. It
includes all weeds defined by State law as "noxious weeds."
OPERATOR — The person chiefly responsible for or in possession of the
land, whether for self-benefit, or for the benefit of the landowner or another.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, company, society,
association, the State, or any department, agency or subdivision thereof,
or any other entity which occupies or owns land or which causes noxious
weed seeds or propagating parts to be disseminated or transported in North
Dakota.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE BOARD — The Board designated by the City
Commission to make determinations on property maintenance issues on
behalf of the Board of City Commissioners.
TALL GRASSES — All varieties of grasses and all weeds that are not defined
by State law of the Board as noxious weeds and are in excess of eight inches
in height.
§ 5-284. Control and eradication of noxious weeds and mowing of
grasses. [Ord. No. 1085, 6-26-2018]
Noxious weeds and tall grasses exceeding eight inches in height growing
within the jurisdictional limits of the City are hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and it shall be the duty of every person in charge of or
in possession of land in this City, whether as landowner, lessee, renter or
tenant, to eradicate or to control the spread of noxious weeds on those
lands, including the adjacent rights-of-way, by mowing grasses in excess of
eight inches. Medians separating street sections shall not be included in the
requirements of this article.
§ 5-285. Powers and duties of Board and the control officer. [Ord.
No. 1085, 6-26-2018]
(a) The Board shall exercise the powers and duties authorized by this
ordinance including:
(1) Meet at least once each year.
(2) Establish the time and place of regular Board meetings.
(3) Call special meetings as needed.
(4) Keep minutes of its meetings and a complete record of all official
acts.
(5) Act as an appeal Board for appeals of property maintenance
determinations.
(b) The Control Officer shall exercise the powers and duties as follows:
(1) The Control Officer shall cause a notice of the requirements of this
article to be published in the official newspaper of the City once per
§ 5-283 WILLISTON CODE § 5-285
AO:158
month during the growing season. These publications shall serve
as notice to all landowners, occupants, or persons in charge of
maintaining any parcel of land within the City limits to comply
with the requirements of this article. These publications shall also
serve as the official notice to property owners to cut weeds and
tall grass. Other methods of notification, such as the media and the
City's website, may also be used to notify landowners, occupants,
or persons in charge to control tall grass and weeds.
(2) Whenever any person owning, occupying or in charge of any
premises, lot, or parcel of land within the jurisdiction of the City,
shall fail, neglect, or refuse to mow the property in accordance with
the provisions of this article, the Control Officer shall arrange for
the nuisance to be abated.
(c) If the Control Officer determines that land within the City jurisdiction
contains noxious weeds, the Control Officer may serve upon the
landowner written notice either personally or by certified mail,
requiring the landowner to control the noxious weeds within the time
period prescribed by the Control Officer in the notice. The notice shall
contain at least the following items:
(1) The minimum remedial requirements.
(2) The time within which the landowner must meet the minimum
remedial requirements.
(3) That the landowner may be subject to penalties provided under
state law and City ordinance if the landowner fails to comply with
the remedial requirements.
(4) A Statement of costs if the landowner fails to control the noxious
weeds.
(5) That the landowner may challenge the notice of the Control Officer
by submitting to the City in writing within seven days of the date of
the notice a request that the Board hold a hearing on the matter in
accordance with this article.
(d) Should the landowner fail to control the noxious weeds within the time
period specified in the notice sent by the Control Officer, the Control
Officer may cause the noxious weeds to be controlled in the absence of
a written appeal by the landowner or if any appeal has been denied.
(e) When the City has affected the eradication, cutting or control of noxious
weeds or tall grasses, the actual cost thereof including allowable City
administrative expenses and any penalties approved by the City
Commission, if not paid by the owner, must be charged and assessed
against the property upon which the noxious weeds or tall grasses were
eradicated, cut or controlled. The Control Officer shall prepare and the
Board shall approve an assessment list showing the costs against each
lot or tract to be assessed. The assessment list shall be forwarded to the
§ 5-285 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-285
AO:159
§ 5-286. Property owner responsibility. [Ord. No. 1085, 6-26-2018]
§ 5-287. (Reserved)
DIVISION 5. Snow and Ice Removal
§ 5-288. Duty of lot owners or occupants. [Ord. No. 1055,
12-27-2016]
Board of City Commissioners for official action. All procedures under
State law for certification, appeal, payment and collection of special
assessments shall apply.
(f) The Control Officer may delegate all or some of the duties required
under this section to other City staff. The City may contract with any
person or company to perform services for the City in the control of
noxious weeds and tall grasses.
(a) Except as noted below, it is the duty of every person owning, occupying
or in charge of any premises, lot or parcel of land to cut, eradicate, or
control any noxious weeds or tall grasses to prevent them from
becoming a public nuisance, a fire hazard and/or unsightly.
(1) Steep slopes exceeding 30° (two horizontal feet to one vertical foot)
that are difficult or hazardous to mow, as an option, may be planted
with selected grass varieties used by the North Dakota Department
of Transportation to control erosion. The property owner must
apply to the City for a waiver of the grass control requirements for
each property where this alternative is to be used. Control of
noxious weeds is mandated by State law and no waiver for control
of noxious weeds is allowed. A waiver request shall be submitted to
the Control Officer or other designated official. The City official
shall review the request, inspect the site and either approve or
deny the request.
(2) The City has no jurisdiction over the control of grass and weeds on
property or easements owned or controlled by state and federal
agencies.
(3) State law limits City action related to grass and weeds on
agriculturally zoned land to the control of noxious weeds.
(a) It shall be the duty of the occupant of every lot or parcel of land, and the
owner of every unoccupied lot or parcel of land in the City adjoining any
street, and along which sidewalks have been built, within the
commercial business district to clear, the sidewalks on or along such
parcels of land of all accumulations of snow and ice within 10 hours
after the same has fallen or accumulated, or by 2:00 p.m. in the
afternoon of the following day if the same shall have fallen or
accumulated in the nighttime, and to keep such sidewalks free from
accumulations of snow and ice.
§ 5-285 WILLISTON CODE § 5-288
AO:160
§ 5-289. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1055, 12-27-2016]
(b) It shall be the duty of each such occupant or owner that are not in the
commercial business district to clear the sidewalks on or along the lots
or parcels of land occupied or owned by him, of all snow and
accumulations of ice within seven days.
(c) It shall be the duty of the owner of a lot or parcel of land where the
sidewalk runs to an alley or other public way to clear snow and ice from
said surface for one-half of the distance across the alley or public way
or to the gutter line of the street.
(d) No person shall dispose of snow removed from private property by
placing it on any public street unless you are located in the downtown
district. Persons cleaning or causing to be cleaned any parking lot,
service station, yard or court shall remove snow to a suitable disposal
point not on any public right-of-way, at his own expense.
(1) Violations.
(a) Any person, whether owner or occupant, who refuses or fails to
keep sidewalks upon the property free from snow and ice shall be
guilty of an offense and shall be subject to a penalty as follows:
(b) Upon failure of the property owner to remove snow and ice, the
City may take action to remove snow and ice and assess the
property, as provided in N.D.C.C. § 40-29-18 through 40-29-21, and
further described below.
1. If snow and ice are not removed from sidewalks within the time
and in the manner provided by the ordinances of the
municipality, the snow and ice may be removed by or under the
direction of the Street Commissioner and the necessary
expense thereof shall be chargeable against the abutting
property. Annually, on or before May first, the Street
Commissioner shall make and file in the office of the City
Auditor a list showing separately the amount chargeable and
assessed against each lot and tract and stating the name of the
owner of each such lot or tract so far as known to the Street
Commissioner.
2. The City Auditor shall give notice of the hearing and
confirmation of the report of snow and ice removal and of the
assessment therefor at the first regular June meeting of the
Governing Body. Such notice shall notify all persons objecting
to the report and assessment to appear and present their
objections. The notice shall be published once each week for
two consecutive weeks in the official municipal newspaper and
the last publication shall not be less than eight days before the
date set for the hearing.
§ 5-288 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-289
AO:161
3. At the meeting of the Governing Body in June or at such later
meeting as the hearing and confirmation of such assessment
may be adjourned to, the Governing Body shall consider and
hear any objection to the snow and ice removal assessment, or
to any part thereof, and after revising or correcting the
assessment, if revision or correction is necessary, it shall
approve and confirm the same. The City Auditor shall attach to
the assessment list the City Auditor's certificate that the list is
correct as confirmed by the Governing Body and shall file the
same in the City Auditor's office, and shall certify the
assessment in the manner provided in Section 40-24-11 of the
North Dakota Century Code.
4. From the time any assessment list provided for in this chapter
is approved by the Governing Body, the assessment, with
interest and penalties thereon, shall be and remain a
permanent lien upon the property upon which the assessment
is levied until the assessment is paid in full, and it shall have
precedence over all other liens except general taxes. Such lien
shall not be divested by any judicial sale, and no mistake in the
description of the property assessed nor in the name of the
owner thereof shall defeat such lien if the property assessed
can be identified by the description in the assessment list.
(2) Penalties. Any person who interferes with or hinders the removal of said
snow and ice by the City, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
§ 5-289 WILLISTON CODE § 5-289
AO:162
ARTICLE VIII
Regulating The Accumulation of Junk12
§ 5-290. Definitions. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
As used in this article:
BLIGHTED STRUCTURE — Shall include without limitation, any dwelling,
garage, or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, warehouse or any other
structure or part of a structure which because of fire, wind, or other natural
disaster, or physical deterioration is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor
useful for the purpose for which it may have been intended.
BUILDING MATERIALS — Shall include without limitation, lumber, bricks,
concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electric wiring or
equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar concrete or
cement, nails, screws or any other materials used in constructing any
structure.
JUNK — Includes without limitation parts of machinery or motor vehicles,
unused furniture, stoves, refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of
wood, metal or any other castoff material of any kind, whether or not the
same could be put to any reasonable use. Such term shall not include
firewood neatly stacked.
JUNK AUTOMOBILE — Shall include, without limitation, any motor vehicle
which is not licensed for use upon the highways of the State of North Dakota
for a period in excess of 60 days and shall also include, whether licensed
or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period
in excess of 60 days; provided that there is excepted from this definition
unlicensed, but operative vehicles, which are kept as the stock in trade of a
regularly licensed and established new or used automobile dealer.
PERSON — Shall include all natural persons, firms, co-partnerships,
corporations and all associations of natural persons, incorporated or
unincorporated, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or
employee. All persons who violate any of the provisions of this chapter,
whether as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, servant or employee shall,
except as herein otherwise provided, be equally liable as principals.
TRASH AND RUBBISH — Shall include any and all forms of debris not
herein otherwise classified.
VEHICLE HULK — The remnant or remains of a motor vehicle which is
inoperative and cannot be mechanically operated without the addition of
vital parts or mechanism and the application of a substantial amount of
labor to effect repairs, or any wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle,
or any part thereof.
12.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article VIII include Ordinance Nos. 552 and
656.
§ 5-290 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-291
AO:163
§ 5-291. Purpose. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish,
junk, junk automobiles, vehicle hulks, building materials, and the
maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the
jurisdiction of the City tends to result in blighted and deteriorated
neighborhoods, the increase of criminal activity, the spread of vermin and
disease, and is contrary to the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare of the community.
§ 5-292. Unlawful to store or accumulate junk, trash, or rubbish.
[Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 1002, 9-9-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or
accumulation of junk, junk automobiles, vehicle hulks, trash or rubbish on
any private property in the City except upon the business premises of a duly
licensed junk dealer, junk buyer or junk gatherer.
§ 5-293. Unlawful to store building materials except on business
premises. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or
accumulation of building materials on any private property except in a
completely enclosed building or except where such building materials are
part of the stock in trade of a business located in said property, or except
when such materials are being used in the construction of a structure on
the property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the City,
and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time.
§ 5-294. Unlawful to maintain blighted structure. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or
vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store, or
warehouse unless the same is kept securely protected to prevent entrance
thereto by unauthorized persons or unless such structure is in the course of
construction in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the City,
and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time.
§ 5-295. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 726,
11-14-1989; Ord. No. 1002, 9-9-2014]
The City Building Official's Department shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this article which may be cited as the
"Junk Ordinance." If the City Building Official is unable to administer and
enforce this article, the City Police Department's Code Compliance Officer
shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article.
§ 5-291 WILLISTON CODE § 5-296
AO:164
§ 5-296. Penalties. [Ord. No. 1002, 9-9-2014]
The penalty for violation of this article shall be a Class B misdemeanor.
When the City has effected the removal of junk, trash, rubbish, building
materials, or blighted structures, or has paid for their removal, the actual
cost thereof, including any necessary costs for placing the property in a
condition to allow the removal of junk, trash, rubbish, building materials,
or blighted structures, if not paid by said owner within 10 days, shall
be charged and assessed against the property upon which removal was
necessary. An assessment list showing the lots or tracts to be assessed with
the cost against each lot or tract shall be prepared as are other special
assessment lists, and shall be approved by the City Commission. Such
assessments shall be subject to the same procedure for certification to the
County Auditor, payment and collection as are other special assessments
under State law.
§ 5-297. through § 5-300. (Reserved)
§ 5-296 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-297
AO:165

ARTICLE IX
House Moving Permits13
§ 5-301. Permit required; application. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
No licensed building mover or any other individual shall attempt or begin to
move any building or structure to or from a location within the jurisdiction
of the City until the City Building Official has issued a permit to do so.
§ 5-302. Inspections. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Prior to the granting of any permit, the City Building Official or his
designated representative shall inspect the building to determine the
condition of the building. The building official shall itemize the work
required to bring the building up to the standards to comply with all
ordinances and codes of the City. Any expenses incurred by the City
Building Official in making this inspection shall be paid by the applicant as
part of his application fee.
§ 5-303. (Reserved)
§ 5-304. Conditions for granting permit. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
(a) Each permit granted shall be granted only upon the following
conditions:
(1) Prior to the start of any work at the relocation site or the placement
of the building or structure upon the site, a building permit shall be
obtained from the City Building Official.
(2) All excavation, site preparation, and foundation work at the
relocation site within the jurisdiction of this Code shall be complete
prior to moving the building or structure onto the site.
(3) In case of moving a building off a location site within the
jurisdiction of this Code, a lot restoration plan shall be required to
obtain said permit. Such plans shall include removal of debris,
foundation removal, basement filling, compaction and grading.
(4) A time limit shall be established when work must be completed.
Separate time limits may be established for interior and exterior
work.
(5) The performance of the required improvements and/or lot
restoration shall be secured by a bond in an amount determined to
be sufficient by the City Building Official, the minimum bond to be
not less than $1,000. The bond shall be posted as guarantee that
the alteration, improvements, or restoration shall in all respects be
13.Editor’s Note: See also City of Williston Code of Ordinances, Ch. 9, Art. II for additional
house moving regulations. Editor’s Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article IX includes
Ordinance No. 609.
§ 5-301 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-304
AO:167
§ 5-305. through § 5-311. (Reserved)
complied with in a manner sufficient to meet the requirements of
this article, and that the construction, improvements, alterations,
or restoration will be completed within the time period set forth.
The form of the bond shall be cash, cashier's check, corporate
surety, or personal surety. In case of personal surety, said bond
shall be approved by the Board of City Commissioners.
§ 5-304 WILLISTON CODE § 5-305
AO:168
ARTICLE X
Pole Buildings14
§ 5-312. Definitions. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building or main use of the premises or
property.
POLE BUILDING — A structure primarily supported by wood columns
embedded in the earth.
§ 5-313. Uses allowed. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 741,
5-28-1991]
§ 5-314. Specifications. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 863,
2-11-2003]
§ 5-315. Inspection required. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Prior to issuing a building permit for any pole building, the City Building
Official shall determine that the proposed pole building will be generally
compatible with adjacent properties or other properties in the geographical
vicinity. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the building official as it
relates to the construction of pole buildings may appeal such decision. The
procedure for appeal shall be that same procedure as set forth in the City of
Williston Zoning Ordinance.
(1) A pole building may be constructed only in areas zoned A: Agricultural,
M-1: Light Industrial, M-2: Heavy Industrial, M-3: Industrial Park, R-1E:
Rural Estate, or R-1A: Rural Residential under the City of Williston
Zoning Ordinance.
(2) A pole building may only be used for cold storage, warehousing, or as
an accessory building.
(1) All pole buildings shall have vertical sidewalls constructed of
prefinished colored 29 gauge steel or according to span.
(2) The roof of any pole building shall have a minimum pitch of two inches
for each 12 inches of slope.
(3) All pole buildings shall be constructed according to the State Building
Codes.
14.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article X include Ordinance No. 647.
§ 5-312 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-315
AO:169

ARTICLE XI
Board of Appeals15
§ 5-316. Establishment. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
There is hereby created a Board of Appeals, which shall consist of five
members and a first and second alternate, each to be appointed for a
term of three years by the Board of City Commissioners. The Board of
Appeals shall address all questions of interpretation and enforcement of the
building code of the City of Williston. It is the intent of this article that all
questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to the
City Building Official and matters shall come before the Board only upon
appeal of the decision of the City Building Official.
§ 5-317. Appeal of decision. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
Any person, upon receiving an adverse decision from the City Building
Official, shall have the right to bring an appeal before the Board of Appeals.
The aggrieved party, within 30 days of obtaining the decision from the City
Building Official, shall file a written notice of appeal specifically stating the
issue or issues to be raised on the appeal. The notice of appeal shall be
filed with the City Building Official. Upon receiving such notice of appeal,
the City Building Official shall forward the notice to the chairman of the
Board of Appeals and the chairman shall promptly set a time for hearing
the appeal. The Board of Appeals shall have 30 days from the date of the
hearing to render a decision either affirming, modifying, or overturning the
original decision of the City Building Official.
§ 5-318. Powers and duties. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its
affairs and in keeping with the provisions of this article. The rules shall be
approved by the Board of City Commissioners. Meetings shall be held at
the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board of Appeals
may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings
shall be open to the public. The Board of Appeals shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if
absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep record of its
examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record
and shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board. All decisions of
the Board of Appeals shall be supported upon written findings of fact and
forwarded to the Board of City Commissioners.
15.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances contained in Article XI include Ordinance No. 670.
§ 5-316 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-319
AO:171
§ 5-319. Board of appeals having powers of City Building Official on
appeals. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989]
In exercising its powers, the Board of Appeals may, so long as such action is
in conformity with the terms of the building code, reverse or affirm, wholly
or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination
appealed from and may make such order, requirements, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers
of the City Building Official from whom the appeal is taken.
The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Appeals shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or determination
to the administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to affect any
variation in the application of the building code of the City of Williston.
§ 5-320. Determination of Board of Appeals reviewable. [Ord. No.
726, 11-14-1989]
Every decision of the Board of Appeals is subject to review in the following
manner:
A decision of the Board of Appeals may be appealed to the Board of
City Commissioners by either the aggrieved applicant or by any officer,
department, board, or bureau of the City. The appeal must be filed with
the City Auditor within 15 days after notice of the decision of the Board of
Appeals. The Board of City Commissioners shall fix a time, within 30 days,
for the hearing of the appeal and shall give due notice of the hearing to the
parties. The Board of City Commissioners shall decide the appeal within a
reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney
at the hearing of the governing body on the appeal. The concurring vote of
four members of the Board of Commissioners of the City shall be necessary
to reverse the decision of the Board of Appeals, in whole or in part, or to
modify the order, decision, or determination appealed.
§ 5-319 WILLISTON CODE § 5-320
AO:172
ARTICLE XII
Violations
§ 5-321. Penalties. [Ord. No. 726, 11-14-1989; Ord. No. 938,
7-12-2011; Ord. No. 1005; Ord. No. 1006]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of
Articles I through XVI of Buildings and Building Regulations of the City of
Williston or commits an act prohibited by this ordinance shall be subject
to the following recourse by the City of Williston, its authorized officials or
employees, cumulatively in the order indicated:
(a) Civil penalty.
(1) Officials or employees of the City of Williston authorized to enforce
this ordinance in whole or in part may commence, or cause to be
conducted, administrative proceedings at which, or as a result of
which, civil penalties may be imposed which shall not exceed a
$1,500 penalty per violation. Each day any violation shall exist shall
constitute a separate offense.
(2) In addition to the authority to commence administrative
proceedings for the purpose of imposing civil penalties, a judicial
action seeking a civil penalty may be commenced by the City of
Williston's Attorney, who may also seek any other relief available to
the City of Williston. The City of Williston may institute an action
for a civil penalty regardless of whether the City of Williston has
commenced or will commence an administrative code enforcement
proceeding or a criminal enforcement action. The City of Williston's
judicial action for a civil penalty may seek an award for attorney's
fees, costs, expenses and disbursements.
(3) When the City of Williston obtains a judgment in an action for civil
penalties, in addition to the appropriate methods of enforcement of
the judgment established in the North Dakota Rules of Civil
Procedure, such judgment for penalties shall be assessed and
collected in the same manner as general City of Williston taxes.
(4) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, the City of
Williston may maintain an action or proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to restrain by
injunction the violation of any ordinance of the City of Williston's
Attorney, regardless of the fact that the ordinance may provide a
penalty for such violation.
(5) Action for relief authorized in this section may be brought alone or
in conjunction with any other relief or remedy available to the City
of Williston, including but not limited to civil penalty, attorney's
fees, costs, expenses and disbursements.
(b) Administrative enforcement of civil penalty.
§ 5-321 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-321
AO:173
(1) Based upon an oral or written complaint that has been received by
the City of Williston, the Building Official shall investigate and
determine if such violation exists and issue a notice of violation
served upon the owner, tenant, or other responsible party.
(2) The notice shall be served by personal service, registered mail, or
certified mail with return receipt requested.
(3) When calculating a reasonable time for compliance, the Building
Official shall take into consideration the following criteria:
a. Type and degree of violation;
b. Intent to comply if intent has been expressed;
c. Procedural requirements for obtaining a permit to carry out
corrective action;
d. Complexity of corrective action; or
e. Any other circumstance beyond the control of the responsible
party.
(4) The Building Official may extend the date of compliance upon the
receipt of a written request from the responsible party in violation
prior to the date of compliance.
(5) If the responsible party fails to complete the corrective action(s)
issued by the Building Official for the noticed violation(s) prior to
the date of compliance, the Building Official shall issue a written
order identifying the type and degree of violation and whether the
responsible party is subject to any civil penalty as defined in §
5-321(a).
(6) Any party affected by a notice of violation may file a written appeal
stating in what respects the specific grounds for reversal or
modification of the order. The appeal with the required filing fee
shall be filed with the City Auditor's Office prior to 4:30 p.m. on the
given compliance date. In the absence of a timely appeal, the
findings of the Building Official contained in the notice of violation
shall be deemed true and final.
(7) Jurisdiction is granted to the Board of Adjustments to hear and
determine such appeals in accordance with, Chapter 5, Article XI
Board of Appeals.
(8) Any person failing to comply, with a final order of the Building
Official, or, in the event of an appeal to the Board of Adjustments,
shall be subject to a cumulative penalty or forfeiture in the amount
described herein per day for each violation from the date set for
compliance in the final order until the order is complied with.
§ 5-321 WILLISTON CODE § 5-321
AO:174
§ 5-322. Violation of stop work order. [Ord. No. 1005; Ord. No.
1006]
§ 5-323. through § 5-325. (Reserved)
(c) Criminal penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
terms or provisions of Articles I through XI of Buildings and Building
Regulations of the City of Williston or commits an act prohibited by this
ordinance shall be cited with a B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of up to $1,500, or by imprisonment up to 30 days, or
both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. The
court shall have the power to suspend the sentence and to revoke the
suspension thereof. Each day any person, firm or corporation violates
any provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. This
penalty section is to be read in accordance with Section 114 of the
International Building Code.
(d) Enforcement of criminal penalty. The Building Official or other official
designated by the City of Williston City Commission may request the
City Attorney to institute the prosecution of any violation of the terms or
provisions of Articles I through XVI of Buildings and Building
Regulations of the City of Williston or commits an act prohibited by this
ordinance.
(a) Whenever the City Engineer, Building Official, or their designee, in
accordance with Section 115 of the International Building Code, finds
any site maintained contrary to the provisions of the municipal code of
the City of Williston, the City Engineer, building official, or their
designee is authorized to issue a stop work order for the site in violation
and any and all other sites permitted by the same permitee or
contractor until the permitee or contractor completes and complies
with the corrective action(s) in order to bring the site into compliance
with the municipal code of the City of Williston.
(b) The issuance of a stop work order by the City Engineer, Building
Official, or their designee shall be in writing and issued to the permittee
or assigned contractor and in accordance with the provisions of §
5-321(b). Upon issuance, the cited work shall immediately cease. The
stop work order shall state the reasons for the order and the conditions
under which the cited work will be permitted to resume.
(c) Any violation of the stop work order, further defined in Section 115 of
the International Building Code and § 5-322 herein, shall be subject to
the following penalties as provided in § 5-321.
§ 5-321 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-323
AO:175

ARTICLE XIII
International Property Maintenance Code, 2012, Adopted
§ 5-326. Code adopted. [Ord. No. 763, § I, 8-24-1993; Ord. No. 812,
4-13-1999; Ord. No. 1023, 8-25-2015]
The Uniform Housing Code (1997 Edition) adopted in § 5-326 Code Adopted,
be replaced by the 2012 International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC).
This article shall be enforced on a complaint basis only or if the building
official has actual notice of an unsafe, hazardous, or unsanitary condition.
The 2012 International Property Maintenance Code is adopted in its
entirety.
§ 5-327. Conflicting ordinances. [Ord. No. 763, § II, 8-24-1993; Ord.
No. 1023, 8-25-2015]
The following Williston City ordinances shall not apply to residential
property to the extent they conflict with the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2012, hereby adopted. These ordinances shall remain in
effect as to all other properties.
§ 5-328. through § 5-529. (Reserved)
(a) Ordinance No. 634 - Weed Ordinance;
(b) Section 12-62 - Abandoning Refrigerators;
(c) Article VII - Division 3, Dangerous Buildings;
(d) Article VIII - Regulating the Accumulation of Junk;
(e) Section 5-317 of Article XI - Appeal of Decision.
§ 5-326 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-328
AO:177

ARTICLE XIV
Illicit Discharges To Storm Sewer System
§ 5-530. Introduction/purpose/applicability. [Ord. No. 906, Art. IV,
7-8-2008]
The USEPA National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit program administered by the North Dakota Department of Health
(NDDH) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain an NPDES permit for the discharge
of stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The
City of Williston is subject to the NPDES Permit Program and is required to
obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit.
As a condition of the City's MS4 permit, the City is obliged to adopt and
enforce an illicit discharge to storm sewer system ordinance.
The purpose of this article is to safeguard persons, protect property, and
prevent damage to the environment in the City of Williston. This article will
also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the
illicit discharge of materials into the City's waterways.
The requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulations, or
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be
considered to take precedence.
§ 5-531. Definitions. [Ord. No. 906, Art. IV, 7-8-2008]
ALLOWABLE NON-STORMWATER — Discharges from firefighting
activities, fire hydrant flushing, potable water sources, waterline flushing,
uncontaminated groundwater, foundation or footing drains where flows are
not contaminated with process materials such as solvents, springs, riparian
habitats, wetlands, irrigation water, air conditioning condensate.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The City Engineer, building inspector, or their
designee.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical connection or other topographical
or other condition, natural or artificial, which is not specifically authorized
by ordinance or written rule of the City of Williston, which causes or
facilitates, directly or indirectly, an illicit discharge.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Shall be any discharge into the MS4 that is not
stormwater or allowable non-stormwater.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — The conveyance
or system of conveyances including storm sewers, roadways, road with
drainage systems, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, constructed
channels, and storm drains owned or operated by the City of Williston.
NDDH — The North Dakota Department of Health.
§ 5-530 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-531
AO:179
PERMITTEE — The City of Williston.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, concentrated animal feeding operation, or landfill leachate collection
system. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture
or agricultural stormwater runoff.
PROPERTY — Shall include but is not limited to real estate, fixtures,
facilities, and premises of any kind located upon, under, or above the real
estate.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — One or more persons that control, or are in
possession of, or own property. Responsible parties shall be jointly and
severally responsible for compliance with this article and jointly and
severally liable for any illicit discharge from the property controlled,
possessed, or owned.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snow melt, and surface runoff and
drainage.
§ 5-532. Illicit connections prohibited. [Ord. No. 906, Art. IV,
7-8-2008]
(a) The connection, use, maintenance, or continued existence of any illicit
connection shall constitute a violation of this article.
(b) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitations, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection
was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the
time of connection.
(c) All detection activities permitted under this article shall be conducted
by the enforcement officer.
(d) The City of Williston shall not be responsible for the direct or indirect
consequences to persons or property of an illicit discharge, or
circumstances which may cause an illicit discharge, undetected by the
City.
(e) Every responsible party has an absolute duty to monitor conditions on
property owned or controlled by them, to prevent all illicit discharges,
and to report to the enforcement officer illicit discharges which the
responsible party knows or should have known to have occurred.
Failure to comply with any provision of this article is a violation of this
article.
(f) Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any responsible
party has information of any known or suspected illicit discharge, the
responsible party shall immediately take all necessary steps to ensure
the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such discharge at the
responsible party's sole cost.
§ 5-531 WILLISTON CODE § 5-532
AO:180
(g) If the illicit discharge consists of hazardous materials, the responsible
party shall also immediately notify emergency dispatch services.
(h) If the illicit discharge emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also
retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken
to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
(i) A report of an illicit discharge shall be made in person or by phone or
facsimile or e-mail to the enforcement officer immediately but in any
event within 24 hours of the illicit discharge; notification in person or
by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed or
emailed to the enforcement officer.
(j) Any person or entity shall also report to the City any illicit discharge or
circumstance which such person or entity reasonably believes pose a
risk of an illicit discharge.
(k) Upon receiving a report pursuant to the previous sections, or otherwise
coming into possession of information indicating any actual or
imminent illicit discharge, the enforcement officer shall conduct an
inspection of the site as soon as reasonably possible and thereafter shall
provide to the responsible party, and any third party reporter, a written
report of the conditions which may cause or which have already caused
an illicit discharge. The responsible party shall immediately commence
corrective action or remediation and shall complete such corrective
action or remediation within 24 hours.
(l) The enforcement officer shall be permitted to enter and inspect
property subject to regulation under this section as often as is
necessary to determine compliance with this section. If a responsible
party has security measure that requires identification and clearance
before entry to its property or premises, the responsible party shall
make the necessary arrangements to allow access by the enforcement
officer.
(m) A responsible party shall allow the enforcement officer ready access to
all parts of the property for purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination, and copying of records related to the suspected, actual, or
imminent illicit discharge, and for the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.
(n) The enforcement officer shall have the right to set up on any property
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the enforcement officer
to conduct monitoring and/or sampling related to a suspected, actual,
or imminent illicit discharge.
(o) The enforcement officer shall have the right to require any responsible
party, at responsible party's sole expense, to install monitoring
equipment and deliver monitoring data or reports to the enforcement
officer as the enforcement officer directs. The sampling and monitoring
§ 5-532 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-532
AO:181
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the responsible party at responsible party's sole
expense. All devices shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(p) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access
property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the responsible party at the written or oral order of the enforcement
officer and shall not be replaced. The cost of clearing such access shall
be borne by the responsible party.
(q) An unreasonable delay in allowing the enforcement officer access to a
property is a violation of this article.
(r) If the enforcement officer has been refused access to any part of the
property from where an illicit connection and/or illicit discharge to a
municipal storm sewer is occurring, suspected, or imminent, and is able
to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation
of this article, or there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspections and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect
the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the
enforcement officer may seek assistance from local law enforcement to
assist with the issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(s) If it is determined that an illicit discharge is imminent or has occurred,
the actual administrative costs incurred by the City in the enforcement
of this article shall be recovered from the responsible party. The
enforcement officer shall submit an invoice to the responsible party
reflecting the actual costs and wages and expenses incurred by the City
for the enforcement activities undertaken. Failure to pay charges
invoiced under this article within 30 days of billing shall constitute a
violation of this article.
(t) Emergency suspension. The enforcement officer may, without prior
notice, suspend storm sewer system access to a property when such
emergency suspension is necessary to stop an ongoing or imminent
illicit discharge. If the responsible party fails to immediately comply
with an emergency suspension order, the enforcement officer shall take
such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize the illicit
discharge. All costs of such action shall be recovered from the
responsible party for the property identified as the source of the illicit
discharge.
(u) Non-emergency suspension. If the enforcement officer detects or is
informed of circumstances which could cause an illicit discharge but
such illicit discharge is not ongoing or imminent, and if the suspension
of storm sewer system access would reasonably be expected to prevent
or reduce the potential illicit discharge, the enforcement officer shall
notify the responsible party of the proposed suspension of storm sewer
system access and the time and date of such suspension. Notice to one
§ 5-532 WILLISTON CODE § 5-532
AO:182
§ 5-533. Watercourse protection. [Ord. No. 906, Art. IV, 7-8-2008]
§ 5-534. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 906, Art. IV, 7-8-2008]
Any violation of this article is subject to the following remedies or penalties:
responsible party for the property shall be sufficient notice to all.
Remediation of the circumstances shall avoid a violation of this article
provided that no illicit discharge occurs. In the alternative, the
responsible party may request a meeting with the enforcement officer
for the purpose of presenting information which the responsible party
believes will show that remediation is unnecessary, and if the
enforcement officer finds such information unsatisfactory, the
enforcement officer shall issue a final written order of suspension
including the date and time of suspension and such order may be
appealed as provided hereinafter. Any physical action to reinstate storm
sewer system access to property subject to such order prior to
obtaining a court order of relief shall be deemed a violation of this
article. An order of suspension shall preclude charging the responsible
party with a municipal infraction as provided hereinafter or taking any
other enforcement action permitted by statute or ordinance.
(a) Watercourse protection. Every person owning property through which a
watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain
that part of the watercourse within the property below the elevation of
the 100-year flood free of trash, debris, grass clippings, or other
organic wastes and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly alter the quality of water flowing through the watercourse.
In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures
will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of
the watercourse.
(a) If any official with the City of Williston discovers a violation of this
article, the City may elect to send notice to the offending parties that
the site will be cleaned by the City of Williston and the offending party
shall be billed accordingly.
(b) If the person owning the property disagrees with the City's decision as
to its finding of responsibility for the illicit discharge as defined in this
section, they may appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals
established under §§ 5-316, 5-317, 5-318, 5-319, and 5-320.
The above-listed sections as applicable to violations of the building code
and decisions made by the building inspector shall also be applicable
to violations of the storm sewer ordinance and decisions made by duly
authorized City officials.
(c) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions
of Article I through XI of Buildings and Building Regulations of the City
of Williston shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of up to $500
§ 5-532 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-534
AO:183
§ 5-535. through § 5-539. (Reserved)
or by imprisonment up to 30 days, or both. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 5-534 WILLISTON CODE § 5-535
AO:184
ARTICLE XV
Construction Site Erosion and Sediment Control
§ 5-540. Introduction/purpose/applicability. [Ord. No. 906, Art. V,
7-8-2008]
The USEPA National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit program administered by the North Dakota Department of Health
(NDDH) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain an NPDES permit for the discharge
of stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The
City of Williston is subject to the NPDES Permit Program and is required to
obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit.
As a condition of the City's MS4 permit, the City is obliged to adopt and
enforce a construction site erosion and sediment control ordinance.
The purpose of this article is to safeguard persons, protect property, and
prevent damage to the environment in the City of Williston. This article will
also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the
design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other
activity that disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of
earth on land in the City of Williston.
Unless specifically exempted, these regulations apply to all lands within the
City of Williston and its extraterritorial limits, in which vegetative cover is
removed or disturbed or which fill material has been brought onto the site
requiring stabilization.
The requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulations, or
other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose
higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be
considered to take precedence.
§ 5-541. Definitions. [Ord. No. 906, Art. V, 7-8-2008]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPS) — Control measures which
prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to water of the state.
CLEARING — Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover.
DRAINAGE WAY — Any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the
site.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PERMIT — A permit issued by the
City of Williston for construction, excavating, clearing, and/or any land
disturbing activity.
GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL PLAN — A set of plans indicating the
specific measures and sequencing used to control sediment and erosion on
a construction site.
§ 5-540 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-541
AO:185
LAND DISTURBANCE/DISTURBING ACTIVITY — Any type of activity that
involves grading, clearing, and/or moving topsoil, rock, or any other natural
surface from property. This also includes bringing fill material onto the site.
NDDH — The North Dakota Department of Health.
NDDOT — The North Dakota Department of Transportation.
PERIMETER CONTROLS — Erosion control measures which protect
neighboring properties from non-stormwater discharges.
STABILIZATION — The use of practices that prevent exposed soils from
eroding including but not limited to grass, trees, sod, mulch, or other
materials which prevent erosion and retain moisture.
SWPPP (STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN) — A plan that
is designed to minimize the accumulated erosion and sediment runoff at
a site during construction activities and includes provisions for additional
pollution prevention. The SWPPP is required by NDDH for stormwater
permit for construction areas disturbing one acre or more.
WATERCOURSE — Any body of water including, but not limited to, lakes,
ponds, streams, and other bodies of water delineated by the City of
Williston.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Any and all surface waters that are contained
in or flow in or through the State of North Dakota as defined in NDCC
61-28-02. This definition includes all watercourses, even if they are usually
dry.
§ 5-542. Erosion and sediment control permit(s). [Ord. No. 906, Art.
V, 7-8-2008]
(a) Unless otherwise exempt, an erosion and sediment control permit will
be required prior to persons engaging in a land disturbing activity
exceeding 5,000 square feet.
(b) City of Williston, Guide to Erosion and Sediment Control Practices shall
be utilized in the preparation of all documents necessary to obtain an
erosion and sediment control permit.
(c) The following requirements must be met before the permit will be
granted for land disturbing activities between 5,000 square feet and
one acre:
(1) Approval of a Grading and Erosion Control Plan (GECP) and
issuance of the erosion and sediment control permit by the City of
Williston Engineering Department.
(d) The following requirements must be met before the permit will be
granted for land disturbing activities of one acre or more:
(1) Approval of a Grading and Erosion Control Plan (GECP) and
issuance of the erosion and sediment control permit by the City of
Williston Engineering Department.
§ 5-541 WILLISTON CODE § 5-542
AO:186
§ 5-543. Grading and erosion control plan for land disturbing
activities between 5,000 square feet and one acre. [Ord. No. 906,
Art. V, 7-8-2008]
Grading and Erosion Control Plan (GECP) for land disturbing activities
between 5,000 square feet and one acre will include:
§ 5-544. Grading and erosion control plan (GECP) for land
disturbing activities of one acre or more. [Ord. No. 906, Art. V,
7-8-2008]
Grading and Erosion Control Plan (GECP) for land disturbing activities of
one acre or more will include:
(2) General Permit for Stormwater Discharge Associated with
Construction Activity (NDR10-000) as required by the NDDH for
land disturbing activities of one acre or more.
(3) Approval of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan by the City of
Williston Engineering Department. The SWPPP is a requirement of
the General Permit for Stormwater Discharge Associated with
Construction Activity.
(e) All permits will be issued for a period of one year but may be renewed
upon a site inspection and approval by the City Engineer or building
inspector.
(f) Persons not subject to an erosion and sediment control permit but who
are engaging in a land disturbing activity are subject to applying
effective best management practices (BMPs) as well as the penalties set
forth in § 5-549.
(g) Exemptions. No erosion and sediment control permit will be required
for the following activities:
(1) Any emergency activity that is immediately needed for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources.
(2) Any nursery and agricultural operations.
(3) Land disturbing activity less than 5,000 square feet.
(a) Plan must include a legible map identifying area(s) to be disturbed,
slopes, and resources to be protected and also must include nearest
downstream stormwater inlets, drainage ways, and neighboring
property lines. The plan must include the BMPs that will be utilized for
erosion and sediment control. The plan must also include the name,
address, and phone numbers of the parties responsible for the project
site. This plan must be approved by City Engineer and BMPs must be in
place before any grading begins. An erosion and sediment control
permit will be issued by the City of Williston following the approval of
the GECP.
§ 5-542 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-544
AO:187
§ 5-545. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 906, Art. V, 7-8-2008]
§ 5-546. Final stabilization. [Ord. No. 906, Art. V, 7-8-2008]
(a) The SWPPP in § 5-542(d)(3) above will be required for submittal as the
GECP for this section.
(b) All BMPs necessary to achieve soil stabilization on the site itself and
including stock piles of any soil, rock, or any additional landscaping
materials on the site. The plan will also include a designated entry/exit
point, a concrete washout area on the site, measures to protect nearest
downstream stormwater inlet(s), and an explanation of the measures
necessary to prevent mud-tracking from vehicles and equipment onto
the street.
(c) All BMPs must be in place before any grading begins.
(d) Dates for final stabilization by grading permit holder.
(e) An erosion and sediment control permit will be issued by the City of
Williston following the approval of the SWPPP.
(a) All erosion and sediment control BMPs shall be maintained by the
erosion and sediment control permit holder until final stabilization of
the site.
(b) All BMPs shall be inspected after runoff events to determine if repair or
replacement is necessary.
(a) All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and either
of the two following criteria are met:
(1) Uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas)
perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70% of the native
background vegetative cover for the area has been established on
all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures,
or
(2) Equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of
riprap, retaining walls, or geotextiles) have been employed.
(b) For individual lots in residential construction, final stabilization means
that either:
(1) The developer/homebuilder has completed final stabilization as
specified above, or
(2) The developer/homebuilder has established temporary stabilization
including perimeter controls for an individual lot prior to
occupation of the home for the homeowner and informing the
homeowner of the need for, and benefits of, final stabilization.
§ 5-544 WILLISTON CODE § 5-546
AO:188
§ 5-547. Additional requirements. [Ord. No. 906, Art V, 7-8-2008]
§ 5-548. Stop work order. [Ord. No. 906, Art. V, 7-8-2008]
(c) For construction projects on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g.,
utilities across crop or range land, staging areas for road construction,
etc.), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed
land to its preconstruction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were
not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips
immediately adjacent to the watercourse, and areas which are not
being returned to their preconstruction agricultural use must meet the
final stabilization criteria in § 5-546(a)(1) above.
(d) Final stabilization must be completed within one year of certificate of
occupancy, final inspection, or project completion, whichever occurs
sooner.
(a) It will be the responsibility of the erosion and sediment control permit
holder to attain approval of all required agencies for any waterway
crossings to be installed if a wet watercourse will be crossed regularly
during construction (i.e.: North Dakota State Water Commission,
NDDH, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Federal Emergency Management
Association, etc.).
(b) GECPs/SWPPPs along with the erosion and sediment control permit
must be maintained on the site during the progress of the work.
(c) If control measures do not achieve stabilization, the permit holder may
be required to submit an updated SWPPP or may be required to submit
a GECP prepared by a professional engineer.
(d) The City of Williston may enter the site to make inspections as needed.
(a) Authority. Whenever the City Engineer, building official, or their
designee finds a site maintained contrary to the provisions of this
article, the City Engineer, building official, or their designee is
authorized to issue a stop work order for the site.
(b) Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and issued to the
permittee or assigned contractor. Upon issuance, the cited work shall
immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reasons for the
order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted
to resume.
(c) Unlawful continuance. Any person, firm, or corporation who shall
continue any work after having been served a stop work order, with
exception to work required by the order, shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of up to $500 or by imprisonment up to 30 days, or
both. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 5-546 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-549
AO:189
§ 5-549. Penalties. [Ord. No. 906, Art. V, 7-8-2008]
Any violation of this article is subject to the following remedies or penalties:
§ 5-550. Fees. [Ord. No. 906, Art. V, 7-8-2008]
§ 5-551. through § 5-559. (Reserved)
(a) If any official with the City of Williston discovers a violation of this
article, the City may elect to send notice to the offending parties that
the site will be cleaned by the City of Williston and the offending party
shall be billed accordingly.
(b) If the person owning the property disagrees with the City's decision as
to its finding of responsibility for the illicit discharge as defined in this
section, they may appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals
established under §§ 5-316, 5-317, 5-318, 5-319, and 5-320.
The above-listed sections as applicable to violations of the building code
and decisions made by the building inspector shall also be applicable
to violations of the storm sewer ordinance and decisions made by duly
authorized City officials.
(c) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions
of Article I through XI of Buildings and Building Regulations of the City
of Williston shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of up to $500
or by imprisonment up to 30 days, or both. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(a) The fee for each permit shall be as follows:
(1) From 5,000 square feet to one acre: $20.
(2) From one acre and above: $10 per acre ($20 minimum).
§ 5-549 WILLISTON CODE § 5-551
AO:190
ARTICLE XVI
Post-Construction Stormwater Control
§ 5-560. Introduction/purpose/applicability. [Ord. No. 906, Art. VI,
7-8-2008]
The USEPA National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit program administered by the North Dakota Department of Health
(NDDH) requires that cities meeting certain demographic and
environmental impact criteria obtain an NPDES permit for the discharge
of stormwater from a municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The
City of Williston is subject to the NPDES Permit Program and is required to
obtain, and has obtained, an MS4 permit.
As a condition of the City's MS4 permit, the City is obliged to adopt and
enforce a post-construction stormwater control ordinance.
The purpose of this article is to protect and safeguard the general health,
safety, and welfare of the public within the City of Williston's jurisdiction.
This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
§ 5-561. Definitions. [Ord. No. 906, Art. VI, 7-8-2008]
(a) Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from development within the
City limits and extraterritorial area in order to reduce flooding,
siltation, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream
channels;
(b) Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater
runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water
quality;
(c) Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows
from any specific development project site after completion to not
exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(d) Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and
nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through establishment of
appropriate minimum stormwater management standards and BMPs
and to ensure that BMPs are properly maintained and pose no threat to
public safety.
The requirements of this article should be considered minimum
requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes
restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule
or regulations, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or
the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
(a) APPLICANT - Means a property owner or agent of a property owner
who has filed an application for a stormwater management plan.
§ 5-560 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-561
AO:191
§ 5-562. Stormwater management plan. [Ord. No. 906, Art. VI,
7-8-2008]
(b) BUILDING - Means any structure, either temporary or permanent,
having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter or any person, animal,
or property, and occupying more than 200 square feet of area.
(c) DEVELOPER - Means a person who undertakes land disturbance
activities.
(d) DEVELOPMENT - Means land disturbance activities exceeding one
acre.
(e) DRAINAGE EASEMENT - Means a legal right granted by a landowner
to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
(f) ENFORCEMENT OFFICER - Shall be the City Engineer, building
inspector or persons designated by the City having responsibility for
administration and enforcement of this article.
(g) LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY - Means any activity which changes
the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land
surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or
excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction,
substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or
rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or man-made
watercourse.
(h) LANDOWNER - Means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including
those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other
person holding proprietary rights in the land.
(i) MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT - Means a legal recorded document that
acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term
maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
(j) STORMWATER MANAGEMENT - Means the use of BMPs to reduce
stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and peak flow
discharge rates.
(k) STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP) - Means a
plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment
runoff at a site during construction activities and includes provisions for
additional pollution prevention.
(a) No landowner or developer shall receive subdivision approval without
first meeting the requirements of this article or having received a
waiver of this article by a duly authorized City employee. The
stormwater management plan shall be submitted in conjunction with a
nonrefundable plan review fee.
§ 5-561 WILLISTON CODE § 5-562
AO:192
(b) Within 14 business days of the receipt of a complete stormwater
management plan, including all documents as required by this article,
the City shall inform the applicant whether the plan is approved or
disapproved.
(c) The stormwater management plan shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer (PE).
(d) Two sets of legible copies of the drawings and required information
shall be submitted to the City Engineer and shall be accompanied by a
receipt from the City to document the payment of all required fees.
Plans shall be prepared to a scale appropriate to the size of the project
and suitable for review.
(e) At a minimum the stormwater management plan for subdivision
approval shall contain the following information:
(1) A map of the existing site conditions showing the site and
immediately adjacent areas, including:
a. The name and address of the applicant, the section, township,
and range, the north point, date, and scale of drawing.
b. The location of the tract by an insert map at a scale sufficient to
clearly identify the location of the property that provides such
information as the names and numbers of adjoining roads,
railroads, utilities, subdivisions, or other defining landmarks.
c. Existing topography with a contour interval appropriate to the
topography of the land, but in no case having a contour interval
greater than two feet and/or providing spot elevations.
d. The 100-year floodplains, flood fringes, and floodways.
e. Location and dimensions of the existing stormwater drain
systems and natural drainage patterns on and immediately
adjacent to the site delineating the direction and the rate
stormwater is conveyed from the site, identifying the receiving
stream, river, public drainage system, or wetland, and
identifying those areas of the unaltered site where stormwater
collects or passes.
f. Locations and dimensions of all proposed land disturbing
activities and any phasing or scheduling of those activities.
g. Hydraulic design calculations for the predevelopment and
post-development conditions for a two-year and 100-year
storm. Calculations shall include a description of the design
storm frequency, intensity, and duration; time of concentration;
Soil Curve Numbers or runoff coefficients; peak runoff rates
and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; storm sewer
capacities; flow velocities; and data on the increase in rate and
volume of runoff for the design storms.
§ 5-562 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-562
AO:193
§ 5-563. Penalties. [Ord. No. 906, Art. VI, 7-8-2008]
Any violation of this article is subject to the following remedies or penalties:
h. Stormwater improvements necessary to accommodate
increases in stormwater rates and volumes.
i. Approximate location of all temporary soil and dirt stockpile
areas.
j. Location and description of all construction site erosion control
measures necessary to meet the requirements of this article.
k. A schedule of anticipated starting and completion dates for
each land disturbing activity, including the installation of
construction site erosion control measures needed to meet the
requirements of the article.
l. Provisions for maintaining the construction site erosion control
measures prior to, during, and after construction.
(f) The applicant or owner of every site shall be responsible for
maintaining as-built stormwater BMPs until final acceptance of the
BMPs by the City of Williston.
(g) Right of entry for inspection. When any new stormwater BMP is
installed on private property, or when any new connection is made
between private property and a public stormwater management facility,
the property owner shall grant to the City the right to enter the
property at reasonable time and in a reasonable manner for the purpose
of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when City has
reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or
has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public
nuisance or correction of a violation of this article.
(a) Failure to maintain stormwater BMPs. If a responsible party fails or
refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant or any
provision of this article, City, after reasonable notice, may correct a
violation by performing all necessary work to place the BMP in proper
working condition. In the event that the stormwater BMP becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, City shall notify the party
responsible for maintenance of the stormwater BMP in writing. Upon
receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 30 days to
complete maintenance and repair of the stormwater BMP in an
approved manner. After proper notice, City may assess, jointly and
severally, the owner(s) of the stormwater BMP or the property owners
or the parties responsible for maintenance under any applicable written
agreement for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of
the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the
beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and
collected as ordinary taxes.
§ 5-562 WILLISTON CODE § 5-563
AO:194
§ 5-564. Fees. [Ord. No. 906, Art. VI, 7-8-2008]
(b) If any official with the City of Williston discovers a violation of this
section, the City may elect to send notice to the offending parties that
the stormwater BMPs will be cleaned or repaired by the City of
Williston and the offending party shall be billed accordingly.
(c) If the person owning the property disagrees with the City's decision as
to its finding of responsibility for the stormwater plan violation, they
may appeal the decision to the Board of Appeals established under §§
5-316, 5-317, 5-318, 5-319, 5-320.
The above-listed sections as applicable to violations of the building code
and decisions made by the building inspector shall also be applicable
to violations of the storm sewer ordinance and decisions made by duly
authorized City officials.
(d) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions
of Article I through XI of Buildings and Building Regulations of the City
of Williston shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of up to $500
or by imprisonment up to 30 days, or both. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(a) The fee for each stormwater management plan shall be as follows:
(1) $2 per acre ($20 minimum).
§ 5-563 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-564
AO:195
Chapter 5.5
CAMPERS AND RV VEHICLES
§ 5-564 WILLISTON CODE § 5-564
AO:196
ARTICLE I
Use As Residence Within City Prohibited
§ 5.5-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 950, § 1, 6-26-2012]
§ 5.5-2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 950, § 2, 6-26-2012]
The purpose of this article is to limit the use of camper vehicles and other
nonpermanent structures for permanent human habitation because it is the
determination of the city commission that their use in the city for permanent
human habitation is deleterious to the health, safety and welfare not only of
the persons residing therein but, additionally, of the public at large. Portable
heating devices, nonstandard electrical connections, a lack of approved
sanitary facilities including, but not limited to, bathrooms with toilets,
sinks or showers or bathtubs and standard kitchen facilities, among other
facilities associated with safe places of permanent human habitation, all
lend themselves to unhealthful, unsanitary and hazardous living conditions,
(a) For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
(1) CAMPER VEHICLE means a vehicle, whether factory or home built,
whether on or off wheels, whether towed or carried on a motor
vehicle or self-propelled, including, but not limited to, recreational
vehicles, hitch mount pull behind trailers, pop up tent trailers,
campers meant to be affixed to the bed of trucks and converted
vehicles such as buses, trucks, or trailers. Such vehicles may be
with or without complete kitchen and toilet facilities, self-contained
water and sewage systems and designed to be used as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreation, or vacation use. "Camper vehicle"
does not include mobile homes, manufactured homes, and "park
models."
(2) PERSON - Means natural person, partnerships, associations, and
all other bodies, corporate or public.
(3) WITHIN THE CITY OF WILLISTON -Includes, but is not limited to,
city streets, commercial/industrial sites, private property,
established residential neighborhoods, and construction sites.
(4) OCCUPY - Means to take residence in.
(5) OTHER FORM OF NONPERMANENT STRUCTURE - Includes, but
is not limited to, mobile homes, manufactured homes, and park
models.
(6) PARK MODELS - Means recreational homes primarily designed as
temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or seasonal use.
These homes are built on a single chassis and mounted on wheels.
Each park model home is certified by the Recreational Park Trailer
Industry Association member manufacturer as complying with
ANSI A119.5, an RV building code.
§ 5.5-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5.5-2
AO:197
if utilized for extended periods of time, occasioned in part because camper
vehicles and other nonpermanent structures are not intended for use as
places of permanent human habitation and do not adequately provide for
the needs associated with human habitation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this article shall make allowance for safe,
comfortable and sanitary use of camper vehicles and other nonpermanent
structures for short term, temporary use for human habitation purposes so
as to facilitate enjoyment of camping, hunting, silviculture, and other outof-
door pursuits.
§ 5.5-3. Violations. [Ord. No. 950, § 3, 6-26-2012]
(1) The use of any camper vehicle or other form of non- permanent
structure for human habitation purposes within R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5,
R-6, R-7, M-1, M-2, M-3, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoned areas, with the
exception of those in construction sites described herein, in violation of
this article shall result in the issuance by the City of Williston of a
warning directed to the owner of the camper vehicle or other
nonpermanent structure used for human habitation purposes, if
ascertainable, or, if the owner cannot be identified, to the owner of the
parcel of real estate upon which it is situated, informing that person or
persons of the need to cease and desist from making use of the camper
vehicle or other nonpermanent structure used for human habitation
purposes.
(2) Any person who violates, disobeys, neglects, omits, tries willfully to
circumvent the intent of the article, refuses to comply with the article,
or resists enforcement of any of its provisions shall be guilty of a B
misdemeanor, unless that person has met the approved guidelines set
below for construction sites, as set by the planning and zoning
department of Williston.
(a) The allowance is for recreational vehicles only.
(b) There will be a maximum of 10 units allowed, unless otherwise
approved by the city building official. The following are the number
of units allowed, per site, up to 10 units.
1. Single-family residential projects: one unit per 6,000 square
feet of lot area.
2. Multi-family residential projects: one unit per six apartment
units.
3. Commercial projects: one unit per 10,000 square feet of lot
area.
4. Industrial projects: one unit per 10,000 square feet of lot area.
(c) The occupants of the recreational vehicle must obtain a permit
issued by the building department every 30 days. Each permit is
§ 5.5-2 WILLISTON CODE § 5.5-3
AO:198
§ 5.5-4. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 950, § 4, 6-24-2012]
valid for a calendar month and must be renewed at the end of
each month. Each permit must provide the make and model of
the recreational vehicle, the license plate number, and the legal
description of the property the recreational vehicle is to be located
on, at the time of issuance of the permit. The cost of the monthly
permit shall be $200 per permit. The application for the permit
must be approved by the city building official.
(d) The holder of the permit shall abide by the following rules, or the
holder will be found in violation of this article:
1. Portable restroom facilities must be provided on site.
2. Sites must be kept clean of trash and litter. Wastewater,
including all liquid wastes, gray water, black water and mop
water must be discharged into the city wastewater sewer
system; or into an approved on-site sewage disposal or holding
system, or other approved disposal site. Dumping or disposal
of waste at other than approved specific sites shall result in
fines or removal of the facility.
3. The location of the recreational vehicles on site must be
approved by the City of Williston Building Department, with
screening if required by the building official.
4. The occupants of the recreational vehicles must be
construction workers for that particular site.
5. The units must be removed if legitimate written complaints are
received by the City of Williston Building Department. If the
units are not removed when requested, the City of Williston
Building Department will have them removed and the cost to
be assessed to the property.
6. Recreational vehicles must be removed and the site must be
cleaned up before a certificate of occupancy will be issued by
the City of Williston Building Department.
(3) The fine for violation of this ordinance is $500 per day, per camper
vehicle.
(1) Residents and family or friends who come to visit may temporarily
occupy a camper vehicle on developed property, but may only do so for
a period of seven days without a permit. Every person residing in a
camper under this exception cannot exceed a total of 28 days of
occupancy in a calendar year.
§ 5.5-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5.5-4
AO:199
Chapter 6
CEMETERIES
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1957
Code §§ 21.1 — 21.15 and Ordinance Nos. 453, 470, 480, 484, 524,
539, 578 and 627.
§ 6-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844,
3-13-2001]
CEMETERY — Riverview Cemetery and/or Hillside Memory Gardens
Cemetery.
RIVERVIEW CEMETERY — Riverview Cemetery, St. Joseph's Cemetery, St.
Joseph's Cemetery First Addition, St. Joseph's Cemetery North Addition,
Green Acres Addition, and all present and future contiguous additions
thereto.
SEXTON — The person appointed by the Board of City Commissioners
serving until such appointment is revoked by same.
§ 6-2. Advisory Board. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844,
3-13-2001; Ord. No. 857, 9-10-2002; amended 6-25-2019 by Ord.
No. 1104]
A Cemetery Board of five residents of the City is hereby created, and
the duties of the Cemetery Board shall be to generally superintend and
exercise control under the Board of City Commissioners over the cemetery.
The Cemetery Board shall hold at least six meetings a year and shall
make recommendations to the Board of City Commissioners as it deems
necessary and advisable, and the members thereof shall serve without pay.
The terms of the Cemetery Board members shall be for three-year periods.
The appointments to the Board shall be made in such a manner as to stagger
the terms so one member's term expires each year. This shall be done upon
resignation or expiration of the terms of the existing members or may be
done by voluntary consent of all the existing members by drawing for a one-
, two- or three-year term.
§ 6-3. Sexton — General powers and duties. [Ord. No. 746,
11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844, 3-13-2001]
The sexton shall have the general superintending jurisdiction over the
cemetery, and it shall be the sexton's duty to enforce all of the rules and
regulations in this chapter. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the
sexton shall have the power to make such reasonable rules and regulations,
approved by the Board of City Commissioners, that the sexton may deem
necessary with reference to the use, care and improvement of the cemetery.
The sexton, subject to the approval of the Board of City Commissioners,
may employ such assistants as may be required for the operation and
management of the cemetery. The Board of City Commissioners would
determine chain of command (department head).
§ 5.5-4 WILLISTON CODE § 6-4
AO:200
§ 6-4. Responsibility of City for damages — disclaimer — Correction
of errors. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844, 3-13-2001]
§ 6-5. Purpose of the cemetery. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No.
844, 3-13-2001]
The cemetery shall be maintained as a burial ground for residents of the
City of Williston and nonresidents.
§ 6-6. General rules of conduct. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No.
844, 3-13-2001]
(a) The City will take every reasonable precaution to protect the property
of lot owners within the cemetery, but it specifically disclaims all
responsibility for loss or damage, whether direct or collateral, from the
acts of thieves, vandals, rioters, and malicious mischief-makers; from all
acts of Providence, including winds, tornadoes, cyclones, hail, snow,
frost, fire, explosion or lightning; and from breakage or accident to
equipment of whatsoever kind and character and from all causes
beyond its reasonable control.
(b) The City shall not be held responsible for inaccuracies or mistakes
occurring as a result of orders taken via telephone, or for any mistakes
occurring for lack of precise and complete instructions as to the
particular space, size and location in the plot where interment is
desired.
(c) The City reserves the right to correct any errors resulting in
misdescription, improper transfer of burial rights, duplication of
transfer of burial rights, surveying errors, improper placement of
interments, and improper disinterments and removals. Corrections may
include, but not limited to, canceling of conveyance or assignment and
substituting in lieu thereof other interment property of equal value and
similar location as far as possible or as may be selected by the City, or,
in the sole discretion of the City, by refunding the amount of money paid
on account of said purchase.
(d) In the event the error shall involve the interment of the remains of any
person in such property, the City reserves and shall have the right to
remove and reinter the remains to such property of equal value and
similar location as may be substituted and transferred in lieu thereof.
(e) In the event of correction pursuant to this section, notice to the owner
or to the immediate family shall be given by certified mail at the last
known address of such party.
(a) Lot owners, their families and visitors will be admitted daily and are
required to observe all rules adopted for the regulation of visitors.
(b) Persons under the age of 15, unattended by persons who will be
responsible for their conduct, will not be admitted.
§ 6-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6
AO:201
§ 6-7. Right of burial — General. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord.
No. 844, 3-13-2001]
(c) Bicycle riding shall be permitted on road surfaces only.
(d) Bicycles must not be leaned up against stone work of any kind.
(e) Automobiles must proceed within the posted speed limits and be kept
under complete control at all times.
(f) Refreshments, liquors or drugs will not be allowed on the grounds.
(g) No person with firearms or dogs (other than dogs used by the sight
impaired) will be permitted on the premises.
(h) Discharging of firearms, other than regular volleys at burial services, is
prohibited in and around the cemetery grounds.
(i) Trucks and vehicles of cumbersome description will not be allowed to
enter the grounds without special permission of the sexton. No vehicles
(except grave digging equipment) will be permitted off the established
roadways in the cemetery without the permission of the sexton.
(j) All persons are prohibited from plucking any plants, whether wild or
cultivated, breaking any tree or shrub, marring any stone work or in
any way defacing the property of lot owners or of the City.
(k) To prevent injury to adjoining lots and to preserve the beauty of the
grounds, no trees, shrubs or plants shall be planted in the cemetery, nor
shall any existing trees, shrubs or plants be cut down, removed or
trimmed except by permission of and under the direction of the sexton.
(l) No improper use of the national flag will be permitted in the cemetery,
nor will the display of any worn out and tattered flag be allowed.
(m) Vases not properly cared for will be removed from the cemetery
grounds.
(n) The decoration of graves shall be limited to the placing of wreaths,
sprays, or flower boxes and the placing of cut flowers shall be restricted
to those graves which have a regular container for that purpose. The
use of jars, tin cans, etc., is prohibited. Decorations placed on the grave
site, other than listed above, or temporary markers may be removed by
the sexton or the sexton's designee for the purpose of mowing or other
maintenance duties.
(a) Persons desiring to purchase burial rights shall visit the cemetery
where the sexton will assist in making a selection.
(b) Lots in the cemetery are to be conveyed by burial right to the
purchaser, his family and heirs, a right forever for the purpose of
burying the human dead, subject to the rules and regulations that are
§ 6-6 WILLISTON CODE § 6-7
AO:202
§ 6-8. Selection of lots. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844,
3-13-2001]
§ 6-9. Charges for lots, services and work. [Ord. No. 746,
11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844, 3-13-2001]
The price of lots (burial rights), interment charges, opening and closing
of graves and disinterment shall be set by resolution of the Board of City
Commissioners.
now in force or may be adopted by the City, but exempt from taxation
and liability for debt.
(c) No burial right will be issued until a lot is fully paid for, and if interment
is permitted before such time, the City retains the right to refuse future
interments or any improvements until any balance due on such lots is
fully paid, and in case of persistent default, to remove any remains
already interred to the single grave section. When lots are purchased
for pre-need, the lots need to be paid-in-full at time of purchase.
(d) A burial right document and its record on the books of the City kept
under the direction of the City Auditor is the only evidence of ownership
of the proprietor recognized by the City; therefore, no lot shall be
subdivided or transferred except with permission of the sexton and
upon recording the same with the City Auditor. In the event of
subdivision or transfer or other use of such rights contrary to the
provisions of this chapter, the whole of such rights shall revert to the
City.
(e) The City authorizes the sexton to repurchase lots and burial rights in
the name of the City when desired by the owner. The price shall be
negotiated by the parties but may not exceed the current price of burial
rights.
(f) No burial rights will be issued for ground that has not been surveyed
and platted.
(g) On the death of an owner or part owner of a lot, the heirs or devisees of
the deceased, if required, shall file in the office of the City Auditor
satisfactory proof of their heirship for the purpose of establishing the
new ownership in the books of the City.
(a) When the buyer desires to purchase two or more single grave lots, the
City reserves the right to require that the selection shall be made in
such a location and manner as not to leave any isolated single grave lots
alongside those purchased.
(b) Single grave lots shall be sold only from single grave lot sections except
as isolated single grave lots may be elsewhere available. In single grave
lot sections there can be no choice of location as these lots must be
filled in regular order, nor can any such lots be reserved or sold for
future use.
§ 6-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-10
AO:203
§ 6-10. Payment of charges and services. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991;
Ord. No. 844, 3-13-2001]
§ 6-11. Burial services — Sundays and holidays. [Ord. No. 746,
11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844, 3-13-2001]
Burial services will not be allowed on Sundays and legal holidays. Holidays
are designated as those set forth in North Dakota Century Code § 1-03-01.
§ 6-12. Interments and funerals. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord.
No. 844, 3-13-2001]
(a) All charges for lots, services and devices are payable in advance unless
it is otherwise agreed, with a guarantee by an approved, responsible
person, and in no event shall the time of payment be extended beyond
30 days from the date of purchase or ordering of work done, or use of
devices.
(b) In all instances where a mortician arranges for the purchase of a lot or
for the interment, such mortician shall assume the liability for
payments to the City of the cost of such lot or interment.
(a) During the period from April 15th to October 15th, orders for
interments must be given 24 hours in advance of the funerals, and such
orders must be accompanied by legal burial permits. During the period
from October 15th to April 15th, such orders must be given 48 hours in
advance of the funerals.
(b) Charges for interment in the county plot are pursuant to state law.
(c) The following particulars are required for record: Name of deceased,
place of birth, last residence, age, date of death, date of interment,
place of death, whether married, widowed or single, the name of the
nearest kindred, the address of the nearest kindred, and military
information pursuant to state law. No burials will be allowed without
such information.
(d) If the order for an interment is for a deceased not of the immediate
family of the lot owner, permission in writing from such lot owner or
authorized person must be filed with the sexton.
(e) When lots are held jointly by two or more persons, either by descent,
devise or purchase, an order will be accepted from either of them or
their heirs for interment in such lots as they shall require.
(f) Orders for burials over the telephone will be accepted only at the option
of the sexton because of the potential for mistakes, and a lot owner or
other authorized person in ordering an interment may be required to
call at the cemetery personally to obviate the possibility of error.
§ 6-10 WILLISTON CODE § 6-12
AO:204
§ 6-13. Markers. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844,
3-13-2001]
(g) Only one interment will be allowed in one grave, except in case of a
parent and infant, or twin children, or two children buried at the same
time.
(h) The interment of up to two cremation remains will be allowed with an
approved vault on an occupied lot or in an unoccupied lot with written
permission of the immediate family. The spreading of ashes is not
allowed in the cemetery. Cremains must receive earth burial or
columbarium interment, if available.
(i) Funeral activities, while within the cemetery grounds, will be under the
control of the sexton.
(j) It shall be mandatory that all rough boxes used shall be of concrete or in
the alternative steel vaults. A permanent type of outside burial
receptacle shall be required in all sections of the cemetery. Outside
receptacles made out of fiberglass shall not be permitted.
(k) The "Garden of the Angels" is for the interment of infants and children
only with a box size opening limited to two by four feet.
(a) Any stone flush with ground level shall be classified as a marker. All
markers need to be installed flush with the border and the existing
ground.
(b) Markers for use in marking graves for infants' and children's plots must
not exceed 16 inches in length or eight inches in width with borders not
to exceed three inches in width.
(c) No permanent marker, or portion thereof, made of any material other
than granite, marble or standard bronze will be permitted for use in the
cemetery.
(d) All markers shall be set in a concrete foundation which will provide a
four inch concrete border around the marker, such concrete border to
be flush with the level of the ground, except those markers with premanufactured
borders allowed in the "Garden of the Angels."
(e) Markers shall be located at the foot of the grave except in Block 11 of
Riverview Cemetery and all of Hillside Memory Gardens Cemetery
where markers shall be located at the head of the grave unless an
additional military marker is requested. Marker with border shall be no
more than two feet in width. The location of markers and all work in
connection with setting them shall be under the direction of the sexton.
(f) No foot marker will be allowed to be installed prior to the interments,
except as allowed in § 6-13(e) above.
§ 6-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-14
AO:205
§ 6-14. Monuments. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844,
3-13-2001]
(a) The use of monuments is permitted in Riverview Cemetery except in
Block 11. Monuments are not permitted in Hillside Memory Gardens
Cemetery.
(b) Any stone or bronze above ground level shall be classified as a
monument but cannot exceed 42 inches in height.
(c) All monuments shall be located at the head of the grave lot.
(d) Grave covers or ledgers are not allowed in Williston cemeteries.
(e) The maximum size of the monument is based upon lot size. The length
of the base shall not exceed 75% of the width of the lot.
(f) No person shall erect or place any monument until the monument and
location have been permitted and approved by the sexton.
(g) No monuments made of any material other than granite, marble or
standard bronze will be allowed in the cemetery. Appurtenances made
of other materials than listed above must be approved by the sexton.
(h) The rolling of stone work across cemetery property shall not be done
without the consent and supervision of the sexton.
(i) The turf around and near where work is to be done must always be
thoroughly protected by planks and boards when required by the
sexton.
(j) All stone work shall have the surface next to the foundation squared so
as to allow full bearing on the foundation.
(k) Foundations shall be required for all monuments, and shall be built so
as to provide a border not less than four inches in width around the
bottom of the base of the monument and shall be adequate to
permanently support the monument in true position. Total width of
monument and base shall be no greater than 24 inches. Vases shall be
installed on the monument or base and not the foundation as the City
shall not be held responsible for damaged vases. In the case where a
marker serves as the monument, a below ground receptacle shall be
provided for the vase.
(l) After the foundation for any monument has been set sufficiently, as
determined by the sexton, the monument shall be installed on the
foundation by a representative of the manufacturer of the particular
monument.
(m) No person is allowed to remove any monument from the cemetery or to
alter any monument erected in the cemetery without first securing
permission from the sexton.
§ 6-14 WILLISTON CODE § 6-15
AO:206
§ 6-15. Disinterments, relocating bodies and vacation of lots. [Ord.
No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844, 3-13-2001]
§ 6-16. Penalty. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No. 844, 3-13-2001]
§ 6-17. Perpetual care fund. [Ord. No. 746, 11-12-1991; Ord. No.
844, 3-13-2001]
(a) Graves will be reopened for official inspection or for any other purpose
only when all statutory provisions relating to the opening of graves
have been complied with and the regular charge for disinterment paid
to the City.
(b) Should a member of the immediate family of an interred person wish to
secure two or more laterally adjacent lots available elsewhere in the
cemetery in order to provide for contiguous burials, he may have the
body in the single lot disinterred and reinterred in the new location by
paying the regular charges for disinterment and reinterment and by
assigning the burial rights of the vacated lot to the City.
(c) Should any single lot be vacated and the body removed from the
cemetery, the regular charge for disinterment must be paid and the
right to the lot so vacated shall revert to the City.
(d) No disinterment, except a court ordered disinterment, will be allowed
from October 15th to April 15th unless ground conditions as
determined by the sexton allows for a disinterment.
(e) If a disinterment is permitted, a licensed mortician must be present to
perform the final retrieval of the remains.
(a) Any person violating any of the prohibitions set forth in this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a maximum criminal
penalty of a $500 fine, 30 days imprisonment, or both such fine and
imprisonment.
(b) The City reserves the right to pursue civil remedies for damages caused
by any party to the grounds, improvements, monuments and markers,
and vegetation on the cemetery property.
(a) There is hereby created a perpetual care fund to be administered by the
City Auditor of the City of Williston.
(b) The principal of the fund shall remain in trust with the interest on said
principal to be utilized as either operating funds for the care and
maintenance of the cemeteries or added to the principal for the fund.
(c) The City is hereby authorized to accept donations from any and all
sources to such fund.
(d) Ten percent of the proceeds of burial rights sales as set forth in this
chapter and set by resolution of the Board of City Commissioners shall
§ 6-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-17
AO:207
Chapter 6.5
CITY-OWNED RAILROAD TRACK
§ 6.5-1. Findings. [Ord. No. 893, 11-28-2006]
The City of Williston owns the railroad track located upon rail easements
in the area known as the Williston Basin Industrial Park in the city, unless
otherwise specified in any Track Use Agreement, and may become the
owner of additional track in this area or other areas.
Private persons or businesses which either own property or run businesses
in the Williston Basin Industrial Park or other areas may desire to use said
railroad track for purposes of loading products or goods on railcars or to
use said railroad track for purposes of receiving products or goods that are
transported to the person or business by train.
This city desires for the persons or business to be able to use the track,
access the city-owned track with spurs into their property, participate in
maintenance of the track based on the amount of use and for the city to
avoid liability for occurrences of events resulting from others' use of the
track.
§ 6.5-2. Use and maintenance. [Ord. No. 893, 11-28-2006]
Chapter 7
ELECTIONS
be allocated to the principal of said fund and be subject to the
restrictions on use set forth herein.
(1) No person or entity may use or access the railroad track owned by the
city in the Williston Basin Industrial Park or other areas without first
entering into a "Track Use Agreement" with the city.
(2) In the Track Use Agreement, the user of the track will indemnify the
city for any harm or damage caused to the track or city property by use
of the track.
(3) In the Track Use Agreement, the user of the track will comply with all
city and railroad requirements.
(4) In the Track Use Agreement, the user of the track will agree to make
equitable allocations between users of the track to pay for the
maintenance of the track.
(5) If the agreement covers a spur track such agreement shall set out at a
minimum-ownership, allowed use by other lot owners and equitable
maintenance of such spur.
§ 6-17 WILLISTON CODE § 7-1
AO:208
§ 7-1. Wards enumerated. [Code 1957, § 1.10; Ord. No. 538, § 1,
5-23-1978; Ord. No. 636, § 1, 8-14-1984]
The number of wards and precincts in the city is and shall be eight. The
wards are numbered from two to four, both inclusive, and six to 10, both
inclusive. The precincts are numbered from 59 to 61, both inclusive, and 72
to 76, both inclusive. The wards and precincts are bounded as hereinafter
stated.
§ 7-2. Ward 2; Precinct 59. [Ord. No. 636, § 2, 8-14-1984]
That the second ward of the city hereby established shall embrace all of that
portion of said city, within the boundary lines, namely:
The S 1/2 of Section 14, T154, R101W less that portion of the NW 1/4
SW 1/4 of Section 14, T154N, R101W located west of the center line of
West Dakota Parkway and that portion of the SE 1/4 of Section 15, T154N,
R101W, located east of the center line of West Dakota Parkway.
The second ward shall also be known as Precinct 59.
§ 7-3. Ward 3; Precinct 60. [Ord. No. 636, § 3, 8-14-1984]
That the third ward of the city hereby established shall embrace all of that
portion of said city, within the boundary lines, namely:
All of Section 24, T154N, R101W, less that portion in the SE 1/4 SE 1/4
of Section 24 not within the corporate limits of the City of Williston and
that portion of Section 19, T154N, R101W, located west of the Little Muddy
River, less that portion not in the corporate City limits.
The third ward shall also be known as Precinct 60.
§ 7-4. Ward 4; Precinct 61. [Ord. No. 636, § 4, 8-14-1984]
That the fourth ward of the city hereby established shall embrace all of that
portion of said city, within the boundary line, namely:
That portion of Section 23, T154N, R101W, and that portion of Section 22,
T154N, R101W, located south of the center line of Sixth Street West from
Second Avenue West to the intersection of its extension to a point on the
west line of the city limits and included within the corporate limits of the
city.
The fourth ward shall also be known as Precinct 61.
§ 7-5. Ward 6, Precinct 72. [Ord. No. 636, § 5, 8-14-1984]
That the sixth ward of the city hereby established shall embrace all of that
portion of said city, within the boundary lines, namely:
That portion of the N1/2 of Section 23, T154N, R101W and that portion of
the NE1/4 of Section 22, T154N, R101W located north of the center line
§ 7-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-5
AO:209
of Sixth Street West from Second Avenue West to the intersection of its
extension to a point on the west line of the city limits.
The sixth ward shall also be known as Precinct 72.
§ 7-6. Ward 7; Precinct 73. [Ord. No. 636, § 6, 8-14-1984]
That the seventh ward of the city hereby established shall embrace all of
that portion of said city, within the boundary lines, namely:
The S 1/2 of Section 13, T154N, R101W and that portion of the SW 1/4 of
Section 18, T154N, R100W, located west of the Little Muddy River.
The seventh ward shall also be known as Precinct 73.
§ 7-7. Ward 8; Precinct 74. [Ord. No. 636, § 7, 8-14-1984]
That the eighth ward of the city hereby established shall embrace all of that
portion of said city, within the boundary lines, namely:
The N 1/2 of Section 13, T154N, R101W and that portion of the NW 1/4 of
Section 18, T154N, R100W, located west of the Little Muddy River.
The eighth ward shall also be known as Precinct 74.
§ 7-8. Ward 9; Precinct 75. [Ord. No. 636, § 8, 8-14-1984]
That the ninth ward of the city hereby established shall embrace all of that
portion of said city, within the boundary lines, namely:
The N 1/2 of Section 14, T154N, R101W and that portion of the NW 1/4 SW
1/4 of Section 14, T154N, R101W, located west of the center line of West
Dakota Parkway.
The ninth ward shall also be known as Precinct 75.
§ 7-9. Ward 10, Precinct 76. [Ord. No. 636, § 9, 8-14-1984]
That the tenth ward of the city hereby established shall embrace all of that
portion of said city, within the boundary lines, namely:
All that area in the corporate city limits not included in Wards 2, 3, 4, 6, 7,
8, and 9.
The tenth ward shall also be known as Precinct 76.
Chapter 7.5
FAIR HOUSING
§ 7-5 WILLISTON CODE § 7.5-1
AO:210
§ 7.5-1. Short title. [Ord. No. 562, Art. I, § 1, 1-1-1981]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Fair Housing
Ordinance of Williston, North Dakota.
§ 7.5-2. Purpose and declaration of policy. [Ord. No. 562, Art. I, § 2,
1-1-1981]
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city and the purpose of this
chapter, in the exercise of its police and regulatory safety and welfare
of the persons in and residing in the city, and for the maintenance and
promotion of commerce, industry, and good government in Williston, to
secure all persons living and/or working or desiring to live and/or work in
the city a fair opportunity to purchase, lease, rent, or occupy real estate
without discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, age, marital
status, physical limitations, source of income, family responsibilities,
educational association, sexual orientation, or national origin.
§ 7.5-3. Construction.
This chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms
and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy stated in
Section 7.5-2 and the special purposes of the particular provision involved.
§ 7.5-4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 562, Art. I, § 4, 1-1-1981]
For the purposes of this chapter:
AGE — Chronological age.
BOARD — The fair housing board.
CITY COMMISSION — The city commission of Williston.
EDUCATIONAL ASSOCIATION — The fact of being enrolled or not being
enrolled at any educational institution.
FAMILY RESPONSIBILITIES — The state of being or the potential to
become a contributor to the support of an individual or individuals in a
dependent relationship.
LEASE — Includes sublease, assignment and rental, and includes any
contract to do any of the foregoing.
LENDING INSTITUTION — Any bank, insurance company, savings and
loan association, or any other person in the business of lending money or
guaranteeing loans, any person of obtaining, arranging, or negotiating loans
or guarantees as agent or broker and any person in the business of buying
or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money which are secured
by title to or a security interest in real estate.
MARTIAL STATUS — The state of being married, unmarried, divorced or
widowed.
NATIONAL ORIGIN — Includes the national origin of an ancestor.
§ 7.5-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7.5-4
AO:211
OWNER — Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, owns any
beneficial interest in any real property, or who holds legal or equitable
title to shares of, or who holds any beneficial interest in any real estate
cooperative which owns any real property.
PANEL — A panel comprised of three or more members of the board,
designated by the chairman of the board, to investigate and to attempt to
conciliate a complaint filed or made under Section 7.5-18 of this chapter.
PERSON — Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, legal representatives, mutual companies, unincorporated
organizations, trusts, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and
fiduciaries.
PHYSICAL LIMITATION — A limitation of physical capabilities unrelated
to one's ability to safely perform the work involved in jobs or positions
available to such person for hire or promotion or a limitation of physical
capabilities unrelated to one's ability to acquire, rent and maintain property.
Physical limitation includes, but is not limited to, blindness or partial
sightedness, deafness or hearing impairment, muteness, partial or total
absence of physical member, speech impairment and motor impairment.
PURCHASE — Includes any contract to purchase.
REAL ESTATE AGENT — Any real estate broker, any real estate salesman
and any other person who, as employee or agent or otherwise, engages in
the management or operation of any real property.
REAL ESTATE BROKER — Any person licensed as a real estate broker in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 43.23, North Dakota Century
Code or required thereby to be so licensed.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION — The purchase, sale, exchange, rental or
lease of any real property or an option to do any of the foregoing.
REAL PROPERTY — Any real estate, vacant land, building, or structure, or
any part thereof, within the city limits.
SALE — Includes any contract to sell, exchange, or to convey, transfer, or
assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real property.
SEXUAL ORIENTATION — Any male or female homosexuality,
heterosexuality or bisexuality, by preference or practice.
SOURCE OF INCOME — Any legal source from which a person obtains
money.
§ 7.5-5. Discriminating negotiations. [Ord. No. 562, Art. II, § 5,
1-1-1981]
It shall be an unlawful housing practice and a violation of this chapter
for any real estate broker, salesman, agent, owner, or other person to
sell or rent, or offer to sell or rent a real property on terms, conditions,
or privileges that discriminate between persons because of race, color,
religion, sex, age, marital status, physical limitations, source of income,
§ 7.5-4 WILLISTON CODE § 7.5-5
AO:212
family responsibilities, educational association, sexual orientation or
national origin.
§ 7.5-6. Refusal to negotiate. [Ord. No. 562, Art. II, § 6, 1-1-1981]
It shall be an unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this chapter
for any real estate broker, salesman, agent, owner or other person to
refuse to negotiate for, enter into, or perform any sale or lease of any
real property because of the race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status,
physical limitations, source of income, family responsibilities, educational
association, sexual orientation, or natural origin.
§ 7.5-7. Withholding housing. [Ord. No. 562, Art. II, § 7, 1-1-1981]
It shall be an unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this chapter for
any real estate broker, salesman, agent, owner, or other person to represent
to any person that any real property is not available for inspection,
purchase, sale, lease, or occupancy when in fact it is so available for
inspection, purchase, sale, lease, or occupancy because of race, color,
religion, sex, age, marital status, physical limitations, source of income,
family responsibilities, educational association, sexual orientation, or
national origin of the person.
§ 7.5-8. Advertisements, signs and notices. [Ord. No. 562, Art. II,
§ 8, 1-1-1981]
It shall be an unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this chapter for
any real estate broker, salesman, agent, owner, or other person to publish or
circulate a statement, advertisement or notice or to post or erect any sign
or notice upon any real property indicating any intent to sell or lease any
real property in a manner that is unlawful under this article.
§ 7.5-9. Refusal of offers. [Ord. No. 562, Art. II, § 9, 1-1-1981]
It shall be unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this chapter for
any real estate broker, salesman, agent or other person to refuse to receive
or to fail to transmit a bonafide offer for the purchase, sale, exchange,
or lease of any real property because of the race, color, religion, sex,
age, marital status, physical limitations, source of income, family
responsibilities, educational association, sexual orientation, or national
origin of person making such offer.
§ 7.5-10. Discrimination in lending. [Ord. No. 562, Art. III, § 10,
1-1-1981]
It shall be an unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this chapter for
any lending institution to refuse to negotiate for, enter into, or perform any
agreement to lend or guarantee the loan of funds or in making, agreeing
to make, arranging or negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds for the
purpose of financing the purchase or sale, construction, lease,
rehabilitation, improvement, renovation, or repair of any real property,
§ 7.5-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7.5-10
AO:213
or to offer or agree to terms, conditions, or privileges that discriminate
between persons because of race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status,
physical limitations, source of income, family responsibilities, educational
association, sexual orientation, or national origin of any party to such
agreement, or of any member of the family of any such party or of the
residents of the area in which such real property is located.
§ 7.5-11. License required. [Ord. No. 562, Art. III, § 11, 1-1-1981]
Every real estate broker shall apply for and obtain a license from the North
Dakota Real Estate Commission prior to transacting any business involving
real estate as a real estate broker and prior to advertising or assuming to
act as such real estate broker, as provided for under North Dakota Century
Code 43.23.
§ 7.5-12. Representation. [Ord. No. 562, Art. IV, § 12, 1-1-1981]
§ 7.5-13. Other violations. [Ord. No. 562, Art. IV, § 13, 1-1-1981]
(a) It shall be an unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this
chapter for any real estate broker, salesman, agent, owner, or other
person, for the purpose of inducing any other person to enter into a real
estate transaction with such person, his principal, or his agent, to:
(1) Represent that a change has occurred, will occur, or may occur
with respect to race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status,
physical limitations, source of income, family responsibilities,
educational association, sexual orientation, or national origin in the
composition of the owners or occupants in any block,
neighborhood, or area in which the real property (which is the
subject of the real estate transaction) is located or
(2) Represent that a change with respect to the race, color, religion,
sex, age, marital status, physical limitations, source of income,
family responsibilities, educational association, sexual orientation,
or national origin in the composition of the owners or occupants in
any block, neighborhood, or area will result in the lowering of
property values, or in an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior,
or in a decline in the quality of schools in such blocks,
neighborhood, or area.
(a) It shall be an unlawful real estate practice and a violation of this
chapter for any real estate broker, salesman, agent, owner, or any other
person:
(1) To aid, abet, incite, or coerce a person to commit an unlawful real
estate practice under this chapter.
(2) To purchase, lease, or rent real estate for residential purposes, or
authorize and direct one in his employment or on his behalf to do
so, or solicit any other person to do so on this behalf for the specific
§ 7.5-10 WILLISTON CODE § 7.5-13
AO:214
§ 7.5-14. Fair housing board - Created. [Ord. No. 562, Art. V, § 14,
1-1-1981]
There is hereby created a fair housing board which shall consist of five
members as hereinafter provided.
§ 7.5-15. Same - Composition. [Ord. No. 562, Art. V, § 15, 1-1-1981]
All five members of the board shall be appointed from the community at
large and shall be citizens who are willing to expend the time and effort
necessary to carry out the duties of the board.
§ 7.5-16. Same - Method of appointment. [Ord. No. 562, Art. V, § 16,
1-1-1981]
Members shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the approval of the city
council. In the first instance, three members shall be appointed for a term
of three years, one for a term of two years, and one for a term of one year.
Thereafter, each member appointed shall serve for a term of three years
or until his successor is duly appointed and qualified. The board shall elect
one of its members to be its chairman. Three members shall constitute a
quorum, but the concurrence of the majority of the entire board (obtained
either at a meeting of the board or in a poll conducted by the chairman)
shall be necessary for board action.
reason and intention of preventing any other person or persons
from purchasing, renting, leasing, or occupying such residential
real estate by reason of the race, color, religion, sex, age, marital
status, physical limitations, source of income, family
responsibilities, educational association, sexual orientation, or
national origin of such person or persons.
(3) To deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of copies of any
listing of real property in Williston to any person because of race,
color, religion, sex, age, marital status, physical limitations, source
of income, family responsibilities, educational association, sexual
orientation, or national origin.
(4) To enter into a listing agreement which prohibits the inspection,
sale, lease, or occupancy of real property to any person because of
race, color, religion, sex, age, marital status, physical limitations,
source of income, family responsibilities, educational association,
sexual orientation, or national origin.
(5) To knowingly and willfully interfere with the performance of a duty
or the exercise of a power by the board or one of its members or
representatives.
(6) To willfully obstruct or prevent or attempt to obstruct or prevent a
person from complying with the provisions of this chapter or an
order issued thereunder.
§ 7.5-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7.5-17
AO:215
§ 7.5-17. Same - Duties and powers. [Ord. No. 562, Art. V, § 17,
1-1-1981]
§ 7.5-18. Complaints; conciliations. [Ord. No. 562, Art. V, § 18,
1-1-1981]
(a) The board shall have and exercise the following duties and powers:
(1) To act to eliminate unlawful real estate practices that violate this
chapter.
(2) To act to assure to persons living, working, or desiring to live in the
city, the opportunity to purchase, lease or occupy real property
without discrimination because of race, color, religion, age, sex,
marital status, physical limitations, source of income, family
responsibilities, educational association, sexual orientation, or
national origin.
(3) To receive and investigate complaints alleging unlawful real estate
practices in violation of this chapter.
(4) To attempt elimination of unfair real estate practices by
conciliation, conference and/or persuasion.
(5) To hold public hearings in the event that its efforts under
paragraph (4) above are ineffective or where it seems that such
efforts will be ineffective.
(6) To instruct the city attorney to commence appropriate court action
against those the board has found to be in violation of this chapter.
(7) To recommend to the North Dakota Real Estate Commission
suspension and/or revocation of licenses of real estate brokers in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(8) To render from time to time but not less than every 12 months, a
written report to the city council of its activities and
recommendations with respect to fair real estate practices, which
written reports shall be made public after submission to the city
council.
(9) To exercise such other powers as are vested in the board by other
sections of this chapter and to adopt such rules and regulations as
may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(a) Any person aggrieved in any manner of any violation of any provision of
this chapter may file with the board a written verified complaint setting
forth his grievance. The complaint shall state:
(1) The name and address of the complainant;
(2) The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is
brought, if known to the complainant;
§ 7.5-17 WILLISTON CODE § 7.5-18
AO:216
§ 7.5-19. Hearings by board. [Ord. No. 562, Art. V, § 19, 1-1-1981]
Such hearings shall be conducted by the entire board or a quorum thereof
upon 10 days' notice to all parties. The board shall not be bound by the strict
rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity.
The board shall have power to administer oaths and to take sworn
testimony. The board shall have the power to subpoena witness and
pertinent documents, which power may be enforced by the board by proper
petition to the district court of the county where the complainant resides.
The complainant and any party alleged to have violated this chapter shall
be entitled to be represented by counsel and shall have the right to call
witnesses on his own behalf and to cross-examine witnesses.
§ 7.5-20. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 562, Art. V, § 20, 1-1-1981]
(3) The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this chapter;
(4) The names and addresses of all persons believed to have
knowledge concerning the alleged facts.
(b) After the filing of any complaint, the board shall serve a copy of the
complaint on the party or parties charged and the chairman of the
board shall designate a panel, as defined in Section 7.5-4 of this
chapter, to make a prompt investigation in connection therewith.
(c) If such panel shall determine after such investigation that probable
cause exists for the allegations of the complaint:
(1) The chairman of the board shall set a time and date for a
conference with the board; said conference shall be private.
(2) At such conference, the board shall interview the complainant and
the person or persons against whom the complaint has been
directed and shall attempt to resolve the complaint by all proper
methods of conciliation and persuasion.
(d) If, at any time after the date of filing of the complaint, the board shall
determine that such attempt at conciliation and persuasion would not
be in furtherance of the objectives of this chapter, the board shall
thereupon proceed promptly to a full hearing on the complaint in
accordance with Section 7.5-19 below.
(a) If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the board finds that the person
complained of has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the
board shall state its findings of fact and shall issue and cause to be
served upon such person, an order requiring such person to cease and
desist from such violation, and to take such affirmative or other action
as, in the judgment of the board, will effectuate the purpose of this
chapter, including a report of the manner of compliance.
§ 7.5-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7.5-20
AO:217
§ 7.5-21. Limitation of time to file complaints. [Ord. No. 562, Art. V,
§ 21, 1-1-1981]
Any complaint filed hereunder with the board must be filed within 60 days
after the alleged discriminatory practice occurred or it shall be barred.
§ 7.5-22. Remedies. [Ord. No. 562, Art. VI, § 22, 1-1-1981]
(b) If, upon all the evidence at the hearing, the board finds that the person
complained of has not violated any of the provisions of this chapter, the
board shall state its findings of the fact and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the complainant an order dismissing the complaints.
(c) The board shall retain jurisdiction of the case until it is satisfied the
person to whom the order was directed has complied. The order of the
board and its findings of fact shall be issued within 30 days after the
filing of the complaint and shall be delivered to the complainant, the
person charged, and the mayor of the city.
(d) The board shall be empowered at the conclusion of the proceedings
held under Section 7.5-19 to instruct the city attorney to do any one or
more of the following:
(1) To institute and prosecute proceedings in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce against any person found in violation of this
chapter the fine provided for in Section 7.5-25.
(2) To apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for:
a. An order restraining any person from violating any provision of
this chapter.
b. Such other future relief as may seem to the court appropriate
for the enforcement of this chapter and for the elimination of
violations hereof.
(3) To petition or institute proceedings with the North Dakota Real
Estate Commission for the purpose of causing the commission to
revoke, suspend, or refuse to renew the license granted by such
commission to any real estate broker or real estate salesman found
to have violated any provision of this chapter.
(e) The board is also empowered at the conclusion of such proceedings to
recommend to the North Dakota Real Estate Commission suspension
and/or revocation of the broker's license of any broker licensed by the
North Dakota Real Estate Commission against whom a complaint shall
have been filed and who shall have been a party to any proceedings
thus filed and found guilty of violating any applicable provision of this
chapter.
(a) Any person aggrieved in any manner by the violation of any provision of
this chapter who has exhausted the remedies provided in sections
§ 7.5-20 WILLISTON CODE § 7.5-22
AO:218
§ 7.5-23. Temporary court order. [Ord. No. 562, Art. VI, § 23,
1-1-1981]
Any complainant under this chapter may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an order temporarily prohibiting any transaction affecting
the real property which is the subject of the complainant's pending
complaint under this chapter prior to final determination by the board
where the owner of said property is one of the parties complained of.
§ 7.5-24. Judicial review of board order. [Ord. No. 562, Art. VI, § 24,
1-1-1981]
Any party, complainant, or person aggrieved by an order of the board shall
have the right to obtain judicial review of such order.
§ 7.5-25. Fines. [Ord. No. 562, Art. VII, § 25, 1-1-1981]
Any person violating any provision of this chapter may, in addition to
revocation or suspension of the license herein required or in there of, be
fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense.
Chapter 8
FIRE PREVENTION
7.5-18 and 7.5-19 of this chapter may apply to any court of competent
jurisdiction for appropriate relief from such violation, including:
(1) An order compelling compliance with this chapter;
(2) An order to prohibit any person found by the court to have violated
any provision of this chapter from the sale, lease, exchange,
transfer, conveyance, or assignment of any dwelling or housing
which is the subject of such violation;
(3) An order requiring specific performance of any contract for the
sale, lease, exchange, transfer, conveyance, or assignment of any
dwelling or housing, by any person who in violation of this chapter
refuses or fails to perform such contract;
(4) Compensatory damages and, if appropriate, punative damages;
(5) Such other and further relief as may seem appropriate to the court
for the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of violations
thereof.
§ 7.5-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7.5-25
AO:219

ARTICLE I
International Fire Code16
§ 8-1. Adoption of City of Williston Fire Prevention Code. [Ord. No.
1014, 3-10-2015]
There is hereby adopted by the City of Williston and incorporated by
reference herein the City of Williston Fire Prevention Code, which shall
consist of the following codes, except those portions hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended:
International Fire Code (IFC) with the appendices, same edition as the
adopted International Building Code.
§ 8-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1014, 3-10-2015]
(a) Subsequent editions. Subsequent editions or revisions of the
International Fire Code (IFC) adopted by the City of Williston shall be
the same edition as the International Building Code, as referenced by
the North Dakota Building Code, and is considered adopted and in full
force and effect within the city upon the adoption of the North Dakota
Building Code and the filing of one copy of the Fire Prevention Code in
the office of the city auditor.
(b) Conflicts. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of the
Code adopted by this chapter and applicable provisions of state law or
city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of the city
ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling.
(a) Whenever the word "municipality" or the word "city" is used in any code
adopted pursuant to this title, it means the City of Williston, North
Dakota.
(b) Whenever the words "corporate counsel" or city attorney" is used in any
code adopted pursuant to this title, it means the city attorney of the City
of Williston, North Dakota.
(c) Whenever the term "International Building Code" is used in the
International Fire Code, it shall mean the currently adopted
International Building Code.
(d) Whenever the terms "International Plumbing Code" is used in the
International Fire Code, it shall mean the "North Dakota State
Plumbing Code" or currently adopted plumbing code by the City of
Williston.
(e) Whenever the term "ICC Electrical Code" is used in the International
Fire Code, it shall mean the "Wiring Standards of North Dakota" or the
currently adopted Electrical Code by the City of Williston.
16.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 506, 661, 709, 750, 897,
914, 928. Article I was replaced and readopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1014,
3-10-2015.
§ 8-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-3
AO:221
§ 8-3. Establishment and duties of individuals. [Ord. No. 1014,
3-10-2015]
The International Fire Code shall be enforced and administered by the Chief
of the Fire Department or his designated representative or representatives
and shall include the following:
(a) Fire Prevention Bureau.
(1) The International Fire Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Fire Department of the city, which shall be
operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
(2) The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the
Fire Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary. The Chief of the Fire Department may recommend to the
board of commissioners the employment of technical inspectors.
(3) A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made monthly
and annually and transmitted to the Fire Chief; it shall contain all
proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the Chief of the
Fire Department may wish to include therein. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall also recommend any amendments to the code,
which in his judgment, shall be desirable.
(b) Modifications.
(1) The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have power to
modify any of the provisions of the International Fire Code upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized
agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying
out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code
shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice
done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed
and the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and
signed copies shall be furnished to the applicant.
(c) New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits.
(1) The Police, Fire and Ambulance Commissioner, the chief of the Fire
Department and the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act
as a committee to determine and specify after giving affected
persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes
or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those
now enumerated in the International Fire Code, the Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous
place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested
persons.
§ 8-3 WILLISTON CODE § 8-4
AO:222
§ 8-4. Fire code compliance inspection; inspection fee established;
posting of fire inspection certificate; penalty. [Ord. No. 1014,
3-10-2015]
(a) Authority to enter. The Fire Chief or the Chief Fire Inspector is
authorized to enter and inspect, or cause to be inspected, all buildings
and premises for the purpose of conducting an annual fire code
compliance inspection. This section shall not apply to the residential
dwelling units.
(b) Annual inspection fee. The Fire Chief or the Chief Fire Inspector or his
or her designee shall charge an annual inspection fee for each fire code
compliance inspection, except when such building or premises is owned
by state or local government. It shall be the duty of every person
maintaining or operating the business or premises to pay the City
Auditor's Office the annual inspection fee. Equipment requiring
periodic testing or operation shall be tested or operated as specified by
the International Fire Code, as adopted by the City of Williston, and the
equipment testing fees shall be included in the fire inspection fee. All
building inspection fees shall be set by resolution by the City
Commission for the City of Williston and shall be filed with the City
Auditor's Office. All new construction inspection fees shall be paid at
the time a building permit is issued by the building department. All
existing building inspection fees shall be paid within 30 days of the date
that the inspection is completed.
(c) Required posting of fire inspection certificate. Each building or
premises shall post their Fire Inspection Certificate in plain view and
each Fire Inspection Certificate will be updated upon the completion of
the annual fire inspection.
(d) Violation; notice of violation; and penalty. Any person, firm or
corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of Chapter 8 of the
City of Williston Code of Ordinances or commits an act prohibited under
any section of Chapter 8 of the City of Williston Code of Ordinances
shall be subject to the following recourse by the City of Williston
through its authorized officials or employees, cumulatively in the order
indicated.
(1) Civil penalty.
a. Officials or employees of the City of Williston authorized to
enforce this ordinance in whole or in part may commence, or
cause to be conducted, administrative proceedings at which, or
as a result of which, civil penalties may be imposed which shall
not exceed a $1,500 penalty per violation. Each day any
violation shall exist shall constitute a separate offense.
b. In addition to the authority to commence administrative
proceedings for the purpose of imposing civil penalties, a
judicial action seeking a civil penalty may be commenced by
the City of Williston's Attorney, who may also seek any other
§ 8-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-4
AO:223
relief available to the City of Williston. The City of Williston
may institute an action for a civil penalty regardless of whether
the City of Williston has commenced or will commence an
administrative code enforcement proceeding or a criminal
enforcement action. The City of Williston's judicial action for
a civil penalty may seek an award for attorney's fees, costs,
expenses and disbursements.
c. When the City of Williston obtains a judgment in an action for
civil penalties, in addition to the appropriate methods of
enforcement of the judgment established in the North Dakota
Rules of Civil Procedure, such judgment for penalties shall be
assessed and collected in the same manner as general City of
Williston taxes.
d. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the City of
Williston may maintain an action or proceeding in a court of
competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or to
restrain by injunction the violation of any ordinance of the City
of Williston's Attorney, regardless of the fact that the ordinance
may provide a penalty for such violation.
e. Action for relief authorized in this section may be brought
alone or in conjunction with any other relief or remedy
available to the City of Williston, including but not limited to
civil penalty, attorney's fees, costs, expenses and
disbursements.
(2) Administrative enforcement of civil penalty.
a. Based upon an oral or written complaint that has been received
by the City of Williston, the Chief of the Fire Department or his
his/her designated representatives shall investigate and
determine if such violation exists and issue a notice of violation
served upon the owner, tenant, or other responsible party.
b. The notice shall be served by personal service, registered mail,
or certified mail with return receipt requested.
c. When calculating a reasonable time for compliance, the
Building Official shall take into consideration the following
criteria:
1. Type and degree of violation;
2. Intent to comply if the intent has been expressed;
3. Procedural requirements for obtaining a permit to carry
out corrective action;
4. Complexity of corrective action; or
§ 8-4 WILLISTON CODE § 8-4
AO:224
5. Any other circumstance beyond the control of the
responsible party.
d. The Chief of the Fire Department may extend the date of
compliance upon the receipt of a written request from the
responsible party in violation prior to the date of compliance.
e. If the responsible party fails to complete the corrective
action(s) issued by the Chief of the Fire Department for the
noticed violation(s) prior to the date of compliance, the Chief of
the Fire Department shall issue a written order identifying the
type and degree of violation and whether the responsible party
is subject to any civil penalty as defined in Section 8-4(d)(1).
f. Any party affected by a notice of violation may file a written
appeal stating in what respects the specific grounds for
reversal or modification of the order. The appeal with the
required filing fee shall be filed with the City Auditor's Office
prior to 4:30 p.m. on the given compliance date. In the absence
of a timely appeal, the findings of the Chief of the Fire
Department contained in the notice of violation shall be
deemed true and final.
g. Jurisdiction is granted to the City Commission for the City of
Williston to hear and determine appeals of a party affected by a
notice of violation after proper notice has been given by the
affected party.
h. Any person failing to comply with a final order of the Chief of
the Fire Department, or, in the event of an appeal to the City
Commission, shall be subject to a cumulative penalty or
forfeiture in the amount described herein per day for each
violation from the date set for compliance in the final order
until the order is complied with.
(3) Criminal penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of
the terms or provisions of Chapter 8 of the City of Williston Code of
Ordinances or commits an act prohibited by this article shall be
cited with a B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be punished by a
fine of up to $1,500, or by imprisonment up to 30 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. The court shall
have the power to suspend the sentence and to revoke the
suspension thereof. Each day any person, firm or corporation
violates any provision of this article shall constitute a separate
offense. This penalty section is to be read in accordance with
Section 114 of the International Building Code.
(4) Enforcement of criminal penalty. The Building Official or other
official designated by the City of Williston City Commission may
request the City Attorney to institute the prosecution of any
violation of the terms or provisions of Articles I through XVI of
§ 8-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-4
AO:225
§ 8-5. Establishment of limits in which storage for dispensing or
fuel source of liquefied petroleum gases are regulated or
prohibited. [Ord. No. 1014, 3-10-2015]
The storage of liquefied petroleum gases may be allowed in any zoning
district if it is found by the Chief of the Fire Department and Building
Official for the Department of Building Safety that its use is necessary as
a back-up emergency fuel system for a public, semi-public, or institutional
use, if the use of liquefied petroleum gases is necessary because the area
is not served by a natural gas system, or if there are unique similar
circumstances which require the use of liquefied petroleum gases. The
maximum allowable storage capacity shall be 500 gallons, and the minimum
distance to building or adjoining lot line shall be 10 feet.
Any business engaged in the dispensing of liquefied petroleum gases shall
be subject to all applicable provisions of the City of Williston's found within
Chapter 8 of the Williston Code of Ordinances and any amendments thereto
as well as all other applicable ordinances found within the Williston Code
of Ordinances or the provisions found in the planning and zoning ordinance
adopted by the City of Williston, and the business shall file with the City a
current certificate of insurance.
§ 8-6. Open burning regulations. [Ord. No. 1014, 3-10-2015]
Open burning shall be prohibited in the City limits. The Chief of the Fire
Department may issue special permits for burning such as, but not limited
to, approved commercial incinerators, oil and gas flares so long as all
applicable ordinances relating to the Department of Building Safety and
Buildings and Building Regulations of the City of Williston or
commits an act prohibited by this article.
(e) Emergency orders. Whenever the Fire Chief or Chief Fire Inspector
finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to
protect the public health, the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief Fire Inspector
may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of
the emergency and requiring that such action be taken as deemed
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding other provisions of
this article, the order shall be effective immediately. The Chief Fire
Inspector shall also have the authority to cause all public utilities
serving the business, building, or premises where the violation takes
place to be terminated, and to affect the closing of the business,
building, or premises until such time as the violation is completely
corrected, or the imminent hazard to life removed. Any person to whom
such an order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon
petition to the Board of Commissioners shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible. After the hearing, depending upon the finding as to
whether the provisions of this article have been complied with, the
Board shall continue the order in effect, modify it, or revoke it.
§ 8-4 WILLISTON CODE § 8-6
AO:226
the Planning and Zoning Department are complied with, recreation and
ceremonial and training fires.
§ 8-7. Bulk storage and handling of flammable liquids and
hazardous materials. [Ord. No. 1014, 3-10-2015]
Bulk storage as defined by the International Fire Code shall require a
permit. Any holder of permit for bulk storage, in accordance with the
applicable provisions found in the International Fire Code shall pay to the
City of Williston, North Dakota, the applicable inspection fee as set by
resolution from the City Commission for the City of Williston.
§ 8-8. Temporary placement of propane cylinders within the city
limits. [Ord. No. 1014, 3-10-2015]
The City of Williston currently has a permanent ban on the use of propane
cylinders within the city other than those needed for portable gas grills. A
temporary permit may be issued for the use of larger propane or flammable
gas storage vessels, as follows:
(a) Residential. The City of Williston is in need of increased residential
properties. Traditional housing is a slow process with mobile properties
being timely, accessible, and cost effective.
Mobile and modular housing can be converted to allow for the use of
natural gas; however, a recreational vehicle such as a camp trailer may
not be feasible according to Montana Dakota Utilities (MDU).
The Williston City Fire Department proposes to allow the temporary use
of propane cylinders or other flammable gas cylinders as referenced
by the International Fire Code to be utilized with the following
stipulations:
(1) Receipt of a letter of request along with reason for the request.
(2) Review by fire and health department officials.
(3) Site inspection.
(4) The requestor pays a permit fee of $125 to be collected by the
Building Department.
(5) Issuance of a temporary permit no greater than six months for the
permit with no more than the issuance of two consecutive permits.
(6) Inspection of installation.
(7) The cylinder shall be placed:
a. On a solid, non-elevated surface.
b. Secured in place.
c. Placed in a position that is safe from damage.
§ 8-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-8
AO:227
d. Attached to the property/appliance in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations.
(b) Commercial. The Williston City Fire Department proposes to allow the
temporary use of propane cylinders during the construction phase of a
building project with the following stipulations:
(1) Receipt of a letter of request along with the reason for the request.
(2) Provide a site plan.
(3) Review by the fire and health department officials.
(4) Site inspection.
(5) The requestor pays a permit fee of $125 to be collected by the
Building Department.
(6) Issuance of a temporary permit no greater than four months for the
permit with no more than the issuance of two consecutive permits
for each project.
(7) Inspection of installation.
(8) The application shall maintain all necessary records of the cylinder
including an MSDS.
(9) Cylinder placement:
a. On a solid, non-elevated surface.
b. Cylinder no greater than 1,000 gallons,
c. Surrounded by concrete barriers to be protected from damage.
d. Attached to the appliance in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendation.
After placement of such cylinder, disaster and emergency
services shall be notified.
(c) Size of propane tank. No propane tank, which is to be used in an RV
park, shall exceed 420 pounds or 120 gallons of capacity. Use of
propane cylinders in an RV park are addressed within a special use
permit for extended use.
(d) Penalties. Failure to obtain a temporary permit for the use of a large
capacity propane cylinder may result in, but not be restricted to:
(1) Immediate cessation of operation.
(2) Removal of the cylinder.
(3) Denial of occupancy until corrected.
(4) All fees and services toward investigation, removal, and cleanup.
§ 8-8 WILLISTON CODE § 8-8
AO:228
§ 8-9. through § 8-12. (Reserved)
(e) References. International Fire Codes include:
(1) Section 1403.
(2) Section 3405.
(3) Chapter 30.
National Fire Protection Association
Occupational Health and Safety Association
Department of Homeland Security
National Propane Gas Association
North Dakota Propane Gas Association.
§ 8-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-9
AO:229

ARTICLE II
Fireworks
Prior ordinances include 1981 Code §§ 8-13, 8-14.
§ 8-13. Sale and use of fireworks. [Ord. No. 966; Ord. No. 1074,
1-23-2018]
No person shall offer for sale, sell or buy at retail, or display, within the city
limits any fireworks or firecrackers of any kind or character at any time,
except public displays of fireworks may be permitted by the City within its
limits, in accordance with N.D.C. § 23-15-03.
Notwithstanding the above fireworks are permitted in the City limits of the
City of Williston on July 4 of each year, until the time of 1:00 a.m. on July 5
of each year; and December 31 of each year, until the time of 1:00 a.m. on
January 1:
§ 8-13.1. Fireworks defined. [Ord. No. 989 § 1, 3-11-2014]
§ 8-13.2. Sale of fireworks prohibited. [Ord. No. 989 § 2, 3-11-2014;
Ord. No. 1074, 1-23-2018]
Except as otherwise provided for in this article, no person may offer for sale,
expose for sale, sell at retail, bring into this city, or cause to be brought into
this city, or use or explode any fireworks.
(a) "Fireworks," as used in this article, means any combustible or explosive
composition, or any substance or combination of substances or article
prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by
combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation.
The term includes any:
(1) Blank cartridge;
(2) Toy pistol, toy cannon, toy cane, or toy gun in which an explosive
other than toy paper cap is used;
(3) Balloon that requires fire underneath to propel the balloon;
(4) Firecracker, torpedo, skyrocket, Roman candle, daygo bomb,
sparkler, or other item of like construction;
(5) Item containing any explosive or flammable compound; or
(6) Any tablet or other device containing any explosive substance.
This section does not apply to any toy paper cap containing not
more than 0.25 of a grain (16.20 milligrams) of explosive
composition per cap.
§ 8-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-13.3
AO:231
§ 8-13.3. Sale of fireworks. [Ord. No. 989 § 3, 3-11-2014]
(1) Any person operating a retail business and who has a retail license as
provided in Subsection 8-13.5 of this article may offer for sale at retail
that year any of the fireworks listed in paragraph 2 of this subsection, to
any individual who is at least 12 years of age, only during the periods of
June 27 through July 5 and December 26 through January 1.
(2) The following items may be sold by licensed retail businesses during the
retail sale periods:
(a) A star light, with wood spike cemented in one end, total
pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 20 grams in weight (10
ball). However, a person may not offer to sell or offer to distribute a
skyrocket, customarily known as a bottle rocket if the outside
diameter of the casing in less than five-eights inch (15.875
millimeters) and the length of the casing is less than 3 1/2 inches
(88.9 millimeters).
(b) A helicopter type flyer, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed
20 grams each in weight.
(c) A cylindrical fountain, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed
75 grams each in weight. The inside tube diameter may not exceed
three-fourths inch (19.05 millimeters).
(d) A cone fountain, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 50
grams each in weight.
(e) A wheel, total pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 60 grams in
weight, for each driver unit, but there may be any number of
drivers on any one wheel. The inside bore of a drive tube may not
be over one-half inch (12.7 millimeters).
(f) An illuminating torch or a colored fire in any form, total
pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 100 grams each in weight.
(g) A sparkler or a dipped stick, total pyrotechnic composition not to
exceed 100 grams each in weight. Pyrotechnic composition
containing any chlorate may not exceed five grams.
(h) A comet or shell, of which the mortar is an integral part, except a
comet or shell designed to produce an audible effect, total
pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 40 grams in weight.
(i) A soft shell firecracker not to exceed 1 1/2 inches (38.1 millimeters)
in length and one-fourth inch (6.35 millimeters) in diameter, total
pyrotechnic composition not to exceed 50 grams each in weight.
(j) A whistle without report, total pyrotechnic composition not to
exceed 40 grams each in weight.
§ 8-13.3 WILLISTON CODE § 8-13.4
AO:232
§ 8-13.4. Public display of fireworks permitted by city or fair
association within its limits — supervised display allowed - Permit
required. [Ord. No. 989 § 4, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 1074, 1-23-2018;
Ord. No. 1088, 8-28-2018]
§ 8-13.5. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 989 § 5, 3-11-2014]
(1) This article does not prohibit supervised public displays of fireworks by
the City of Williston, fair associations, amusement parks or other
organizations.
(2) Except when a display is given by the City of Williston or fair
association within its own limits, no display may be given unless a
permit for the display has first been secured.
(a) Every permit application must be given to the city auditor at least
15 days in advance of the date of the display with payment of an
application fee as determined by city resolution.
(b) The city auditor shall promptly refer the application to the chief of
the fire department or his designated employee.
(c) The fire department shall make an investigation of the application
to determine whether the operator of the display is competent and
where the display is to be located, discharged, or fired so that it will
not be hazardous to property or endangering any person, and that
it complies with any rules and regulations of the State Fire
Marshall.
(d) The chief of the fire department shall determine whether such
permit will be approved or the application rejected. If the
application is approved by the fire department, the city auditor will
place the item on the agenda for final review and approval by the
Board of Commissioners at their next regular meeting.
(3) The city auditor will issue a display permit after approval by the Board
of City Commissioners. In issuing such permit, the city assumes no
liability for any damage to persons or property resulting from such
displays.
(4) Permits are non-transferrable.
(5) After a permit has been issued, sales, possession, use, and distribution
for the permitted display are lawful for that purpose only.
(1) This article does not prohibit:
(a) A licensed wholesaler, dealer, or jobber from selling at wholesale
fireworks that are not prohibited.
(b) The sale of any kind of fireworks for shipment directly out of State.
§ 8-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-13.5
AO:233
§ 8-13.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 989 § 6, 3-11-2014]
Williston Police Officers and the Williston Fire Chief are charged with
enforcing these provisions and shall seize, take, remove, or cause to be
removed at the owner's expense all fireworks or combustibles offered or
exposed for sale, stored or held for use in violation of this article.
§ 8-13.7. Penalty. [Ord. No. 989 § 7, 3-11-2014; Ord. No. 1091,
8-28-2018]
(c) The use of fireworks by transportation agencies for signal purposes
or illumination.
(d) The sale or use of blank cartridges for a show or theater, for signal
or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or for use by military
organizations.
(2) An application for license as a distributor must be made to the State
Fire Marshal as provided in N.D.C.C. 23-15-04(2).
(3) An application for a license as a retailer must be made to the County
Sheriff on forms prescribed by the State Fire Marshal as provided in
N.D.C.C. 23-15-04(2).
(4) Retail and wholesale licenses are valid only for the calendar year in
which they are issued and must be at all times displayed at the place of
business of the licensee.
(5) Retail licensees must comply with any other licenses required by law or
Williston ordinance.
(6) A person not licensed as a wholesaler or retailer may not bring any
fireworks into the City of Williston.
(7) A retailer may not sell any fireworks that have not been purchased from
a wholesaler licensed under State law.
(8) Licensees must keep available for inspection by Williston Police Officer
or Williston Fire Chief or other law enforcement a copy of each invoice
for fireworks purchased as long as any fireworks included on the
invoice are held in the licensee's possession. Each invoice must show
the license number of the wholesaler from whom the purchase was
made.
1, Any person who violates the provisions of this article is guilty of an
infraction.
2, The schedule of fines shall not exceed the minimum penalties
established as follows:
a) First violation: $250;
§ 8-13.5 WILLISTON CODE § 8-13.7
AO:234
§ 8-14. (Reserved)
b) Second violation and any violation thereafter, if within one year of
the first violation: $500;
3, Notwithstanding the aforementioned schedule of penalties, pursuant to
the guidelines for penalties established in N.D.C.C. § 12.1-32-01, a
single violation of this ordinance can carry a penalty of up to $1,500.
Any person convicted of an infraction who has, within one year prior to
commission of the infraction of which the person was convicted, been
previously convicted of an offense classified as an infraction may be
sentenced as though convicted of a Class B misdemeanor. If the
prosecution contends that the infraction is punishable as a Class B
misdemeanor, the complaint shall specify that the offense is a
misdemeanor.
§ 8-13.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-14
AO:235

ARTICLE III
Fire Department
§ 8-15. Fire department. [Ord. No. 814, 6-22-1999]
The City of Williston hereby establishes that the Williston Fire Department
shall be composed of a fire chief, volunteer members as shall be provided
by the Williston Volunteer Fire Department bylaws, and such full-time
firefighters and personnel as shall be determined by the city commission.
§ 8-16. Fire chief's duties. [Ord. No. 814, 6-22-1999]
All fire department volunteers and full-time members shall be under the
control and supervision of the fire chief at all emergency scenes and other
events, except Williston Volunteer Fire Department meetings and
nonemergency events sponsored by the Williston Volunteer Fire
Department.
§ 8-17. Supervision in absence of chief. [Ord. No. 814, 6-22-1999]
In the absence of the fire chief, the battalion chief, deputy chief or assistant
chief of the Williston Volunteer Fire Department shall have control and
supervision of all personnel at all fire scenes. Control and supervision of
any other situation or event at which Williston Fire Department personnel,
volunteer or full-time, are present in an official capacity shall be governed
by policies to be adopted by the fire chief.
§ 8-18. Williston Volunteer Fire Department bylaws. [Ord. No. 814,
6-22-1999]
The Williston Volunteer Fire Department shall be governed by bylaws
adopted by the Williston Volunteer Fire Department as approved by the
Williston City Commission.
§ 8-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-18
AO:237
Chapter 8.3
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 8-18 WILLISTON CODE § 8-18
AO:238
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
§ 8.3-1. Statutory authorization. [Ord. No. 930, § 1.1, 7-27-2010]
The Legislature of the State of North Dakota has in North Dakota Century
Code, Chapters 40-47, 11-33 and 58-03, delegated responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
Therefore, the City Commission of Williston, North Dakota does ordain as
follows.
§ 8.3-2. Findings of fact. [Ord. No. 930, § 1.2, 7-27-2010]
§ 8.3-3. Statement of purpose. [Ord. No. 930, § 1.3, 7-27-2010]
(1) The flood hazard areas of Williston, North Dakota, are subject to
periodic inundation which can endanger life, result in loss of property,
create health and safety hazards, disrupt commerce and governmental
services, cause extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection
and relief, and impair the tax base, all of which adversely affect the
public health, safety, and general welfare.
(2) Flood losses caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in the
special flood hazard areas cause increases in flood heights and
velocities. Inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
unprotected structures also contribute to the flood loss.
(a) It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
(1) To protect human life and health;
(2) To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(3) To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding, and generally undertaken at the expense of the general
public;
(4) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in special flood hazard areas;
(6) To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use
and development of special flood hazard areas so as to minimize
future flood blight areas;
§ 8.3-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-3
AO:239
§ 8.3-4. Methods of reducing flood losses. [Ord. No. 930, § 1.4,
7-27-2010]
§ 8.3-5. (Reserved)
(7) To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a
special flood hazard area; and,
(8) To ensure that those who occupy the special flood hazard areas
assume responsibility for their actions.
(a) In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and
provisions for:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel floodwaters;
(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and,
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
§ 8.3-3 WILLISTON CODE § 8.3-5
AO:240
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 8.3-6. Words defined. [Ord. No. 930, § 2.0, 7-27-2010]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the city commission's interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The height of the base flood or 100-year
flood usually in feet above mean sea level.
BASE FLOOD OR 100-YEAR FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BEST AVAILABLE DATA (BAD) — Water elevation information from any
source used to estimate or determine a base flood elevation (i.e. high water
mark).
CONVEYANCE OR HYDRAULIC CONVEYANCE — A geometric
characteristic of a river or watercourse at a given point that determines the
flow-carrying capacity at that point.
DEVELOPMENT — Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located
within the special flood hazard area.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency where special flood hazard areas
are designated as Zone A, AE, AO, AH, A1-A30 or A-99.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland
or tidal waters and/or; from the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING (DRY) — Protection provided a structure, together with
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, which is watertight two feet above
the base flood elevation with walls that are substantially impermeable to the
passage of water.
FLOODWAY OR REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
§ 8.3-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-6
AO:241
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of a structure including the basement.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle,"
but does include "mobile home."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter.[Adopted
7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 930]
REASONABLY SAFE FROM FLOODING — Base floodwaters will not
inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the special
flood hazard area, and that any subsurface waters related to the base flood
will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area of land that would be
inundated by a flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement, and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start
of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
(a) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
(b)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck;
(c)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational camping, travel, or seasonal
use; including, but not limited to;
(d)
Travel trailers, trailers on wheels, park-model trailers, and other similar
vehicles.
(e)
§ 8.3-6 WILLISTON CODE § 8.3-6
AO:242
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including manufactured
homes and gas or liquid aboveground storage tanks.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the building to its predamaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure either:
Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage
occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial improvement" is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor,
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state
or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 8.3-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-6
AO:243

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 8.3-7. Lands to which this chapter applies. [Ord. No. 930, § 3.1,
7-27-2010]
This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the City of Williston, North Dakota.
§ 8.3-8. Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas. [Ord.
No. 930, § 3.2, 7-27-2010]
The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The
Flood Insurance Study for the City of Williston, dated August 5, 2010," with
an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map and all subsequent revisions
thereto is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
ordinance. The Flood Insurance Study is on file at City Hall, 22 E. Broadway,
Williston, ND.
§ 8.3-9. Compliance. [Ord. No. 930, § 3.3, 7-27-2010]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations.
§ 8.3-10. Greater restrictions. [Ord. No. 930, § 3.4, 7-27-2010]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, remedy, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance
and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 8.3-11. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 930, § 3.5, 7-27-2010]
§ 8.3-12. Warning and disclaimer or liability. [Ord. No. 930, § 3.6,
7-27-2010]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
(a) In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
§ 8.3-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-12
AO:245
This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas
or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City
of Williston, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 8.3-13. through § 8.3-14. (Reserved)
§ 8.3-12 WILLISTON CODE § 8.3-13
AO:246
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 8.3-15. Establishment of development permit. [Ord. No. 930, § 4.1,
7-27-2010]
§ 8.3-16. Designation of the local administrator. [Ord. No. 930,
§ 4.2, 7-27-2010]
The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement this
chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 8.3-17. Duties and responsibilities of the building official. [Ord.
No. 930, § 4.3, 7-27-2010]
(a) A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any special flood hazard area established in
Section 8.3-8. Application for a development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the city auditor and may include, but not be limited
to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill storage materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all
structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in Section 8.3-22(2) and,
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(a) Duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Permit review.
(a) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(b) Review all development permits to determine that all
necessary permits have been obtained from those federal,
state, or local governmental agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(c) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the
§ 8.3-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-17
AO:247
floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions of Section
8.3-23(1) are met.
(2) Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has
not been provided in accordance with Section 8.3-8, Basis for
establishing the special flood hazard areas, the building official
shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation
data and floodway data available (known as best available data)
from a federal, state, or other source, as criteria for requiring that
new construction, substantial improvements, or other development
in the floodplain are administered in accordance with Section
8.3-22, Specific standards.
(3) Information to be obtained and maintained.
(a) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
(b) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean
sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed;
2. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
Section 8.3-15(3).
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
(4) Alteration of watercourses. The responsible person shall:
(a) Notify nearby communities, water resource districts, and the
North Dakota State Engineer, as necessary, prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence
of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(b) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished; and,
(c) Notify the appropriate water resource district prior to removal
or placement of fill within 200 feet of the bank of a body of
water during normal flow or stage.
(5) Interpretation of flood insurance rate map (FIRM) boundaries.
Make interpretation where needed, as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where
there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the
§ 8.3-17 WILLISTON CODE § 8.3-17
AO:248
§ 8.3-18. Variance procedure. [Ord. No. 930, § 4.4, 7-27-2010]
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in Section 8.3-18.
(1) Appeal board.
(a) The Williston City Commission as established by the City of
Williston shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
(b) The Williston City Commission shall hear and decide appeals when
it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the building official in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(c) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Williston City Commission,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the district court, as
provided in NDCC 40-47-11, 11-33-12, or 58-03-14.
(d) In passing upon such applications, the Williston City Commission
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this ordinance; and:
1. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
2. The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
3. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
4. The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
5. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
6. The availability of alternative locations, for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
7. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
8. The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for that area;
9. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
§ 8.3-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-18
AO:249
10. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
11. The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(e) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre to
less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(1-11) in Section 8.3-18(1)(d) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(f) Upon consideration of the factors of Section 8.3-18(1)(d) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Williston City Commission may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary
to further the purposes of this chapter.
(g) The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions
and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency upon request.
(2) Conditions for variances.
(a) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to
the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.
(b) Variances shall not be issued within the identified floodplain if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(c) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(d) Variances shall only be issued upon:
1. A showing of good and sufficient cause;
2. A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
3. A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in
Section 8.3-18(1)(d), or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
§ 8.3-18 WILLISTON CODE § 8.3-18
AO:250
§ 8.3-19. through § 8.3-20. (Reserved)
(e) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 8.3-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-19
AO:251

ARTICLE V
Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 8.3-21. General standards. [Ord. No. 930, § 5.1, 7-27-2010]
(a) In all special flood hazard areas the following standards are required:
(1) Anchoring.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements, including
additions, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure.
(b) All manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-thetop
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in
addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements
for resisting wind forces.
(2) Construction materials and methods.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage.
(b) All new and substantial improvements shall be constructed
using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(c) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and
air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
(3) Utilities.
(a) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the system;
(b) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters
into the systems and discharge from the systems into
floodwaters; and,
(c) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(4) Subdivision proposals.
§ 8.3-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-21
AO:253
§ 8.3-22. Specific standards. [Ord. No. 930, § 5.2, 7-27-2010]
(a) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(b) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems
located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and,
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
(a) In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in Section 8.3-8, Basis for establishing the
special flood hazard areas or Section 8.3-17(2) Use of other base flood
data, the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated on fill to at least one foot above
the base flood elevation.
(2) Nonresidential construction. Construction and substantial
improvement of any nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated on fill to at least one foot
above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities shall:
(a) Be floodproofed to at least two feet above the base flood
elevation, so that below this elevation the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy;
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in
Section 8.3-17(3)(b).
(3) Manufactured homes.
(a) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
Section 8.3-21(1)(b).
(b) All manufactured homes or those to be substantially improved
shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated on fill to at
§ 8.3-21 WILLISTON CODE § 8.3-22
AO:254
§ 8.3-23. Floodways. [Ord. No. 930, § 5.3, 7-27-2010]
§ 8.3-24. through § 8.3-25. (Reserved)
least one foot above the base flood elevation, and is securely
anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system.
(a) Located within the special flood hazard areas established in Section
8.3-8 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following
provisions apply:
(1) Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless
certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is
provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
(2) If Section 8.3-21(1) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of Article V, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
§ 8.3-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-24
AO:255

ARTICLE VI
Penalties
§ 8.3-26. Penalties for violations. [Ord. No. 930, § 6.1, 7-27-2010]
(1) Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, including violations on conditions and safeguards
established in connection with grants or variances or conditional uses,
shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or
fails to comply with any of its requirements, shall upon conviction
thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment
not to exceed 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment for each
such offense, and in addition shall pay costs and expenses involved in
the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Williston City Commission
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
§ 8.3-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8.3-26
AO:257
Chapter 8.5
FRANCHISE REQUIREMENT
§ 8.5-1. Franchise required. [Ord. No. 817, § 1, 11-23-1999]
Except as otherwise provided by law, a person, firm, corporation or utility
may not utilize a public right-of-way by placing or maintaining any
permanent or semi-permanent medium used to transmit or transport
electric or electronic signals, natural gas, or other materials in order to
provide a service within the city without a franchise to do so from the city.
No person, firm, corporation or utility may operate in and upon the streets,
alleys, public ways, and places in the city for the purpose of collecting and
conveying garbage accumulated in the city without a franchise issued by
the city. The board of city commissioners may grant, by resolution, any
franchise that provides a service within the City of Williston.
§ 8.5-2. Term of franchise. [Ord. No. 817, § 2, 11-23-1999]
An exclusive, perpetual or irrevocable franchise may not be granted. A
franchise may not be granted for a term exceeding 20 years. A franchise
may not be extended but may be renewed in the same manner as a new
franchise.
§ 8.5-3. Public hearing. [Ord. No. 817, § 3, 11-23-1999]
Before any franchise is granted, the board of city commissioners shall hold
a public hearing. Notice of the hearing must be published at least once in
the official newspaper not less than 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 8.5-4. Application required. [Ord. No. 817, § 4, 11-23-1999]
Before any franchise is granted, the applicant shall file with the city auditor
an application containing such information as may be necessary and helpful
to act on the application. All applications for a franchise must be
accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $500.
§ 8.5-5. Nonexclusive franchise. [Ord. No. 817, § 5, 11-23-1999]
Any franchise granted by the municipality will not be exclusive and shall not
be construed to prevent the municipality from granting to any other party
the right to use the public right-of-ways.
§ 8.5-6. Fee. [Ord. No. 817, § 6, 11-23-1999]
A fee or a right to negotiate a future fee shall be included in all franchises.
Chapter 9
LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
§ 8.3-26 WILLISTON CODE § 8.5-6
AO:258
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 9-1. License for wholesale sale of fruits or vegetables — Required.
[Code 1957, § 12.6]
§ 9-2. Same — Bond. [Code 1957, § 12.10]
Each applicant for a license required by Section 9-1 of this article shall,
at the time of filing his application therefor and before the execution of
such license by the city, file with the city auditor a good and sufficient bond
in the penal sum of $2,500 and upon a form to be approved by the city
attorney. Such bond shall be executed by the applicant as principal and
by a surety company authorized to do business in the state as surety. The
bond shall be for the benefit of all persons dealing with such licensee in
the pursuit of selling, delivery or distribution of fresh fruits or vegetables
at wholesale, and particularly to protect such persons against fraud and
misrepresentation.
§ 9-3. Same — Duplicates; transferability. [Code 1957, § 12.9]
(a) No person shall engage in the occupation of selling or distributing fresh
fruits or vegetables at wholesale within the city without first having
obtained a license so to do from the board of city commissioners;
provided, however, that nothing in this and the following four sections
shall be held to apply to persons selling or producing fresh fruits or
vegetables which they themselves have raised, grown or produced.
(b) Every farmer or producer engaged in the sale of fresh fruits or
vegetables at wholesale under this exception to any firm within the
corporate limits of the city shall, before doing same, file with the city
auditor an affidavit duly sworn to or an affirmation duly made that he
will sell only such farm products as are raised, grown or produced by
him and obtain a producer's permit to do so. The city auditor shall
furnish to the applicant for a producer's permit a metal plate of suitable
design with the proper number thereon. The producer at all times shall
have one of these permits on all vehicles used. Each applicant for a
producer's permit shall furnish suitable proof that he is a bona fide
producer and the city auditor may then investigate and verify the
applicant's statement.
(a) Each applicant applying for a license to sell at wholesale fresh fruits
and vegetables shall designate, at the time of his application, the
number of duplicate licenses required, and such duplicate licenses shall
be furnished by the city. Additional duplicate licenses shall be furnished
by the city to the licensee from time to time during the term covered by
the license upon request. Each applicant for such license shall, at the
time of applying for his license or for additional duplicate licenses as
above provided, make and file on oath to the effect that such duplicate
licenses are to be used only on vehicles owned or being purchased by
§ 9-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3
AO:259
§ 9-4. Same — Fees; expiration; renewal. [Code 1957, § 12.7]
Any person desiring a license required by Section 9-1 shall pay to the city
for such license the sum of $100. The license shall expire on the thirtieth
day of June of each year. A renewal of such license may be applied for and
received on the payment of $50 for each year after the first.
§ 9-5. Same — Display; number to appear on vehicles. [Code 1957,
§ 12.8]
Every licensee for the wholesale sale of fruits or vegetables shall display
his license in a conspicuous place in his established place of business. The
number of the license shall appear on all of the licensees' vehicles and
conveyances engaged in the same and in the distribution and delivery of the
products aforesaid.
§ 9-6. License for fortunetelling, etc. — Required; possession. [Code
1957, § 12.2]
No person shall practice or engage in the business or profession of
astrology, palmistry, clairvoyancy, mesmerism, spiritualism, mind reading,
phrenology or fortunetelling in the city without first having obtained a
license therefor from the city auditor, and having such license in his place
of business at all times while practicing or engaging in such business.
§ 9-7. Same — Application. [Code 1957, § 12.3]
Every applicant for a license to engage in the practice or business stated
in Section 9-6 of this article shall make application on blanks furnished by
the city auditor and verified by the applicant. Such application shall contain
the name and residence address of the applicant; his age and occupation or
business; the purpose for which the license is to be issued and the particular
place where the licensee proposes to carry on the business or practice
during the term of the license; and the period of time the applicant proposes
to conduct such business or practice thereunder. Such application shall be
accompanied by the license fee required in Section 9-9 of this article, in
cash.
the licensee for his own use and benefit, and that the products aforesaid
to be sold or distributed or delivered from a vehicle bearing one of
the duplicate licenses will be sold, distributed or delivered for the use
and benefit of the licensee and not otherwise. The use of the duplicate
license upon any vehicle contrary to the affidavit of the applicant for
such license shall be sufficient grounds for the revocation of the license
and shall make the licensee subject to the penalties provided for in
Section 1-11 of this Code.
(b) No such license shall be transferable.
§ 9-3 WILLISTON CODE § 9-8
AO:260
§ 9-8. Same — Issuance. [Code 1957, § 12.4]
The application and license fee required by the preceding section shall be
delivered to the city auditor. If it shall appear from the application, and the
city auditor so determines, that the applicant is entitled to the particular
license applied for and has paid the required license fee, then the city
auditor shall execute and deliver such license to the applicant.
§ 9-9. Same — Fee; duration. [Code 1957, § 12.5]
The license fee to practice or engage in any of the businesses stated in
Section 9-6 of this article shall be $5 per day or $25 per month. No license
shall be issued for a period of less than one day nor more than one month.
§ 9-10. Auctioneer's license. [Code 1957, § 12.1; Ord. No. 509, § 1,
9-23-1975]
§ 9-11. Special event permit — Required. [Ord. No. 1102,
4-23-2019]
(a) No person shall pursue the business of an auctioneer or sell goods or
property at auction, except under legal process, without a license
therefor.
(b) For a license to sell stock of goods brought into the city for sale at
auction, or any part thereof, there shall be taxed and collected a license
fee of $25 for each day's sales.
(c) For a license to pursue the business of any auctioneer or to sell goods or
property at auction, there shall be levied and collected a license fee of
$50 for the first year applied for and a renewal fee of $25 each year
thereafter, the year to commence on the first day of July in each year.
(d) Before a license shall be issued to any person to pursue the business of
an auctioneer or to sell goods or property at auction, he shall file a
surety bond in the sum of $500 to be approved by the city attorney, and
conditioned for the prompt payment of all moneys and the delivery of all
goods that may come in his hands in his business to the person entitled
to receive the same; and which bond may be sued on in, the name of the
city by any person damaged by a breach of its conditions.
(1) Any individual planning a meeting, assembly, public dance, public
concert, or musical festival must fill out a special event permit.
(2) The chief peace officer of the city in which any public dance, music
festival or public concert is held within the limit of the city may police
such dance, music festival or public concert so that law and order are
there maintained. The chief peace officer shall determine the number, if
any, special officers needed to police the dance, music festival or public
concert properly. The person conducting any such dance, music festival
or public concert, before the dance, music festival or public concert is
held, shall pay to the peace officer the expense of any special officer
§ 9-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-11
AO:261
§ 9-12. through § 9-21. (Reserved)
required for the proper policing of such dance, music festival or public
concert, and no such dance, music festival or public concert may be
permitted to proceed unless such officer or officers are present and fees
therefore are paid. The holding of such dance, music festival or public
concert without making provision for policing thereof, is unlawful. No
person, directly or indirectly interested or concerned in the giving,
holding or conducting of such public dance, music festival or public
concert, or connected with the person conducting the same, is eligible
to appointment under this section as special officer.
(3) Except as otherwise may be provided, any person violating any
provision of this chapter can be charged with a Class B Misdemeanor,
assessed an administrative fee of up to $1,500 or both. In addition, the
Chief of Police, or his designee, has the authority to terminate the event
at any time for failure to obtain the permit required herein.
(4) Private dances or events are not subject to the aforementioned
ordinance. Private dances are those which are not open to the public,
are not advertised, and where private invitations are required. Each
private dance or event shall have a sign indicating it is a private dance
or event.
§ 9-11 WILLISTON CODE § 9-12
AO:262
ARTICLE II
House Moving17
§ 9-22. Definition. [Code 1957, § 23.11]
Every person who moves or contracts or agrees to move, or is engaged in
the business or occupation of moving houses and buildings of any kind or
nature whatsoever for compensation or hire, and who is not the owner of,
or the tenant or lessee in actual possession and acting by and under the
consent of the owner of the building to be moved, shall be deemed to be a
building mover and engaged in the business or occupation of moving houses
and buildings within the meaning and contemplation of this article.
§ 9-23. License to engage in business — Required. [Code 1957,
§ 23.12]
No person shall engage in the business or occupation of moving houses and
buildings of any kind or nature whatsoever from place to place within the
city limits of the city, or upon the streets or alleys of the city for hire or
compensation, without first obtaining an annual license therefor from the
city auditor as set forth in this article.
§ 9-24. Same — Issuance upon giving bond. [Code 1957, § 23.13;
Ord. No. 673, 7-8-1986]
No license required by the preceding section shall be granted to any person
until the person applying therefor shall have given a bond in the sum of
$5,000, such bond to run to the city for the use and benefit of the city,
and to be conditioned among other things that the person asking for the
license will pay any and all damages which may accrue by reason of the
granting of the license or flow from the moving of any house of the granting
of the license or flow from the moving of any house or building thereunder
which may be caused to any property, either public or private, within the
city, whether such damage or injury shall be inflicted by such licensee or
his agent, employees or workmen; and conditions also that such person will
indemnify and keep harmless the city against all liability, claims, judgments,
costs and expenses which may accrue against the city in consequence of
the granting of such permit or license, and that the person will in all things
comply with the conditions of such license or permit. Upon the execution of
the bond and approval of the board of city commissioners and the payment
of the license fee prescribed in this article, the license shall be issued, and
not otherwise.
§ 9-25. Same — Fee. [Ord. 1957, § 23.14; Ord. No. 673, 7-8-1986]
The license fee for persons engaged in the business or occupation of moving
houses and buildings shall be established by resolution by the board of city
commissioners.
17.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 5, Art. IX for additional permit requirements.
§ 9-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-26
AO:263
§ 9-26. Work done by other person than licensed mover. [Code
1957, § 23.18]
Any owner of any house or building, either by himself or persons in his
employ, other than licensed building movers, subject to this article, may
move any house or building within the city limits upon and along the streets
and alleys of the city upon procuring a permit therefor from the city auditor
as provided in Section 9-27 of this article and posting a bond as provided in
Section 9-24 of this article.
§ 9-27. Permit — Required. [Code 1957, § 23.15]
No house or building shall be moved upon the streets or alleys of the city
by any person, whether he is a licensed building mover or not, until a
permit therefor shall be obtained as provided in this article; and no licensed
building mover shall attempt or begin to move any house or building or the
tenant or lessees in actual possession acting by and under the consent of
the owner shall first have obtained a permit therefor as herein provided.
§ 9-28. Same — Application. [Code 1957, § 23.16]
Every person desiring to move a house or building shall make application
therefor to the board of city commissioners before moving any house or
building within the city limits.
§ 9-29. Same — Contents. [Code 1957, § 23.17]
The permit required in this article shall contain and specifically state all the
conditions to be complied with in moving such house or building, prescribe
the route to be taken in such moving and limit the time in which such
removal shall be made.
§ 9-30. Blocking streets. [Code 1957, § 23.20]
No public street or alley in the city shall be blocked, or public travel or
traffic delayed, upon any of the streets by reason of moving of houses or
buildings for a longer period than three hours.
§ 9-31. Cutting wires. [Code 1957, § 23.4]
No person shall cut, remove or break any telephone, telegraph, fire alarm
or electric wire, properly strung up on poles running through or across
any street in the city, for the purpose of moving any building or for any
other purpose, except in the case of fire or to prevent the destruction of
property, without first giving at least six hours' notice of his intention to cut,
remove or break such wire, such notice to be given to the company or city
or individual that owns or controls such wire.
§ 9-26 WILLISTON CODE § 9-32
AO:264
§ 9-32. Frame buildings. [Code 1957, § 23.19]
No person shall move any frame or wooden building or house into the fire
limits of the city, as defined in Section 5-14 of this Code; nor shall any frame
or wooden house or building be moved from place to place within the fire
limits.
§ 9-33. through § 9-44. (Reserved)
§ 9-32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-33
AO:265

ARTICLE III
Pesticide Applicators
§ 9-45. Definitions. [Ord. No. 443, § 1, 5-21-1968]
For the purposes of this article:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known, or hereafter invented, that is
used or designed for navigation of, or flight in, the air over land or water,
and that is designed for or adaptable to use in applying pesticides as sprays,
dusts or in other forms.
APPLICATOR — Any person who engages in custom application of
pesticides.
CUSTOM APPLICATION OF PESTICIDES — Any application of insecticides,
fungicides, herbicides, defoliants or desiccants by aircraft or ground
equipment, for hire or compensation; provided, however, that the term shall
not apply to stump-treating when the tree is cut or sawn down, nor to the
use of brush or a mop in connection with axe frilling.
DEFOLIANT — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for
causing the leaves or foliage to drop from a plant, with or without causing
abscission.
DESICCANT — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for
artificially accelerating the drying of plant tissues.
FUNGI — Any nonchlorophyll-bearing thallophytes including rusts, smuts,
mildews, molds, yeasts and bacteria, except those on or in living man or
other living animals, and except those on or in processed food, beverages or
pharmaceuticals.
FUNGICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended or
compounded for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any fungi or
bacteria.
GROUND EQUIPMENT — Any machine, equipment or device that is
designed for use, adaptable to use or that is used on land or water in
applying pesticides, as sprays, dusts, aerosols, fogs or in other forms.
HERBICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended or
compounded for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any weed.
INSECT — Any of the numerous small invertebrate animals generally
having the body more or less obviously segmented, for the most part
belonging to the class insecta, comprising six legged, usually winged forms,
including beetles, bugs and flies, and belonging to other allied classes of
arthropods whose members are wingless and usually have more than six
legs, including spiders, mites, ticks, centipedes and wood lice.
INSECTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended or
compounded for preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating insects
which may be present in any environment.
§ 9-45 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-45
AO:267
PESTICIDE — Any substance or mixture of substances intended for
regulating, defoliating or desiccating plants, or for preventing, destroying,
repelling or mitigating any insects, rodents, fungi, bacteria, weeds or other
forms of plant or animal life which the board shall declare to be a pest,
excluding plant nutrients, trace elements, nutritional chemicals, plant
inoculants and soil amendments from "regulating."
WEED — Any plant or plant part which grows where not wanted.
§ 9-46. Violations of regulations. [Ord. No. 443, § 8, 5-21-1968]
Any person violating the rules, regulations or standards promulgated
pursuant to this article, after a notice to cease and desist, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor.
§ 9-47. Exemption. [Ord. No. 443, § 4, 5-21-1968]
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as prohibiting any
person within the corporate limits of the city from spraying his own
property, nor as prohibiting any such person from doing his own spraying
upon any property rented by or under lease to him.
§ 9-48. Permit — Required. [Ord. No. 443, § 2, 5-21-1968]
It is unlawful for any person to act, operate or do business as an applicator,
or to engage in custom application of pesticides, unless the person has
an applicator's permit issued by the city. Permits shall be issued only
under application to the city on a form of application prescribed by the
city. The application shall contain information regarding the applicant's
qualifications, proposed operations, present residence, residence for the
past five years, name of insurance company that the applicant has insurance
with, policy number and such other information as may be specified by the
city.
§ 9-49. Same — Qualification or fitness. [Ord. No. 443, § 2,
5-21-1968]
A permit under this article shall be issued only after the applicant's
qualifications are deemed satisfactory by the board, showing that the
particular individual or individuals who will personally make, or supervise
the making, of a custom application of pesticides under the permit, are
qualified to do so. A failure to show proper qualification or fitness as an
applicator, in the opinion of the city, shall make it the duty of the city to deny
the application for a permit.
§ 9-50. Same — Bond, insurance. [Ord. No. 443, § 2, 5-21-1968]
(a) No permit shall be issued, renewed or validated under this article
unless the applicant has furnished evidence of financial responsibility
with the board consisting of a surety bond or cash bond, plus certificate
of liability insurance, or certification thereof, protecting any person
§ 9-45 WILLISTON CODE § 9-50
AO:268
§ 9-51. Same — Fees. [Ord. No. 443, § 2, 5-21-1968; Ord. No. 511,
10-28-1975]
who may suffer legal damages as a result of the operations of the
applicant. The board shall require a reasonable bond or insurance
policy from each applicant, under such rules and regulations as it may
prescribe, with respect to custom applications of pesticides. The board
shall not accept a surety bond or liability insurance policy, except from
authorized insurers licensed to do business in the state, in the following
amounts:
(1) Liability insurance.
a. Aircraft.
$25,000 property damage
$25,000 bodily injury
$250 maximum deductible allowed
b. Ground equipment.
$10,000 property damage
$10,000 bodily injury
$100 maximum deductible allowed
(2) Surety bond.
a. Aircraft, $25,000.
b. Ground equipment, $10,000.
(3) Cash bond.
a. Aircraft, $25,000.
b. Ground equipment, $10,000.
(b) These amounts are to include any legal loss or damage arising out of
the actual use of a pesticide. The bond or liability insurance policy shall
be maintained at not less than the required sum at all times during the
licensed period, and a copy of the valid bond or insurance policy will be
furnished to the city auditor at the time the license is issued. If the
applicant has not satisfied the requirement of the deductible amount in
any prior legal claim, such deductible clause shall not be accepted by
the board.
(c) Whenever the applicator's bond or liability insurance is reduced below
the required amount, the permit shall be automatically suspended until
such bond or insurance policy again meets the requirements
prescribed. The board shall be notified at least 10 days prior to any
reduction or cancellation of the surety bond or liability insurance policy
by the surety or insurer.
§ 9-50 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-51
AO:269
§ 9-52. Same — Authority granted. [Ord. No. 443, § 2, 5-21-1968]
Upon payment of the license fee as provided in this article, a license so
granted shall entitle the licensee named therein to engage in business as
a public sprayer within the corporate limits of the city for a period of one
year, unless said license shall be sooner revoked.
§ 9-53. Same — Suspension, etc. [Ord. No. 443. § 7, 5-21-1968]
Any permit issued under this article may be suspended, canceled or revoked
by the board after a hearing and opportunity to be heard has been given
to the holder of the permit. Notice thereof shall be given to the holder of
the permit by registered or certified mail at least 10 days prior to the date
of hearing. The suspension, cancellation or revocation may be made if the
board finds that the person has made misrepresentations for the purpose
of defrauding; has not satisfactorily performed, without proper cause, any
contract into which the person has entered; if the person has used methods
of pesticides not suitable or safe for the purpose for which they have been
employed; for the failure or refusal to furnish the board, upon request, true
information regarding methods, pesticides and safety measures used, work
performed or other information deemed essential by the board; for making
any false statement or misrepresentation in an application for issuance or
renewal of a permit; or for any violation of state law or of regulations or
standards prescribed by the board. Any reason for suspension, cancellation
or revocation of a permit is a misdemeanor.
§ 9-54. Same — Expiration; renewal. [Ord. No. 443, § 2, 5-21-1968]
All permits shall expire annually on December 31st following their issuance
or renewal and may be renewed for the ensuing calendar year, without
examination, if the application therefor is filed with the board not later than
March first of the ensuing year for which the permit is to be renewed.
§ 9-55. Equipment. [Ord. No. 443, § 4, 5-21-1968]
(a) A fee of $65 shall be paid to the city for the issuance, or renewal, of a
permit, for each unit of an aerial applicator plus and investigation fee of
$10. This fee shall be paid annually.
(b) A fee of $65 shall be paid for the issuance or renewal of a permit, for
each unit of any applicator, other than aerial, plus an investigation, fee
of $10 for the initial permit only.
(c) All fees shall be collected by the city auditor.
(a) Every licensee under this article shall be equipped with a power
sprayer with a pressure gauge attached, and such machine shall be
capable of maintaining at least 250 pounds pressure or the equivalent
thereof, measured at the gauge when two nozzles are open for use. The
tank must have a mechanical agitator. If back pressure agitation is
used, at least 400 pounds pressure must be used. All dormant sprays for
§ 9-51 WILLISTON CODE § 9-55
AO:270
§ 9-56. Records, reports. [Ord. No. 443, § 3, 5-21-1968]
§ 9-57. through § 9-67. (Reserved)
San Jose scale and other sucking and chewing insect pests, as well as
the calyx spray for the codling moth, shall be applied by such machines
under at least 200 pounds pressure or the equivalent thereof.
(b) The board shall have the authority to make, adopt, promulgate and
enforce regulations and standards for the custom application of
pesticides. All regulations and standards adopted by the board shall
have the force and effect of law insofar as they conform, as far as
possible, under existing state law, to the recommendations of the
United States Department of Agriculture. The board may procure
samples of spray and dusting materials, after they have been mixed, in
order to determine the concentration of the mixture. If the board finds
that any sample is deficient, the findings shall be considered prima facie
evidence for revocation of applicator's permit and for prosecution for a
misdemeanor.
(a) Each applicator is hereby required to keep the following information:
(1) Date, time and method of each application.
(2) Pesticide used and dosage.
(3) Name and address of person contracting application.
(4) Name and address of owner or occupant of area treated.
(5) Location of area treated.
(6) Specific type of vegetation, trees, crop, etc., to which pesticide was
applied.
(b) It shall be, the duty of every licensee to file with the city auditor weekly
a written report giving the names and addresses of the persons for
whom spraying has been done during the period covered by said report.
§ 9-55 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-57
AO:271

ARTICLE IV
Games of Chance18
§ 9-68. Adoption of state law. [Ord. No. 1045, 4-25-2017]
The Board of City Commissioners hereby adopts all of the terms, conditions
and provisions of Chapter 53-06.1 of the North Dakota Century Code, as
may be amended from time to time. The City shall authorize the conduct
of games of chance only as provided under said law, recognizing that an
eligible organization maintaining a building for the use of its members and
guests, which organization offers meals or liquor or both as a part of its
operation, must be licensed by the Attorney General of the State and shall
not be authorized under the provisions of this article.
§ 9-69. Organizations eligible; use of proceeds. [Ord. No. 1045,
4-25-2017]
The Board of City Commissioners hereby allows nonprofit veterans,
charitable, educational, religious and fraternal organizations, civic and
service clubs and public spirited organizations, as those terms are defined
by State law, to conduct certain games of chance authorized by State law,
under the limited conditions of State law. The entire net proceeds of such
games of chance are to be devoted to educational, charitable, patriotic,
fraternal, religious or other public-spirited uses as defined by State law.
§ 9-70. Application for site authorization; application for permit;
review by city auditor. [Ord. No. 1045, 4-25-2017]
(a) The Board of City Commissioners grants approval of site authorization
applications and gaming permit applications to the discretion of the
City Auditor. The City Auditor shall review all applications in a timely
manner. The City Auditor has complete discretion to approve or reject
an application. The City Auditor has discretion to require additional
information, or to continue the consideration of an application from
time to time. The City Auditor shall have complete discretion and
authority to place conditions for approval of an application or place any
conditions or restrictions upon an organization as the condition of
approval.
(b) Each applicant for a game of chance site authorization within the City
shall submit an application to the City Auditor on a form provided by the
City Auditor. Each site authorization shall be accompanied by an annual
license fee of $100 per site. Each application for a single event site
authorization shall be accompanied by a license fee of $50 per site for
the single event. The application for the site authorization shall contain
a list of the names and addresses of the applicant's gaming committee
members, a description of the primary purpose of the organization and
intended uses of the gaming proceeds, a description of the means used
18.Editor's Note: Prior history: Resolution of 7-12-1977.
§ 9-68 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-70
AO:273
§ 9-71. Limitations. [Ord. No. 1045, 4-25-2017]
§ 9-72. (Reserved)
§ 9-73. Power reserved. [Ord. No. 1045, 4-25-2017]
The Board of City Commissioners shall have the power, on its own motion
based on reasonable grounds or on written complaint, to suspend or revoke
an authorization in accordance with Chapter 28-32 of the North Dakota
Century Code (Administrative Agencies Practice Act) for violation of the
State law or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder applicable to
games of chance, or of this article, by an organization authorized under
this article to conduct games of chance or any officer, director, agent,
member, or employee of such organization. Any person aggrieved by an
action of the Board of City Commissioners has the right to appeal such
action to the district court, provided that the aggrieved person files a notice
of appeal with the City Auditor within 30 days of notice of the suspension or
revocation.
to determine how the gaming proceeds are applied to charitable
causes, and a complete list of the applicant's receipts, expenses,
charitable contributions, and a detailed account showing the
percentage of funds applied to local charitable causes for the previous
operational year if the application is for a renewal of a site previously
granted. The application shall contain a statement that the real estate
taxes and special assessments on the proposed site have been paid.
(c) Each applicant for a permit to conduct games of chance shall submit an
application for a local permit or charity local permit to the City Auditor
on a form approved by the Attorney General and provided by the City
Auditor. Such application must be filed in a timely manner to enable the
City Auditor to review such application. The fee for all local permits
shall be $25.
(d) An applicant may appeal a decision made by the City Auditor to the
Board of City Commissioners. The appeal must be filed within 30 days
of the City Auditor's decision. A hearing on the appeal shall be held at
the next regular commission meeting following the filing of the appeal.
The appeal must be filed on a form provided by the City and signed by
the applicant.
(a) Site approval for conducting authorized games of chance shall be
limited to premises within the City holding valid on-sale liquor licenses.
Maximum hours of operation of games of chance shall be the same as
allowable for liquor and beer licensees under the City's alcoholic
beverage ordinance.
(b) The Board of City Commissioners shall have the authority to limit the
number of gaming sites granted to any single organization. There shall
be no limitation of the number of site authorizations granted for the
game of bingo within the City of Williston.
§ 9-70 WILLISTON CODE § 9-74
AO:274
§ 9-74. through § 9-84. (Reserved)
§ 9-74 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-74
AO:275

ARTICLE V
Adult Entertainment19
§ 9-85. Purpose; authority and determinations. [Ord. No. 1035,
1-26-2016]
(a) It is the purpose of this article to regulate adult entertainment
establishments in order to promote the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Williston, and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious
secondary effects and concentrations of adult entertainment
establishments within the City of Williston. The provisions of this article
have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or
restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative
materials, including any sexually oriented materials. Further, it is
neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by
the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment
protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors
and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended
market. Neither it is the intent nor effect of this ordinance to condone
or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(b) Whereas, the City of Williston has explicit authority under Section
40-05-01(29) of the North Dakota Century Code to adopt regulations
governing the sale of alcohol beverages within city limits; and
Whereas, the City of Williston has explicit authority under Section
40-05-01(24) of the North Dakota Century Code to "fix the amount,
terms and manner of issuing and revoking licenses;" and
Whereas, the City has general police powers set forth in Chapter 40-05
of the North Dakota Century Code to act for the good order of the City
of Williston, for its commercial benefit, and for the health, safety and
welfare of the public and may carry its powers out by regulation or
suppression;
Whereas, by adopting this ordinance [Ord. No. 1035], the City does not
intend to regulate obscenity, as nudity in and of itself is not obscene;
Whereas, the City declares its intent to address the secondary effects of
live nude dancing, as defined in this chapter, in liquor licensed premises
within City limits; and
Whereas, the liquor licensed establishments featuring live nude
dancing have:
(1) Caused depreciation in surrounding property values near these
establishments;
19.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance No. 571 which was repealed by
Ord. No. 1035.
§ 9-85 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-85
AO:277
(2) Harmed the economic welfare of communities;
(3) Negatively affected the quality of life of communities, including the
City of Williston;
(4) Increased criminal and other offensive activity in other
communities facing these same issues;
(5) Increased criminal activity in our own community, as evidenced by
the police reports and police call logs that were provided to City
Commission members as they contemplated action on the
secondary effects of nude dancing in liquor-licensed
establishments; and
(6) Disrupted the peace and order of these communities, and our own
community as police resources are diverted a disproportionate
period of time to address recurring issues at these live nude
dancing liquor licensed establishments.
These secondary effects are detrimental to the health, safety, and
welfare of the citizens of the City of Williston.
Whereas, the City recognizes that the First Amendment to the
United States Constitution is applicable to the states through the
Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution and
further recognizes that the United States Supreme Court has held
that nude dancing is expressive conduct entitled to limited
protection under the First Amendment of the US Constitution; and
Whereas, the Commission further recognizes that freedom of
speech and expression are amongst our most precious and highly
protected rights and wishes to act consistently with protection of
those rights as they enact these regulations; and
Whereas, however, the Commission is aware, based on the effects
felt in our community and those experienced in other communities,
that liquor licensed establishments featuring live nude dancing
may and do generate secondary effects which the Commission
believes are detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare;
and
Whereas, based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary
effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in studies and
local police reports made available to the board, and on findings
incorporated in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S.
277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41
(1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/
PBS, Inc. V. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen
Theatre, Inc., 501 US. 560 (1991); Thomas v. Chicago Park District,
122 S. Ct. 775 (2002); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972);
City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002);
McCrothers Corp. v. Mandan, 2007 ND 28, 728 N.E. 2d 124 (2007);
§ 9-85 WILLISTON CODE § 9-85
AO:278
City of Chicago v. Poo Bah Enterprises, Inc., 865 N.E. 2d 390 (Ill.
2006); and other cases; and reports of secondary effects occurring
in and around adult entertainment establishments, including, but
not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston,
Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove,
California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin,
Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma County, Oklahoma;
Cleveland, Ohio; Dallas, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; St. Croix County,
Wisconsin; Bellevue, Washington; Newport News, Virginia; New
York, New York; Phoenix, Arizona; Mandan, North Dakota; and
from summaries of several of the foregoing secondary effects
report; the board finds:
(1) Employees of unregulated sexually oriented businesses,
especially live nude dancing establishments, are at risk of
engaging in certain types of illicit and illegal sexual behavior at
a higher incidence than employees of other establishments.
(2) Sex acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, occur
at unregulated sexually oriented businesses, especially those
which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for
viewing films or videos or live nude dancing and/or sexually
oriented shows.
(3) Patrons frequent these types of establishments with the
purpose of soliciting and engaging in certain illicit and illegal
sexual acts within the premises of the sexually oriented
businesses. These acts and solicitation often occur over the
exchange of money.
(4) The Office of the Texas Attorney General presented a report to
the Texas Legislature in March 2013 regarding the
interconnected relationship between human trafficking and
sexually oriented businesses. The increase in human
trafficking in the Bakken region is something state and local
officials are acutely aware of and taking steps to combat.
(5) Between mid-2013 and June 2015 there were 200 incidents at
the 2 strip clubs located within City limits that the Williston
Police Department responded to.
a. The following is a summary of the types of calls and
incidents that the Williston Police Department responded
to:
1. The following criminal violations occurred: murder
(2), fights/assaults, DUI, disorderly conduct, unruly
and intoxicated patrons, hit and run calls, theft of
property calls (including stolen vehicles), welfare
checks, traffic violations, junk ordinance violations,
minors admitted to the establishments, minors being
served alcohol.
§ 9-85 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-85
AO:279
2. Of the fight/assault calls, almost all involved
intoxicated individuals. For example, in September
2014, there was a fight between overly intoxicated
individuals outside one of the strip clubs. One
individual was pushed and struck his head. The head
injury resulted in permanent brain damage.
3. A review of the police reports of the incidences at the
adult entertainment venues within City limits shows
that over 90% of these incidences involved alcohol.
(6) The Office of the Texas Attorney General presented a report to
the Texas Legislature in March 2013 regarding the
relationship between human trafficking and sexually oriented
businesses. The increase in human trafficking in the Bakken
region is something state and local officials are acutely aware
of and taking steps to combat.
(7) A limited study was done by The Freedom and Justice Center
for Prostitution Resources: A program of the Volunteers of
America of Minnesota. The Survey Data was analyzed on the
Statistical Program for Social Sciences. 100% of the women
involved in the study reported incidences of physical abuse in
the strip club at which they were working. 100% of the women
involved in the study reported sexual abuse in the strip club at
which they were working. 100% of these incidences went
unreported to law enforcement.
(8) The City of St. Marys, Georgia published a Digest of Research:
The Evidence of Relationships Between Adult-Oriented
Businesses and Community Crime and Disorder.
(9) Eric S. McCord and Richard Tewksbury of the Department of
Justice Administration at the University of Louisville, KY
published an article in Crime & Delinquency addressing if
sexually oriented businesses in communities is related to
increased levels of crime. Their study revealed that "sexually
oriented businesses are associated with much higher rates of
all types of offenses in the immediate vicinity of the business
and continue to have significant effects on crime levels as one
moves further from the business." Crime & Delinquency 59(7),
1108-25(2012).
(10) Research supports the finding that sexually oriented
businesses that serve alcohol or that are located near liquorserving
businesses pose "larger and qualitatively different
ambient public safety hazards" than other establishments. The
Illinois Supreme Court, after reviewing available research,
found that "Victims become more vulnerable because of
alcohol's debilitating effects, thus creating an attractive
situation for potential offenders." City of Chicago v. Pooh Bah
§ 9-85 WILLISTON CODE § 9-85
AO:280
Enterprises, Inc. et al. (Ill. 2006). Research found that patrons
of sexually oriented businesses are reluctant to involve or
contact law enforcement when victimized. Testimony of Dr.
Richard McCleary, a professor at the University of California,
Irvin, and Professor Lori Sexton to the Illinois State Senate
Public Health Committee in March 2012 in support of SB 3348.
Dr. McCleary is a nationally recognized expert on sexually
oriented businesses. He's been studying secondary effects of
sexually oriented businesses and the sexually oriented
business industry since the 1980s. He and Professor Lori
Sexton proffered written testimony in March 2012 to the
Illinois State Legislature discussing the impact of alcohol,
crime, and sexually oriented businesses when the legislature
was contemplating creating a program to offer Grants to
combat sexual assaults and sexual violence.
(11) Offering and providing unregulated space encourages unsafe
and unsanitary acts, which create public health issues and
possibly even health code violations.
(12) The National Health Research and Development Program of
Health Canada published a Final Report on Erotic/Exotic
Dancing: HIV-Related Risk Factors detailing the sexual health
issues that exist in live nude dancing establishments.
(13) Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in adult entertainment establishments.
(14) According to the best scientific evidence, sexually transmitted
diseases and infections are principally transmitted through
sexual acts. Sex acts at adult entertainment establishments is a
real concern.
(15) According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, 1.1 million people
are living with HIV in the US. 76% diagnosed are male and
24% female. 84% of new HIV infections of women occur
through heterosexual sex. The majority of all new infections
across all races and genders resulted from sexual contact. In
2010 there were 47,500 new HIV infections in the US.
(16) According to the CDC, there were 1.4 million reported cases of
Chlamydia in the US in 2013.
(17) There were over 333,000 reported cases of Gonorrhea in the
US in 2013 according to the CDC.
(18) Sanitary conditions in some adult oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because of the activities conducted there
are conducted in an unhealthy fashion, and, in part, because of
the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the
owners and operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain their facilities.
§ 9-85 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-85
AO:281
§ 9-86. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1035, 1-26-2016]
(19) Numerous studies and reports have shown that semen is found
in the areas of adult entertainment establishments where
persons view adult oriented films and live nude shows, like the
live nude shows that take place at the adult establishments in
Williston; and
Whereas, the Commission finds that the consumption of
alcoholic beverages exacerbates these negative secondary
effects; and
Whereas, the Commission desires to minimize, prevent and
control these negative secondary effects and thereby protect
the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and
Whereas, the Commission is also aware that Courts in North
Dakota and in the United States Eighth Circuit Court of
Appeals have found that there is no constitutionally protected
right to consume or sell alcohol while watching or offering live
nude dancing; and
Whereas, the Commission has received and contemplated
studies regarding the secondary effects of nude dancing in
communities, judicial opinions, ordinances from other
communities, and City of Williston police reports and police
call logs while determining a course of action; and
Whereas, the Commission has determined that an ordinance
prohibiting live nude dancing in liquor licensed establishments
promotes the substantial goal of minimizing, preventing, and
controlling the negative secondary effects associated with such
activity; and
Whereas, the Commission has also determined that an
ordinance prohibiting live nude dancing in liquor licensed
establishments is the least restrictive means of regulating such
negative secondary effects, staying mindful of not infringing
on any more protected speech than is necessary to achieve
its lawful interest in regulating the adverse secondary effects
of live nude dancing that are exacerbated by the sale and
consumption of alcohol in such establishments that offer live
nude dancing.
(a) Definitions for the purposes of this title:
ADULT CABARET — Any commercial premises or private club to which
any member of the public or club member is invited or admitted, and
where an entertainer provides live entertainment or activity as defined
in adult entertainment.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Is split into two sub-categories:
§ 9-85 WILLISTON CODE § 9-86
AO:282
APPLICANT — The individual or entity seeking a cabaret license in the
City of Williston.
APPLICANT CONTROL PERSON — All partners, corporate officers and
directors and any other individuals in the applicant's business
organization who hold a significant interest in the adult cabaret
"Allowable Adult Entertainment" means:
Any exhibition, performance or dance conducted in a licensed
adult cabaret premises where such exhibition, performance,
or dance involves a person who performs in such clothing or
sheds clothing to a point where the female breast is exposed.
1.
a.
"Prohibited Adult Entertainment" means:
Any exhibition, performance, or dance, conducted in a licensed
adult cabaret premise or otherwise, which includes any of the
following:
Exposure of any portion of pubic area, anus, buttocks,
vulva or genitals, or wearing any device or covering
exposed to view which simulates the appearance of any
portion of the pubic region, anus, buttocks, vulva or
genital, or human male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state, even if completely and opaquely covered; and/or
i.
The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral
copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are
prohibited by law; and/or
ii.
The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of
the breast, buttock, anus, or genitals; and/or
iii.
The actual or simulated display of the pubic hair, anus,
vulva, or genitals or the nipples of the female; and/or
iv.
Appearances, entertainment or performances of any type
consisting of or containing any fully nude performer; and/
or
v.
1.
Any exhibition, performance or dance which is intended to
sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is
conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the
premises activity. This includes, but is not limited to, any such
exhibition, performance or dance performed for, arranged
with, or engaged in with fewer than all members of the public
on the premises at that time, which separate consideration
paid, either directly or indirectly, for such performance,
exhibition or dance and which is commonly referred to as table
dancing, couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private
dancing, or straddle dancing.
2.
b.
§ 9-86 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-86
AO:283
business, based on the responsibility for management of the adult
cabaret business.
CABARET — Any room, place or space whatsoever in the City of
Williston in which any music, singing, dancing, or other similar
entertainment is permitted in connection with any hotel, restaurant,
cafe, club, bar, tavern and/or eating place, directly selling, serving or
providing the public or its members, with or without charge, food or
liquor. Music and entertainment, as used in this definition, does not
apply to radios or mechanical devices.
CLERK — Any such City of Williston employee or agent as the City
Administrator/City Auditor designates to administer this article, or any
designee thereof.
EMPLOYEE — Any and all persons, including managers, assistant
managers, servers, bartenders, bouncers, entertainers, or any other
person considered an employee for payroll purposes, who works in or at
or render any services directly related to the operation of the cabaret.
ENTERTAINER — Any person, either employee or independent
contractor, who provides adult entertainment within an adult cabaret,
whether or not a fee is charged or accepted for such entertainment.
LIQUOR — All beverages as defined in Title 5 of the North Dakota
Century Code and Chapter 3 of the City of Williston Code of
Ordinances.
MANAGER — Any person who manages, directs, administers or is in
charge of the affairs and/or conduct of any portion of any activity
involving adult entertainment occurring at any adult cabaret. The term
manager includes assistant managers working with or under the
direction of a manager to carry out such purposes.
MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC — Any customer, patron, club member, or
person, other than an employee, who is invited or admitted to a cabaret.
NUDE PERFORMER OR NUDE DANCER — Any person who performs
or appears in attire such that any portion of the breast below the areola,
pubic area, anus, vulva, or genitals is exposed to view.
OPERATOR — Any person operating, conducting or maintaining any
adult cabaret.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, trust, incorporated or unincorporated association, marital
community, joint venture, governmental entity, or other entity or group
of persons, however organized.
SEXUAL CONDUCT —
The performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or
any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; and/or
a.
§ 9-86 WILLISTON CODE § 9-86
AO:284
§ 9-87. Standards of conduct and operation. [Ord. No. 1035,
1-26-2016]
TOPLESS FEMALE PERFORMER OR TOPLESS FEMALE DANCER —
Any female who performs or appears in attire such at any portion of her
breasts below the top of the areola are exposed to view.
The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling of the
breast, buttocks, anus, or genitals; and/or
b.
The actual or simulated display of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, or
genitals, or the nipples of a female; and/or
c.
Appearances, entertainment, or performances of any type
consisting of or containing any nude performer, nude dancer, or
topless female dancer.
d.
(a) Standards of conduct. The following standards of conduct must be
adhered to by applicants, operators, employees and entertainers of any
adult cabaret while in any area in which members of the public are
allowed to be present:
(1) Section 9-86(a)(2)(a) defines the allowable adult entertainment.
(2) No employee or entertainer shall perform any of the acts defined as
prohibited adult entertainment under Section 9-86(a)(2)b which
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
a. No employee or entertainer, while performing, shall be
unclothed so as to expose to view any portion of the pubic
region, anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals.
b. No employee or entertainer, while mingling with members of
the public, shall be unclothed so as to expose any portion of the
breast below the areola or any of the pubic region, anus,
buttocks, vulva or genitals, nor shall any male employee or
entertainer at any time appear with his genitals in a discernibly
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered, or wear
or use any device or covering which simulates the same.
c. No employee or entertainer, while performing or mingling with
members of the public, shall wear or use any device or
covering exposed to view which simulates vulva, genitals,
anus, any portion of the pubic region, or buttocks.
(3) No employee or entertainer may caress, fondle, or erotically touch
any member of the public. No employee or entertainer may
encourage or permit any member of the public to caress, fondle, or
erotically touch any employee or entertainer's breasts or genitals.
(4) No employee or entertainer shall perform actual or simulated acts
of sexual conduct or any act which constitutes a violation of
Chapters 12.1-27.1 or 12.1-27.2 of the North Dakota Century Code.
§ 9-86 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-87
AO:285
(5) No employee or entertainer mingling with members of the public
shall conduct any dance, performance, or exhibition in or about the
non-stage area of the adult cabaret.
(b) Requirements. At any adult cabaret, the following are required:
(1) Admission must be restricted to persons 21 years of age or older. It
is unlawful for any owner, applicant, operator, manager, or other
person in charge of the adult cabaret to knowingly permit or allow
any person under the minimum age specified to be in or upon such
premises.
(2) Neither the performance or any photograph, drawing, sketch, or
other pictorial or graphic representation displaying any portion of
the breasts below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic
hair, buttocks, genitals and/or anus may be visible outside of the
adult cabaret.
(3) No member of the public may be permitted at any time to enter into
any of the non-public portions of the adult cabaret, which include,
but are not limited to the dressing rooms of the entertainers or
other rooms provided for the benefit of employees, and the kitchen
and storage areas. The exception to the previously stated rule is
that persons delivering goods and materials, food and beverages,
or performing maintenance or repairs to the premises or
equipment on the premises may be permitted into non-public areas
to the extent required to perform their job duties.
(4) The consumption or possession of alcohol is prohibited in or upon
the premises of an adult cabaret.
(c) Responsibilities of cabaret. The responsibilities of the applicants,
cabaret licensees, operators, and managers of an adult cabaret include,
but are not limited to:
(1) The operator or their designee/agent must be on duty at an adult
cabaret at all times adult entertainment is being provided or
members of the public are present on the premises. The name and
license of the operator or their designee/agent must be prominently
displayed during business hours. This individual must be
responsible for verifying that any person who provides adult
entertainment within the premises possesses a current and valid
entertainer's license.
(2) The operator or their designee/agent must provide to the Williston
Police Department a weekly schedule of dates and names of the
licensed entertainers who will be performing, which notice shall be
provided no later than 4:00 p.m. on each Monday of each week. Any
changes in the schedule must be provided to the Williston Police
Department within 24 hours of the change.
§ 9-87 WILLISTON CODE § 9-87
AO:286
(3) The operator or their designee/agent on duty may not be an
entertainer.
(4) The operator or their designee/agent licensed under this ordinance
must maintain visual observation of each member of the public at
all times any entertainer is present in the public or performance
areas of the adult cabaret. Where there is more than one
performance area, or the performance area is of such size or
configuration that the responsible individual is unable to visually
observe, at all times, each adult entertainer, each employee, and
each member of the public, an additional responsible individual
must be provided for each public performance or performance area
or portion of a public or performance area visually separated from
other portions of the adult cabaret.
(5) The operator or their designee/agent shall ensure that the actions
of members of the public, the adult entertainers, and all other
employees comply with all requirements of this article.
(d) Premises; specifications.
(1) Performance area. The performance area of the adult cabaret
where adult entertainment is provided must be a stage or platform
at least 18 inches in elevation above the level of the patron seating
areas and must be separated by a distance of at least six feet from
all areas of the premises to which members of the public have
access. A continuous railing at least three feet in height and located
at least six feet from all points of the performance area must
separate the performance area and the patron seating areas.
1. The stage and the entire interior portion of cubicles, rooms, or
stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided must be visible
from the common areas of the premises and at least one
manager's station. Visibility must not be blocked or obstructed
by doors, curtains, drapes or any other obstruction whatsoever.
(2) Lighting. Sufficient lighting must be provided and equally
distributed throughout the public areas of the premises so that all
objects are plainly visible at all times.
(3) Signs. A sign at least two feet by two feet, with letters at least one
inch in height must be conspicuously displayed in the public area of
the premises stating the following:
THIS ADULT CABARET IS REGULATED BY THE CITY OF
WILLISTON.
ENTERTAINERS ARE NOT PERMITTED TO:
1. ENGAGE IN ANY TYPE OF SEXUAL CONDUCT.
2. APPEAR FULLY NUDE.
§ 9-87 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-87
AO:287
§ 9-88. License required. [Ord. No. 1035, 1-26-2016]
3. ACCEPT TIPS OR GRATUITIES IN ADVANCE OF THEIR
PERFORMANCE.
(e) Recordkeeping requirements.
(1) All papers, records, and things required to be kept pursuant to this
article must be open to inspection by the city, its employees or
agents during the hours when the licensed premises is open for
business, upon two days' written notice. The purpose for such
inspections must be to determine whether the papers, records, and
things retained comply with the requirements of this article.
(2) Each adult cabaret entertainment business must maintain and
retain, for a period of two years, the name, address, and age of
each person employed or otherwise retained or allowed to perform
on the premises, as an adult entertainer, including independent
contractors and their employees. This information must be open to
inspection by the city, its employees or agents during hours of
operation upon two days' written notice to the licensee.
(f) All adult cabarets which are open to the public, including those adult
cabarets which offer memberships to members of the public, must be
open to inspection by city agents and employees during the hours when
the premises is open for business. The purpose of such inspection must
be to determine if the licensed premises is operated in accordance with
the requirements of this article. It is hereby expressly declared that
unannounced inspections are necessary to ensure compliance with this
article, and the adult cabaret upon acceptance of a license from the City
of Williston consents to such unannounced inspections.
(g) Hours of operation. It is unlawful for any adult cabaret to be in
operation or otherwise open to the public between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 10:00 a.m.
(h) Exemptions.
(1) This article must not be construed or interpreted to prohibit:
a. Plays, operas, musicals or other dramatic works that are not
obscene;
b. Classes, seminars, and lectures which are held for serious
scientific or educational purposes and which are not obscene;
or
c. Exhibitions, performances, expressions, or dances that are not
obscene.
(2) These exemptions shall not apply to sexual conduct.
§ 9-87 WILLISTON CODE § 9-88
AO:288
§ 9-89. Application. [Ord. No. 1035, 1-26-2016]
(a) It is unlawful for any person to conduct, manage or operate an adult
cabaret unless such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting
license from the City of Williston to do so, obtained in the manner
provided by this article.
(b) It is unlawful for any entertainer, employee or manager to knowingly
work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service or entertainment
directly related to, the operation of an unlicensed adult cabaret.
(c) It is unlawful for any entertainer to perform in an adult cabaret unless
such person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City
of Williston to do so.
(d) It is unlawful for any manager to work in an adult cabaret unless such
person is the holder of a valid and subsisting license from the City of
Williston to do so.
(a) Adult cabaret license.
(1) All applications for an adult cabaret license must be submitted to
the clerk in the name of the person or entity proposing to conduct
an adult cabaret on the business premises and must be signed by
such person and certified as true under penalty of perjury. All
applications must be submitted on a form supplied by the clerk,
which must include the following information:
a. Provide names, any aliases or previous names, driver's license
number or state issued identification, if any, business, mailing,
and residential addresses, and business telephone number of
the applicant, applicant control person, and operator.
b. If a partnership, whether general or limited in nature, and if a
corporation, date and place of incorporation, and if a limited
liability company, the date and place of organization, plus
evidence that the business entity is in good standing under
state laws, and name and address of any registered agent for
service of process and the names of all partners, members, or
shareholders.
c. Whether the applicant or any partner, corporate officer, or
director of the applicant holds any other licenses under this
article or any license for similar adult entertainment or
sexually oriented business, including bookstore, motion
picture theaters and panoramas, from the city or another city,
county or state, and, if so, the names and addresses of each
other licensed business.
d. A summary of the business history of the applicant, applicant
control person, and operator(s) in owning or operating the
adult entertainment or other sexually oriented businesses,
§ 9-88 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-89
AO:289
providing names, addresses and dates of operation for such
businesses, and whether any business license or adult
entertainment license has been revoked or suspended and the
reason for such revocation or suspension.
e. For the applicant, applicant control person and operator(s),
any and all criminal convictions or forfeitures within five years
immediately preceding the date of the application, other than
parking offenses or minor traffic infractions, including the
dates of conviction, nature of the crime, names and location of
court and disposition of all charges.
f. For the applicant, applicant control person and operator(s), a
description of business, occupation, or employment history for
the three years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
g. Authorization for the City of Williston, its agents and
employees to seek information to confirm any statements set
forth in the application.
h. The location and doing-business-as name of the proposed adult
cabaret, including a legal description of the property, street
address, and telephone number, together with the name and
address of each owner and the lessee of the property.
i. Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant,
applicant control person and operator(s), taken within six
months of the date of the application, showing only the full
face.
j. A complete set of fingerprints for the applicant, applicant
control person and operator(s) taken by Williston Police
Department employees.
k. A scale drawing or diagram showing the configuration of the
premises of the proposed adult cabaret, including a statement
of the total floor space occupied by the business, and marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises. Performance areas,
seating areas, manager's office and stations, restrooms and
service areas must be clearly marked on the drawing. An
application for a license for an adult cabaret must include
building plans which demonstrate compliance with all
applicable building, fire, food service, and health and safety
codes at the city, county, state or federal level.
(2) An application is deemed complete when the applicant has
provided all information requested in Subsection (1)a of this
section, and the applicant's verification that the application is
complete. The clerk may request other information or clarification
in addition to that provided in a complete application where
necessary to determine compliance with this article.
§ 9-89 WILLISTON CODE § 9-89
AO:290
(3) A nonrefundable application fee as established by resolution must
be paid at the time of filing an application in order to defray the
costs of processing the application.
(4) Each applicant, applicant control person and operator(s) must
verify, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained in
the application is true.
(5) If any person or entity acquires, subsequent to the issuance of an
adult cabaret license, a significant interest based on the
responsibility for management or operation of the licensed
premises or the licensed business, notice of such acquisition must
be provided in writing to the clerk no later than 21 days following
such acquisition. The notice required must include the information
required for the original adult cabaret license application.
(6) The adult cabaret license, if granted, must state on its face the
name of the person to whom it is issued, the expiration date, the
doing-business-as name and the address of the licensed adult
cabaret. The permit must be posted in a conspicuous place at or
near the entrance to the adult cabaret so that it can be easily read
at any time the business is open.
(7) No person or entity granted an adult cabaret license pursuant to
this article may operate the adult cabaret business under a name
not specified on the license, nor may any person or entity operate
an adult cabaret under any designation or at any location not
specified on the license.
(8) Upon receipt of the complete application and fee, the clerk must
provide copies to the health office, police, fire, and building
departments for their investigation and review to determine
compliance of the proposed adult cabaret with the laws and
regulations which each department administers. Each department
shall, within 30 days of the date of such application, inspect the
application and premises and shall make a written report to the
clerk whether such application and premises complies with the
laws administered by each department.
a. No license may be issued unless each department reports that
the application and premises comply with all applicable laws.
b. In the event the premises is not yet constructed, the
departments shall base their recommendation as to premises
compliance on their review of the drawings submitted in the
application.
c. Any adult cabaret license approved prior to the premises
construction shall contain a condition that the premises may
not be open for business until the premises have been
inspected and determined to be in substantial compliance with
the drawings submitted with the application.
§ 9-89 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-89
AO:291
d. A department must recommend denial of a license under this
section if it finds that the proposed adult cabaret is not in
compliance with the requirements of this article or other law in
effect in the city. A recommendation for denial must cite the
specific reason for the denial, including citation to applicable
laws.
(9) An adult cabaret license shall be issued by the clerk within 60 days
of the date of filing a complete license application and fee, unless
the Board of City Commissioners determines that the applicant has
failed to meet any of the requirements of this article or provide any
information required under this subsection or that the applicant
has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material
fact on the application for a license or the clerk has denied such
license.
a. The clerk may grant an extension of time in which an applicant
is to provide all information required for a complete license
application upon the request of the applicant.
b. If the clerk finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of the
requirements for issuance of an adult cabaret license, the clerk
shall recommend denial of the application in writing, shall cite
the specific reasons for the denial recommendation, including
applicable law, and must forward the same to the board.
c. If the board fails to approve or deny the license within 60 days
of the date of filing of a complete application and fee, the
applicant may, subject to all other applicable law, operate the
business for which the license was sought until a notification of
denial is received from the clerk.
d. The clerk or Board of City Commissioners may, for good cause
shown, extend the application review time past the 60 days but
in no event may the City extend the application review time for
more than an additional 60 days.
(b) Adult cabaret manager and entertainer license.
(1) No person may work as a manager, assistant manager, or
entertainer at an adult cabaret without first obtaining an
entertainer's or manager's license from the City of Williston. Each
applicant for a manager's or entertainer's license must complete an
application on forms provided by the City containing the
information below.
(2) A nonrefundable application fee established by resolution of the
City Commission must accompany the application. An application is
not considered complete unless accompanied by the required
application fee.
§ 9-89 WILLISTON CODE § 9-89
AO:292
(3) A copy of the application shall be forwarded to the Williston Police
Department for review, investigation and recommendation.
(4) All applications for a manager's or entertainer's license must be
signed by the applicant and certified to be true under penalty of
perjury.
(5) The manager's or entertainer's license application shall require the
following information:
a. The applicant's name, home address, home telephone number,
date and place of birth;
b. Any stage names, nicknames or aliases used by the applicant;
c. Fingerprints taken by Williston Police Department employees
or by a police department approved by the City of Williston;
d. The name and address of each business at which the applicant
intends to work;
e. Documentation that the applicant has attained the age of 18
years. Any two may be accepted as documentation of age:
1. A motor vehicle operator's license issued by any state
bearing the applicant's photograph and date of birth.
2. A state-issued identification card bearing the applicant's
photograph and date of birth.
3. An official passport issued by the United States of
America.
4. An immigration card issued by the United States of
America.
5. Any other identification that the city determines to be
acceptable.
f. A complete statement of all convictions of the applicant for any
misdemeanor or felony violations in the City of Williston or any
other city, county, or state within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application, parking violations or
minor traffic infractions excepted, including the dates of
conviction, nature of the crime, named and location of court
and disposition of all charges.
g. A description of the applicant's principal activities or services
to be rendered in the adult cabaret.
h. Two two-inch by two-inch color photographs of the applicant,
taken within six months of the date of the application, showing
only the full face.
§ 9-89 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-89
AO:293
§ 9-90. Penalty for violation of this article. [Ord. No. 1035,
1-26-2016]
i. Authorization for the city, its employees and agents to
investigate and confirm any statements set forth in the
application.
j. Every adult entertainer must provide his license to the adult
cabaret manager on duty on the premises prior to the
entertainer's performance. The manager must retain the
licenses of the adult entertainers in a fashion that renders
them readily available for inspection by the City at any time
during business hours of the adult cabaret.
(6) The clerk may request additional information or clarification when
necessary to determine compliance with this article.
(7) An adult cabaret manager's or an adult entertainer's license shall
be issued by the City within 30 days from the date the complete
application and fees are received, unless the clerk determines that
the applicant has failed to provide any information required to be
supplied according to this article, has made any false, misleading
or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or has
failed to meet any requirements for issuance of a license under this
article.
a. If the clerk determines that the applicant has failed to qualify
for a license applied for, the clerk must recommend denial in
writing, cite the specific reasons for the recommended denial,
including citation to applicable laws, and must forward the
same to the Board.
(8) If the Board fails to approve or deny an application for an adult
cabaret manager's or entertainer's license within 30 days of filing
of a complete application, the applicant may, subject to all other
applicable laws, commence work as an adult cabaret manager in a
duly licensed adult cabaret until notification of denial of the
application by the clerk is received by the applicant.
(9) The clerk or Board of City Commissioners may, for good cause
shown, extend the application review time past the 30 days but in
no event may the City extend the application review time for more
than an additional 60 days.
(10) An applicant for an adult entertainer's license may be issued a
temporary license upon receipt of a complete license application
and fee. The temporary license will automatically expire on the
30th day following the filing of the complete application and fee
unless the city has failed to approve or deny the license application
in which case the temporary license shall be valid until the board
approves or denies the application.
§ 9-89 WILLISTON CODE § 9-90
AO:294
§ 9-91. through § 9-98. (Reserved)
(a) Any person, firm, or corporation violating the terms of this Article is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be subject
to the penalties as described under state law for Class B misdemeanors.
(b) Such penalty shall be in addition to the authority of the Board to
suspend or revoke an alcoholic beverage license pursuant to the
provisions of this Article.
§ 9-90 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-91
AO:295

ARTICLE VI
Emergency Alarm Systems
§ 9-99. Connection to the police department. [Ord. No. 561, § 1,
10-28-1980]
§ 9-100. False alarms. [Ord. No. 561, § 2, 10-28-1980]
§ 9-101. Appeals. [Ord. No. 561, § 3, 10-28-1980]
Any order of disconnection or order of revocation of permit issued by the
chief of police as provided by this article may be appealed by filing a written
(a) Alarm systems installed in commercial buildings and residential
property may be connected directly to the city police department with
the approval of the chief of police. The installation, operation and
maintenance thereof shall be at the expense of the property owner.
Alarms connected to the police department shall have a separate line to
the department and shall not be connected to existing telephone
numbers. Applications for connection to the police department shall
provide for waiver and release of municipal liability by reason of said
connection. Fees for connection to the police department shall be as
follows:
(1) A permit fee of $10 shall be paid when application for connection to
the police department is filed.
(2) An annual rental space fee of $20 payable on or before January 1 of
each year shall be required for each alarm connected to the police
department.
(a) Through carelessness, improper maintenance or other causes, large
numbers of false alarms are received by the police department from
emergency alarm systems. Each false alarm requires response by
public safety personnel and in some instances, fire equipment; this
involves unnecessary expense to the city, increases the risk of injury to
personnel or damage to property and dilutes the public safety
protection to the overall city.
(b) The term "false alarm" as used in this article shall mean a signal from
an alarm system resulting in a response by the police department or fire
department when an emergency situation does not exist.
(c) Any alarm system connected to the police department which actuates in
excess of three false alarms within any one calendar year may be
disconnected from the police department by order of the chief of police
upon 30 days' prior written notice. Newly installed alarm systems shall
not be subject to this provision for the first 60 days after connection to
the department. Failure to pay the annual rental space fee or the permit
fee as set forth in Section 9-99 above may be grounds for disconnection
by order of the chief of police on 30 days' prior written notice.
§ 9-99 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-101
AO:297
notice of appeal with the city auditor. Said appeal shall be filed within 10
days of the date of the order. Said appeal shall be heard by the board of city
commissioners within 30 days of the date of filing the appeal. The board of
city commissioners may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the chief
of police. An appeal timely filed suspends an order of disconnection or order
of revocation or permit until the board of city commissioners renders its
decision. The city auditor shall give written notice of the time and place
of the hearing to the appellant. Such notice shall be given by registered
or certified mail or personal delivery not less than seven days before the
hearing.
§ 9-102. Penalty. [Ord. No. 561, § 4, 10-28-1980]
Any false alarm resulting in a response by the police department or fire
department shall subject the individual holding the permit for the alarm to a
fine of not less than $20 nor more than $100 or imprisonment for not more
than 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment.
§ 9-103. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 561, § 5, 10-28-1980]
Property owned or leased by the City of Williston, the school district or
boards or commissions of the city or Williston School District shall not be
subject to the fees as provided by this article.
§ 9-104. Connection to the fire department dispatcher. [Ord. No.
702, § 1, 8-25-1987]
Fire alarm systems installed in commercial buildings and residential
property may be connected directly to the city fire department dispatcher
with the approval of the fire chief. The installation, operation and
maintenance thereof shall be at the expense of the property owner. Alarms
connected to the fire department dispatcher shall have a separate line to
the department and shall not be connected to existing telephone numbers.
Applications for connection to the fire department dispatcher shall provide
for waiver and release of municipal liability by reason of said connection.
Fees for connection to the fire department dispatcher shall be as follows:
§ 9-105. False alarms to fire department. [Ord. No. 702, § 2,
8-25-1987]
(a) A permit fee of $10 shall be paid when application for connection to the
fire department dispatcher is filed.
(b) An annual rental space fee of $20 payable on or before January 1 of
each year shall be required for each alarm connected to the fire
department dispatcher.
(a) Purpose. Through carelessness, improper maintenance or other causes,
large numbers of false alarms are received by the fire department
dispatcher from emergency alarm systems. Each false alarm requires
response by public safety personnel and fire equipment; this involves
§ 9-101 WILLISTON CODE § 9-105
AO:298
§ 9-106. False alarm to fire department fee. [Ord. No. 702, § 3,
11-14-1989]
Any false alarm resulting in a response by the City of Williston Fire
Department shall subject the individual holding the permit for the fire alarm
of a fee of $125.
§ 9-107. through § 9-112. (Reserved)
unnecessary expense to the city, increases the risk of injury to
personnel or damage to property and dilutes the public safety
protection to the overall city.
(b) The term "false alarm" as used in this section shall mean a signal from a
fire alarm system resulting in a response by the City of Williston Fire
Department when an emergency situation does not exist.
(c) Failure to pay the annual rental space fee or the permit fee as set forth
in Section 9-104 above may be grounds for disconnection by order of
the fire chief on 30 days' prior written notice.
§ 9-105 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-107
AO:299

ARTICLE VII
Sunday Closing
§ 9-113. Food stores. [Ord. No. 724, 9-26-1989]
Subject to the limitations of North Dakota Century Code Section 12.1-30-02,
and pursuant to authorization contained in North Dakota Century Code
Section 12.1-30-03(30), food stores within the City of Williston may be open
on Sunday, without restrictions on the number of employees on duty at one
time.
§ 9-113 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-113
AO:301

ARTICLE VIII
Authority for the Sale of Tobacco Products20
§ 9-114. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1059, 3-16-2017]
Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms
shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this
article, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.
(a) ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT - Means any noncombustible
product containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption,
whether chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means.
The term does not include any cigarette, cigar, snuff, tobacco in any
other form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, any
electronic smoking device, or any product regulated as a drug or device
by the United States Food and Drug Administration under Chapter V of
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
(b) APPLICANT - Means any person seeking the authority to sell tobacco
products in the City by (1) applying for a new City Tobacco License; or
(2) applying for a renewal of an existing City Tobacco License.
(c) CITY TOBACCO LICENSE - Means a license to sell tobacco products
issued by the City Commission pursuant to Section 9-115 of this article
or a State tobacco license that has been deemed to be a valid City
Tobacco License pursuant to Section 9-115 of this article.
(d) COMPLIANCE CHECKS - Means the system the city uses to investigate
and ensure that those licensed to sell tobacco products are following
and complying with the requirements of this article. Compliance checks
may involve the use of minors as authorized by this article. Compliance
checks may also be conducted by other units of government for the
purpose of enforcing Federal, State and local laws and regulations
relating to tobacco products.
(e) E-CIGARETTE - Means any device that can be used to deliver
aerosolized or vaporized nicotine to the person inhaling from the
device, including an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen, or e-hookah.
"E-cigarette" includes any component, part, or accessory of such a
device, whether or not sold separately, and includes any e-cigarette
substance. "E-cigarette" does not include any universal use battery or
battery charger when sold separately. In addition, "e-cigarette" does
not include drugs, devices, or combination products authorized for sale
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are defined in
the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
20.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 782, 788, 852.
§ 9-114 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-114
AO:303
(f) E-CIGARETTE SUBSTANCE - Means any liquid, gel, or other substance
that is sold, marketed or intended for use in an e-cigarette, whether or
not such substance contains nicotine.
(g) LICENSEE - Means any person with a valid City Tobacco License issued
by the City pursuant to the terms of this article.
(h) MINOR - Means any individual who has not yet reached the age of 18
years.
(i) PERSON - Means any individual, licensee, association, partnership,
company, corporation or any other legal or commercial entity and
successor, representative, agent, agency, or instrumentality thereof.
(j) SALE - Means any transfer of goods for money, trade, barter, or other
consideration.
(k) SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY - Means a display that contains cigarettes,
cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form which it may
be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or
alternative nicotine products, and is located in an area that is openly
accessible to the retailer's customers, and from which customers can
readily access those products without the assistance of a salesperson. A
display case that holds those products behind locked doors does not
constitute a self-service display.
(l) STATE TOBACCO LICENSE - Means a tobacco product dealer's license
issued by the North Dakota Attorney General pursuant to Chapter
57-36 of the North Dakota Century Code.
(m) TOBACCO PRODUCTS - Means any product that is made from or
derived from tobacco and is intended for human consumption or is
likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including a
cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, snus, or an ecigarette.
"Tobacco product" includes any component or accessory used
in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters, rolling papers,
pipes, or liquids used in electronic smoking devices. "Tobacco product"
does not include drugs, devices, or combination products authorized for
sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those terms are
defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
(n) TOBACCO SPECIALTY STORE - Means a retail store that:
(1) Derives at least 75% of its revenue from the sale of cigarettes,
cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it
may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic smoking
devices, or alternative nicotine products; and
(2) Does not permit minors to enter the premises unless accompanied
by a parent or legal guardian.
§ 9-114 WILLISTON CODE § 9-114
AO:304
§ 9-115. License required. [Ord. No. 1059, 3-16-2017]
(o) VENDING MACHINE - Means a machine, appliance, or other
mechanical device operated by currency, token, debit card, credit card,
or other means of payment that is designed or used for vending
purposes, including machines or devices that use remote control
locking mechanisms.
(a) License.
(1) License required. No person shall directly or indirectly, or by
means of any device, keep for retail sale, sell at retail, or otherwise
dispense any tobacco products within the City of Williston, without
a valid City Tobacco License. Any person required to have a current
and valid State tobacco license must file a copy of such valid State
tobacco license, along with an application for licensure, to the City
of Williston Auditor's Office and request approval by the City
Commission. The City reserves the right to suspend or revoke any
person's privilege to sell tobacco products within the City pursuant
to the terms of this article, whether or not such person has a valid
State tobacco license.
(2) Application. For persons who are not required to obtain a State
tobacco license, an application for a City Tobacco License to sell
tobacco products must be made on a form provided by the City. The
application must contain the full name of the applicant, the
applicant's business addresses and telephone numbers, the name
of the business for which the City Tobacco License is sought, and
any additional information the City deems necessary. Upon receipt
of a completed application, the City Auditor will forward the
application to the City Commission for action in a timely manner,
pending review and approval by any additional necessary
departments (e.g. Police, Building, Fire). If the City Auditor
determines that an application is incomplete, he or she will return
the application to the applicant with notice of the information
necessary to make the application complete.
(3) Action. The City Commission may either approve or deny the City
Tobacco License application, or it may delay action for a reasonable
period of time, as necessary to complete any investigation of the
application or the applicant it deems necessary. If the City
Commission approves the City Tobacco License application, the
City Auditor will issue the City Tobacco License to the applicant. If
the City Commission denies the license application, a Notice of the
Denial will be issued to the applicant, along with notice of the
applicant's right to appeal the City Commission's decision.
(4) Term. All City Tobacco Licenses issued under this section expire on
December 31st following the date of issuance.
§ 9-114 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-115
AO:305
(5) Revocation or suspension. Any City Tobacco License issued under
this section may be revoked or suspended as provided in Section
9-117.
(6) Transfers. All City Tobacco Licenses issued under this section shall
be valid only on the premises for which the City Tobacco License
was issued and only for the person to whom the City Tobacco
License was issued. No transfer of any City Tobacco License to
another location or person shall be valid unless approved at a
regular meeting of the City Commission.
(7) Movable place of business. No City Tobacco License shall be issued
to a movable place of business. Only fixed location businesses shall
be eligible to be licensed under this section.
(8) Delinquent taxes/special assessments. No City Tobacco License or
renewal of license shall be granted to applicants whose business
premises have delinquent taxes or special assessments.
(9) Display. All City Tobacco Licenses and State tobacco licenses must
be posted and displayed at all times in plain view of the general
public on the licensed premises.
(10) Renewals. The renewal of a City Tobacco License issued under this
section will be handled in the same manner as the original
application. If a person has a valid State tobacco license, a copy of
such license renewal application must be filed with the City
Auditor's office by August 31st. Renewals of City Tobacco Licenses
will take place annually as determined by the City Auditor's office
and made known by City resolution.
(11) Ability to sell tobacco products in the City is a privilege and not a
right. The issuance of a City Tobacco License under this section is a
privilege and not an absolute right of the applicant and does not
entitle the holder to an automatic renewal of the City Tobacco
License. In addition, the ability to sell tobacco products in the City
upon the filing of a valid State tobacco license is contingent upon
compliance with the terms of this article.
(b) Fees. No City Tobacco License will be issued under this section until the
appropriate license fee has been paid in full. The fee for a City Tobacco
License under this article will be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Commission.
(c) Basis for denial of license.
(1) Grounds for denying the issuance or renewal of a City Tobacco
License under this article, or prohibiting the sale of tobacco
products in the City upon the filing of a valid State tobacco license,
include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. The applicant is under the age of 18 years.
§ 9-115 WILLISTON CODE § 9-115
AO:306
b. The applicant has been convicted within the past 12 months of
any violation of a Federal, State, or local law, ordinance
provision, or other regulation relating to tobacco products.
c. The applicant has had a City Tobacco License revoked within
the preceding 12 months of the date of application.
d. The applicant provides false or misleading information on the
City Tobacco License application.
e. The applicant is prohibited by Federal, State, or other local
law, ordinance, or other regulation from holding a license to
sell tobacco products.
(2) Except as may otherwise be provided by law, the existence of any
particular ground for denial does not mean that the City must deny
a City Tobacco License application.
(3) If a City Tobacco License is mistakenly issued or renewed to a
person who was ineligible to obtain a City Tobacco License, it shall
be revoked immediately upon the discovery that the person was
ineligible for the City Tobacco License under this article. In the
event that a City Tobacco License is revoked under this article, the
licensee may request in writing a hearing on the matter.
(d) Prohibited acts.
(1) Sale of tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine
products to minors is prohibited.
(2) Use of tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine
products to minors is prohibited.
(3) Penalties.
a. It is an infraction for any person to sell or furnish to a minor, or
procure for a minor, cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff,
tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for
smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative
nicotine products. As used in this subsection, "sell" includes
dispensing from a vending machine under the control of the
purchaser.
b. It is an infraction for any person to display or offer for sale
cigarettes, cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other
form in which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing,
electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products
through a self-service display. This subsection does not apply to
a:
1. Vending machine or other coin-operated machine that is
permitted under N.D.C.C. § 12.1-31-03.1; or
§ 9-115 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-115
AO:307
2. Self-service display that is located in a tobacco specialty
store.
c. It is a noncriminal offense for a minor to purchase, possess,
smoke, or use cigarettes, cigars, cigarette papers, snuff,
tobacco in any other form in which it may be utilized for
smoking or chewing, electronic smoking devices, or alternative
nicotine products. However, a minor may purchase and possess
tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine
products as part of a compliance survey program when acting
with the permission of the individual's parent or guardian and
while acting under the supervision of any law enforcement
authority. A State agency; City; County; Board of Health;
tobacco, electronic smoking devices, or alternative nicotine
products retailer; or association of tobacco, electronic smoking
devices, or alternative nicotine products retailers may also
conduct compliance surveys, after coordination with the
appropriate local law enforcement authority.
d. It is a noncriminal offense for a minor to present or offer to
another individual a purported proof of age which is false,
fraudulent, or not actually the minor's own proof of age, for the
purpose of attempting to purchase or possess cigarettes,
cigars, cigarette papers, snuff, tobacco in any other form in
which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic
smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products.
e. A minor 14 years of age or older found to have violated
Subsection c or d of this Section 9-115(d)(3) shall be fined $25.
1. Any individual who has been cited for a violation of
Subsection c, or d of Section 9-115(d)(3) may appear
before a court of competent jurisdiction and pay the fee by
the time scheduled for a hearing or, if bond has been
posted, said individual may forfeit the bond by not
appearing at the scheduled time. An individual appearing
at the time scheduled in the citation may make a statement
in explanation of that individual's action and the judge, in
his or her discretion, may waive, reduce, or suspend the
fee or bond, or both. If the individual cited follows the
procedures of this subsection, said individual is deemed to
have admitted the violation and has waived the right to a
hearing on the issue of commission of the violation. The
bond required to secure appearance before the court must
be identical to the fee. This section does not allow a citing
officer to receive the fee or bond.
2. If an individual cited for a violation of Subsection c or d of
Section 9-115(d)(3) does not choose to follow the
procedures provided under Subsection e,1 of Section
9-115(d)(3), that individual may request a hearing on the
§ 9-115 WILLISTON CODE § 9-115
AO:308
issue of the commission of the violation cited. The hearing
must be held at the time scheduled in the citation, or at
some future time not to exceed 90 days from the date of
the citation, which shall be set at the time scheduled in the
citation. At the time of a request for a hearing on the issue
on commission of the violation, the individual cited shall
deposit with the court an appearance bond equal to the fee
for the violation cited.
3. The failure to post bond or to pay an assessed fee is
punishable as a contempt of court, except a minor may not
be imprisoned for the contempt.
f. The prosecution must prove the commission of a cited violation
under Subsection c or d of this Section 9-115(d)(3) by a
preponderance of the evidence.
g. A law enforcement officer who cites a minor for a violation of
this Section 9-115(d) shall mail a notice of the violation to the
parent or legal guardian of the minor within 10 days of the
citation.
h. A person adjudged guilty of contempt for failure to pay a fee or
fine may be sentenced by the court to a sanction or order
designed to ensure compliance with the payment of the fee or
fine, or to an alternative sentence or sanction, including
community service.
(4) Sale of tobacco product through vending machines restricted.
a. It is an infraction for any person to sell or furnish cigarettes,
cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in
which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic
smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products through a
vending machine, except as provided in Section 9-115(d)(3)b.
b. Subsection a of this Section 9-115(d)(4) does not apply to:
1. A vending machine that is located in an area in which
minors are not permitted access; or
2. A vending machine that dispenses cigarettes, cigarette
papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in which it
may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic
smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products through
the operation of a device that requires a salesperson to
control the dispensation of such product.
c. It is an infraction for any person to sell or furnish cigarettes,
cigarette papers, cigars, snuff, tobacco in any other form in
which it may be utilized for smoking or chewing, electronic
smoking devices, or alternative nicotine products through any
§ 9-115 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-115
AO:309
vending machine, if those products are placed together with
any non-tobacco product, other than matches, in the vending
machine.
(5) No person operating a business where tobacco products are sold or
offered for sale shall sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, or display
for sale any tobacco product in any manner, unless such tobacco
products are stored for sale behind a counter in an area that is
accessible only to the employees of such business.
(6) No person shall sell any e-cigarette substance unless such
substance is sold in a container that satisfies the child-resistant
effectiveness standards set forth in Section 1700.15 of title 16,
Code of Federal Regulations, as determined through testing in
accordance with the method described in Section 1700.20 of title
16, Code of Federal Regulations, as such sections may be amended.
This restriction does not include a sealed, pre-filled, and disposable
container of e-cigarette substance in which such container is
inserted directly into an e-cigarette, if the e-cigarette substance is
inaccessible through customary or reasonably foreseeable handling
or use, including reasonably foreseeable ingestion or other contact
by children.
(7) No minor shall have any tobacco products in his or her possession.
This Subsection (7) of Section 9-115(d) does not apply to minors
lawfully involved in a compliance check.
(8) No minor shall consume any tobacco product by smoking, heating,
inhaling, chewing, absorbing, dissolving, or otherwise ingesting
such product in any other way.
(9) No minor shall purchase or attempt to purchase or otherwise
obtain any tobacco product. It is a violation of this chapter for any
person to purchase or otherwise obtain any tobacco product on
behalf of a minor. It is also a violation of this chapter for any person
to coerce or attempt to coerce a minor to illegally purchase or
otherwise obtain or use any tobacco product. This Subsection (9) of
Section 9-115(d) does not apply to minors lawfully involved in a
compliance check.
(10)No minor shall attempt to disguise his or her true age by the use of
a false form of identification, whether the identification is that of
another person or one on which the age of the person has been
modified or tampered with to represent an age older than the
actual age of the person.
(11) All licensees under this chapter are liable for the actions of their
employees regarding the sale of tobacco products on the licensed
premises, and the sale of an item by an employee shall be
considered a sale by the licensee.
§ 9-115 WILLISTON CODE § 9-115
AO:310
§ 9-116. (Reserved)
§ 9-117. Violations and penalties. [Ord. No. 1059, 3-16-2017]
(12) Compliance checks and inspection. All licensed premises shall be
open to inspection by the City Police or other authorized City
official during regular business hours. At least once per year, or as
practicable as possible, the City will conduct compliance checks by
engaging, with the written consent of their parents or guardians,
minors over the age of 15 years but less than 18 years to enter the
licensed premises to attempt to purchase tobacco products. Minors
used for the purpose of compliance checks will be supervised by
City designated law enforcement officers or other designated City
personnel. Minors used for compliance checks will not be guilty of
unlawful possession of tobacco products when those items are
obtained as a part of the compliance check. No minor used in
compliance checks shall attempt to use a false identification
misrepresenting the minor's age, and all minors lawfully engaged
in a compliance check shall truthfully answer all questions about
the minor's age asked by the licensee or his or her employee and
shall produce any identification, if any exists, for which he or she is
asked. Nothing in this Subsection (12) of Section 9-115 prohibits
compliance checks authorized by State or Federal laws for
educational, research, information, or training purposes, or as
required for the enforcement of a particular State or Federal law.
(13) Exceptions and defenses.
a. Nothing in this article prevents the providing of tobacco
products to a minor as part of a lawfully recognized religious,
spiritual, or cultural ceremony.
b. It is an affirmative defense to the violation of this article for a
person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described
by State law.
(14) Severability. If any section or provision of this article is held invalid,
such invalidity does not affect other sections or provisions which
can be given force and effect without the invalidated section or
provision.
(a) Nothing in this section prohibits the City from seeking prosecution as
an infraction, as defined under N.D.C.C. § 12.1-32-01(7), for any alleged
violation of this ordinance, except for violations of subsections 7, 9 and
12 of Section 9-115.
(1) Violations.
a. Notice. A person violating this article may be issued, either
personally or by mail, a citation that sets forth the alleged
violation and that informs the alleged violator of his or her
§ 9-115 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-117
AO:311
right to a hearing on the matter. The citation shall provide
notice that a hearing must be requested pursuant to the rules
of Williston Municipal Court and that hearing rights shall be
terminated if a hearing is not promptly requested. The citation
will provide information on how and where a hearing may be
requested, including a contact address and phone number.
b. Hearings. Upon issuance of a citation, a person accused of
violating this article may request in writing a hearing on the
matter. Hearing requests must be made pursuant to the rules
of Williston Municipal Court. The Williston Municipal Judge,
who presides over the Williston Municipal Court, shall serve as
the hearing officer. Each violation, and every day in which a
violation occurs or continues, shall constitute a separate
offense.
(b) Administrative suspension of authority to sell tobacco products.
(1) The authority granted under this article shall be affected or
suspended by the City for violation of Section 9-115, or for a
violation of any other provisions of this article, or any City
ordinance or State law regulating the sale of tobacco products, as
follows:
a. First offense: Mandatory $100 administrative fee assessed to
the tobacco sale license holder under whom the sale took
place, and warning that authority to sell shall be suspended if a
subsequent offense occurs within 12 months. Furthermore, the
manager and/or supervisor shall undergo mandatory training
at licensee's expense, regarding sales to minors which training
shall be specified by the City.
b. Second offense within 12 months: Mandatory one day
suspension of authority to sell, mandatory $150 administrative
fee, and mandatory training at licensee's expense of all
employees handling tobacco products.
c. Third offense within 12 months: Minimum seven day
suspension of authority to sell and mandatory $250
administrative fee.
d. Fourth offense within 12 months: Minimum thirty-day
suspension of authority to sell and mandatory $250
administrative fee.
(2) The above penalties shall be automatically imposed by the City
Auditor upon receiving a copy of the judgment of conviction for
sales to a minor. The licensee has the right to appeal such penalty
to the City Commission.
(3) For purpose of these administrative penalties for sales to minors,
the business where a vending machine is located in an area other
§ 9-117 WILLISTON CODE § 9-117
AO:312
§ 9-118. through § 9-120. (Reserved)
than one restricted to persons 21 and older, shall be considered
the seller/licensee. Where a vending machine is located in an area
restricted to persons 21 and older, administrative penalties shall
not apply.
§ 9-117 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-118
AO:313

ARTICLE IX
Sign Hangers
§ 9-121. License required. [Ord. No. 766, § 1, 1-25-1994; Ord. No.
863, 2-11-2003]
No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, alter, repair, relocate, construct,
or install any sign unless such person:
§ 9-122. Licensing of sign hangers. [Ord. No. 766, § 2, 1-25-1994;
Ord. No. 863, 2-11-2003]
All licensing of sign hangers shall be done by the city building official. Any
sign hanger licensed to do business within the City of Williston must provide
proof that they have been in such business for a period of five years or have
received special training in the business which qualifies that person, firm,
or corporation as having sufficient experience, training, and ability to safely
and properly install signs and to determine that the requirements of the
State Adopted Building Code and Uniform Sign Code are met. Such license
and application form shall be in the form designated by the city building
official. Such license shall be renewed annually.
§ 9-123. Insurance. [Ord. No. 766, § 3, 1-25-1994]
Prior to issuing any sign hangers license, the city building official shall be
provided with proof of liability insurance in the amounts of $100,000 per
injured party with minimum of $300,000 per incident.
§ 9-124. License fee. [Ord. No. 766, § 4, 1-25-1994]
The license fee for sign hangers shall be established by resolution of the city
commission of the City of Williston.
(a) Has been licensed as a sign hanger and provides an affidavit that such
work on any sign shall be in full compliance with the Uniform Sign Code
as adopted and the State Adopted Building Code. Such affidavit shall be
in the form designated by the city building official; or
(b) Provides an engineered drawing and plan for such work upon a sign and
provides an affidavit that all such work will be done in compliance with
the engineered drawing, as well as the State Adopted Building Code
and Uniform Sign Code, as adopted by the City of Williston.
§ 9-121 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-124
AO:315

ARTICLE X
City Lodging and Restaurant Tax
§ 9-125. City lodging and restaurant tax.
§ 9-125.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 992, 4-8-2014]
§ 9-125.2. Tax on gross lodging receipts. [Ord. No. 992, 4-8-2014]
A tax of 2% pursuant to Section 40-57.3-01 of the North Dakota Century
Code is hereby imposed upon gross lodging receipts as defined herein. Said
tax shall be in addition to the State sales tax on rental accommodations
provided in Chapter 57-39.2 of the North Dakota Century Code and the City
sales and use tax.
§ 9-125.3. Tax on gross lodging and restaurant receipts. [Ord. No.
992, 4-8-2014]
A tax of 1% pursuant to Section 40-57.3-01.1 of the North Dakota Century
Code is hereby imposed upon gross lodging and restaurant receipts as
(1) GROSS LODGING RECEIPTS - Means receipts of retailers for the
leasing or renting, for periods of less than 30 consecutive calendar days
or one month, of hotel, motel, or tourist court accommodations within
the corporate limits of the City of Williston.
(2) GROSS LODGING AND RESTAURANT RECEIPTS - Means receipts of
retailers for the leasing or renting, for periods of less than 30
consecutive calendar days or one month, of hotel, motel, or tourist
court accommodations within the corporate limits of the City of
Williston, and receipts of a restaurant from any sales of prepared food
or beverages, not including alcoholic beverages for consumption off the
premises where purchased.
(3) RETAILER - Means any person, firm or corporation in the business of
leasing or renting hotel, motel or tourist court accommodations for
periods of 30 or less consecutive calendar days or one month.
(4) RESTAURANT - Means any place where food is prepared and intended
for individual portion service for consumption on or off the premises
and the term "prepared" includes heating prepackaged food.
(5) VISITOR'S PROMOTION FUND - Means shall be comprised of the funds
created by collection of the 2% tax pursuant to Section 40-57.3-01 of
the North Dakota Century Code, less any amount which may be
retained by the state for the collection of such tax.
(6) VISITOR'S PROMOTION CAPITAL CONSTRUCTION FUND - Shall be
comprised of the funds created by collection of the 1% tax pursuant to
Section 40-57.3-01.1 of the North Dakota Century Code, less any
amount which may be retained by the State for the collection of such
tax.
§ 9-125 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-125.3
AO:317
defined herein. Accommodations, food and beverages are all, each, or in
any combination subject to the tax under this section, if all items in any
category which are taxable under State law are taxable, except as provided
by Chapter 40-57.3 of the North Dakota Century Code. Said tax shall be
in addition to the State sales tax on rental accommodations and restaurant
sales provided in Chapter 57-39.2 of the North Dakota Century Code and
the City sales and use tax.
§ 9-125.4. Collection of tax. [Ord. No. 992, 4-8-2014]
The tax hereby imposed shall be due and payable at the same time the
retailer is required to file a return under Chapter 57-39.2 of the North
Dakota Century Code, and shall be collected and administered by the State
Tax Department.
§ 9-125.5. Tax receipts - Utilization. [Ord. No. 992, 4-8-2014]
§ 9-125.6. Establishment of a Visitor's Committee. [Ord. No. 992,
4-8-2014]
There is hereby created a Visitor's Committee, which shall serve as an
advisory committee to the Governing Body of the City in administrating
the proceeds from the taxes available to the City under this article. The
Committee shall be comprised of five members, who shall have terms of
four years. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the initial
appointment. The Committee shall elect a chairperson and a vice
chairperson from among its members to serve for a term of two years.
The Committee each year shall prepare a proposed budget for the
expenditure of the Visitor's Promotion Fund and the Visitor's Promotion
Capital Construction Fund, and present that budget to the City Commission.
(1) Visitor's Promotion Fund. There is hereby created a fund to be known
as the Visitor's Promotion Fund, and all taxes collected pursuant to the
2% tax pursuant to Section 40-57.3-01 of the North Dakota Century
Code shall be placed in this fund and utilized for the purpose to
promote, encourage and attract visitors to come to the City of Williston
and use the travel and tourism facilities within the City.
(2) Visitor's promotion capital construction fund. There is hereby created a
fund to be known as the Visitor's Promotion Capita 1 Construction
Fund, and all taxes collected pursuant to the 1% tax pursuant to Section
40-57.3-01.1 of the North Dakota Century Code shall be placed in this
fund and utilized for the purpose of tourism or the purchase, equipping,
improving, construction, maintenance, repair, and acquisition of
buildings, including parking ramps, garages, and other sources of
downtown parking, or property consistent with visitor attraction or
promotion.
§ 9-125.3 WILLISTON CODE § 9-125.7
AO:318
§ 9-125.7. Budget. [Ord. No. 992, 4-8-2014]
The proposed budget of the Visitor's Committee shall be presented to
the City Commission, which shall have the authority to approve the final
budget for use of the funds in the Visitor's Promotion Fund and the Visitor's
Promotion Capital Construction Fund each year. No funds shall be expended
from the Visitor's Promotion Fund or the Visitor's Promotion Capital
Construction Fund for a particular year until that budget has been approved
by the City. After approval of the budget, the City Auditor may dispense
funds from the Visitor's Promotion Fund and the Visitor's Promotion Capital
Construction Fund in accordance with the budget adopted by the
Commission.
§ 9-125.8. Failure to comply - Penalty. [Ord. No. 992, 4-18-2014]
The penalties and liabilities provided in Sections 57-39.2-18 and
57-39.2-18.1 of the North Dakota Century Code shall apply to the filing of
returns and the administration of the taxes imposed under this article.
§ 9-125.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-125.8
AO:319
Chapter 10
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 9-125.8 WILLISTON CODE § 9-125.8
AO:320
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 10-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 521, § 1-1, 7-27-1970; Ord. No. 942,
§ 1, 11-22-2011]
In this chapter, unless the context or subject matter otherwise requires:
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES —
BICYCLE — A motorized bicycle and every device propelled by human
power upon which any person may ride, having two tandem wheels, either
of which is more than 20 inches (50.8 centimeters) in diameter;
BUS — Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than 10 passengers
and used for the transportation of persons, and every motor vehicle, other
Class A authorized emergency vehicles shall mean:
a. Vehicles of a governmentally owned fire department;
Vehicles when operated by or under the control of a police officer
having authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter or by
a salaried employee of any municipal police department within
the City or by any sheriff or deputy sheriff not to include special
deputy sheriffs, or by the warden of the state penitentiary and
his authorized agents, or by the state highway patrol, or by crime
bureau officers of North Dakota;
b.
c. Ambulances;
Vehicles operated by or under the control of the commissioner, and
district deputy commissioner, and district deputy game warden of
the North Dakota game and fish department;
d.
Vehicles owned or leased by the United States government used for
law enforcement purposes; North Dakota truck regulatory officers,
or by
e.
Vehicles designated for the use of the adjutant general and
assistant adjutant general in cases of emergency; and
f.
Vehicles operated by or under the control of the director, assistant
director and park superintendents of the North Dakota parks and
recreation department.
g.
(1)
Class B authorized emergency vehicles shall mean wreckers and such
other emergency vehicles as are authorized by the local authorities;
and
(2)
Class C authorized emergency vehicles means those vehicles
authorized by state and local disaster emergency services organizations
and those vehicles used by volunteer firemen while performing their
assigned disaster and emergency responsibilities.
(3)
§ 10-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1
AO:321
than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation;
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A vehicle designed, maintained, or used
primarily for the transportation of property, provided however that such
definitions shall not include vehicles designated or titled as 3/4 ton or less;
COMMISSIONER — The commissioner of the North Dakota state highway
department, acting directly or through his authorized agents;
CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY — Every highway, street or roadway in
respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons
have not legal right to access to or from the same except at such points only
and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having
jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway;
CROSSWALK — That part of a roadway at an intersection included within
the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of
the highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from
the edges of the traversable roadway; or any portion of a roadway at an
intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines or other markings on the surface;
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle;
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel and of every way privately maintained
within a mobile home park, trailer park or campground containing five or
more lots for occupancy by mobile homes, travel trailers or tents when any
part thereof is open for purposes of vehicular travel;
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the prolongation or
connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary
lines of the roadways of two highways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different highways joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet (9.14 meters) or more
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by
an intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In
the event such intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet
(9.14 meters) or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such
highways shall be regarded as a separate intersection;
INTOXICATING LIQUOR — Includes any beverage containing alcohol;
LEGAL OWNER — A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle;
LOCAL AUTHORITIES — Shall include every county, municipal and other
local board or body having authority to adopt local police regulations under
the constitution and laws of this state;
§ 10-1 WILLISTON CODE § 10-1
AO:322
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes every vehicle, except motorized bicycles,
which is self-propelled and every vehicle is propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails;
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of
the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact
with the ground, but excluding implements of husbandry;
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — A vehicle equipped with two or three wheels,
foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, a power source providing up
to a maximum of two brake horsepower having a maximum piston or
rotor displacement of 3.05 cubic inches (49.98 milliliters) if a combustion
engine is used, which will propel the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not
to exceed 30 miles (48.28 kilometers) per hour on a level road surface, is
equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically
only, not requiring clutching or shifting by the operator after the drive
system is engaged, and shall have a width no greater than 32 inches (81.28
centimeters);
NONRESIDENT — Any person who is not a resident of this state;
NONRESIDENT'S OPERATING PRIVILEGE — The privilege conferred upon
a nonresident by the laws of this state pertaining to the operation by such
person of a motor vehicle, or the use of a vehicle owned by such person, in
this state;
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES — All signs, signals, markings and
devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of
a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic;
OPERATOR — Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle upon a highway or who is exercising control over or steering
a vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle;
OWNER — A person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title
to a vehicle. The term includes a person entitled to the use and possession
of a vehicle subject to a security interest in another person, but excludes a
lessee under a lease not intended as security;
PARK, WHEN PROHIBITED — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading;
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot;
POLICE OFFICER — Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations;
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY — Every way or place in private ownership
and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or
implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons;
RAILROAD — A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than
streetcars, operated upon stationary rails;
§ 10-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1
AO:323
RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL — Any sign, signal or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train;
RECONSTRUCTED VEHICLE — Every vehicle of a type required to be
registered under this chapter materially altered from its original
construction by the removal, addition or substitution of essential parts, new
or used;
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The privilege of the immediate use of a roadway;
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a
highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as
used in this chapter shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to
all such roadways collectively;
SAFETY ZONE — The area or space officially set aside within a highway for
the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is so plainly marked or indicated
by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set aside as a safety
zone;
SCHOOL BUS — Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental
agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school
or to or from school-related activities, or privately owned and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from school or to or
from school-related activities;
SEMI-TRUCK TRAILER — Includes every vehicle of the trailer type so
designed and used in conjunction with a motor vehicle that some part of
its own weight and that of its own load rests upon or is carried by another
motor vehicle;
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians;
SPECIALLY CONSTRUCTED VEHICLE — Any vehicle under a distinctive
name, make, model or type by a generally recognized manufacturer of
vehicles and not materially altered from its original construction;
STAND OR STANDING — The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in receiving or discharging passengers;
STATE — A state, territory or possession of the United States, the District of
Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a province of the Dominion
of Canada;
STOP OR STOPPING, WHEN PROHIBITED — Any halting, even
momentarily, or a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control sign or signal;
STOP, WHEN REQUIRED — Complete cessation from movement;
§ 10-1 WILLISTON CODE § 10-1
AO:324
STREET — The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel;
THROUGH HIGHWAY — Every highway or portion thereof on which
vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to
which vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to
yield right-of-way to vehicles on such through highway and in obedience to
either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided
by law;
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purpose of travel;
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device, whether manually, electrically
or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and
to proceed;
TRAILER — Includes every vehicle without motive power designated to
carry property or passengers wholly on its own structure and to be drawn
by a motor vehicle; except that it shall not include a "house trailer" or
"mobile home," which terms shall mean a vehicle as defined in this
subsection which is designed and intended for use as living or sleeping
quarters for people and which is not used for commercial hauling of
passengers.
TRUCK — Any vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of
property whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight
exceeds 12,000 pounds registered gross weight.
VEHICLE — Includes every device in, upon or by which any person or
property may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
§ 10-2. Authority of police and fire department officials. [Ord. No.
521, § 3-1, 7-27-1976]
(a) It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such
officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic
laws of this City and all of the state vehicle laws.
(b) Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the
chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of
a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as
conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic
laws.
§ 10-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2
AO:325
§ 10-3. Obedience generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-2, 7-27-1976]
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 10-4. Obedience to police officer or fireman. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-3,
7-27-1976]
No person shall willfully refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction
of any police officer or fireman invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic.
§ 10-5. Public employees to obey regulations. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-6,
7-27-1976]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned
or operated by the United States, this state, or any county, town, district
or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific
exceptions as are set forth in this chapter or in the state vehicle code.
§ 10-6. Motor vehicle registration. [Ord. No. 501, 7-22-1975]
(c) Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts:
(1) To operate, or for the owner thereof knowingly to permit anyone to
operate upon the streets or avenues of the City, any motor vehicle,
the registration of which has been cancelled or revoked, or which is
not registered, or which does not have attached thereto and
displayed thereon a number plate or plates assigned thereto by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles of North Dakota for the current
registration year.
(2) To display, or cause or permit to be displayed, or to have in
possession, any registration card or registration number plate,
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been cancelled, or
revoked, suspended or altered.
(3) No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle on the public
streets or avenues of this City, unless such vehicle shall have a
distinctive number assigned to it by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
of North Dakota and two numbered plates bearing such numbers
conspicuously displayed horizontally, and in an upright position;
one on the front, and one on the rear of such vehicle; each securely
fastened, except number plates assigned to motorcycles shall be
attached to the rear thereof. As far as reasonably possible, such
plates shall be at all times kept free and clear of mud, ice and snow,
so as to be clearly visible, and all number plates, markers or
§ 10-2 WILLISTON CODE § 10-6
AO:326
§ 10-6.1. Transfer of title — endorsement required — certificate of
title delivered — new certificate obtained — Penalty. [Ord. No. 995,
6-10-2014]
§ 10-7. Degree of care; warnings. [Ord. No. 527, § 1, 11-23-1976]
Any person driving a vehicle upon a street or highway or in an area used
principally for public parking shall drive the same in a careful and prudent
manner, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of the street
or highway or area used principally for public parking, and shall give
such warnings as are reasonably necessary for safe operation under the
circumstances. No person shall drive any vehicle upon a street or highway
or in an area used principally for public parking in a manner to endanger
evidence of registration or licensings, except for the current year,
shall be removed from such vehicles. An annual registration tab or
sticker for the current registration year shall be displayed for each
number plate in those years for which such tabs or stickers are
issued in lieu of number plates.
(b) Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be punished by
not more than a $100 fine, or 30 days in jail, or both.
(a) The owner or transferor of a motor vehicle who transfers title to a
vehicle shall endorse an assignment and warranty of title upon the
certificate of title to the vehicle. The owner or transferor shall include
on the assignment and warranty of title the name of the transferee and
the selling price of the vehicle if applicable.
(b) If legal title passes to the transferee, the owner shall deliver the
endorsed certificate of title to the transferee within 15 days.
(c) If legal title passes to a lienholder rather than the transferee, the
transferee shall endorse a statement that the lienholder holds the lien
and shall send the certificate of title to the North Dakota Department of
Motor Vehicles with an application for a new certificate of title showing
the names of the new owner and lienholder. The certificate of title when
issued must be sent by the Department to the lienholder or the
Department may use an electronic lien notification procedure in lieu of
sending a certificate of title to a lienholder.
(d) Within 30 days, the transferee shall deliver the endorsed certificate of
title to the Department of Motor Vehicles with the required transfer fee,
and shall make an application for a new certificate of title.
(1) In addition to any other penalty, the registration to a motor vehicle
may be suspended or revoked if the transferee fails to present the
endorsed certificate of title within 30 days.
(e) A violation of this section by an owner, lienholder, or transferee is a
Class B misdemeanor punishable by up to a $1,500 fine, up to 30 days in
jail, or both.
§ 10-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7
AO:327
the life, limb or property of any person. Any person convicted of violating
the requirements of this section shall be guilty of driving without due care
(care required) and shall be assessed a fee of up to $30.
§ 10-8. Reckless driving. [Ord. No. 521, § 19-2, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-9. License carried and exhibited on demand. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 19-11, 7-27-1976]
Every licensee shall have his operator's license or permit in his immediate
possession at all times when operating a motor vehicle and shall display the
same, upon demand of the municipal court, a patrolman, peace officer or a
field deputy or inspector of the highway department. However, no person
charged with violating this section shall be convicted or assessed any court
costs if he produces in court, to the chief of police or in the office of the
arresting officer, an operator's license or permit theretofore issued to him
and valid and not under suspension, revocation or cancellation at the time
of his arrest.
§ 10-10. Driving without license. [Ord. No. 521, §§ 19-9, 19-10,
7-27-1976]
No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon a highway in this City unless
such person has a valid license as an operator or is expressly exempted from
licensing requirements by the laws of this state.
§ 10-11. Driving while license suspended or revoked. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 19-6, 7-27-1976; Ord. No. 620, § 1, 6-28-1983; Ord. No. 654,
8-27-1985]
(a) Any person shall be guilty of reckless driving if he drives a vehicle:
(1) Recklessly in disregard of the rights or safety of others; or
(2) Without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a
manner so as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or
the property of another.
(b) Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, any person violating
the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense.
(a) Any person who drives a motor vehicle an any public highway of this
City at a time when his license or privilege so to do is suspended or
revoked shall be guilty of an offense.
(b) If the suspension or revocation was imposed for violation of N.D.C.C.
Section 39-08-01 or equivalent ordinance or was governed by N.D.C.C.
39-06-1931 or N.D.C.C. Chapter 39-20 as those laws currently exist or
may be hereinafter amended, the sentence must be at least four days
imprisonment and such fine as the court deems proper. The sentence
and the imposition of sentence may not be suspended under N.D.C.C.
Chapter 12-53, as this law currently exists or may be hereinafter
§ 10-7 WILLISTON CODE § 10-11
AO:328
§ 10-12. Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any
other drugs or substances — Driving prohibited. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 19-1, 7-27-1976; Ord. No. 620, § 2, 6-28-1983; Ord. No. 871,
12-9-2003; Ord. No. 970, 8-27-2013]
amended. Forfeiture of bail is not permitted in lieu of the defendant's
personal appearance in open court for arraignment on a charge under
this subsection.
(1) A person may not drive or be in actual physical control of any vehicle
upon a highway or upon public or private areas to which the public has
a right of access for vehicular use in this State if any of the following
apply:
(a) That person has an alcohol concentration of at least eight 100 of
1% by weight at the time of the performance of a chemical test
within two hours after the driving or being in actual physical
control of a vehicle.
(b) That person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(c) That person is under the influence of any drug or substance or
combination of drugs or substances to a degree which renders that
person incapable of safely driving.
(d) That person is under the combined influence of alcohol and any
other drugs or substances to a degree which renders that person
incapable of safely driving.
(e) That individual refuses to submit to any of the following:
1. A chemical test, or tests, of the individual's blood, breath, or
urine to determine the alcohol concentration or presence of
other drugs, or combination thereof, in the individual's blood,
breath, or urine, at the direction of a law enforcement officer
under N.D.C.C. § 39-06.2-10.2 if the individual is driving or is in
actual physical control of a commercial motor vehicle; or
2. A chemical test, or tests, of the individual's blood, breath, or
urine to determine the alcohol concentration or presence of
other drugs, or combination thereof, in the individual's blood,
breath, or urine, at the direction of a law enforcement officer
under N.D.C.C. § 39-20-01; or
3. An on-site screening test, or tests, of the individual's breath for
the purpose of estimating the alcohol concentration in the
individual's breath upon the request of a law enforcement
officer under N.D.C.C. § 39-20-14. The fact that any person
charged with violating this section is or has been legally
entitled to use alcohol or other drugs or substances is not a
defense against any charge for violating this section, unless a
drug which predominately caused impairment was used only
§ 10-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-12
AO:329
§ 10-13. Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any
other drugs or substances not to operate vehicle - Penalty. [Ord. No.
521, § 19-1, 7-27-1976; Ord. No. 620, § 3, 6-28-1983; Ord. No. 871,
12-9-2003; Ord. No. 970, 8-27-2013]
as directed or cautioned by a practitioner who legally
prescribed or dispensed the drug to that person.
(2) An individual who operates a motor vehicle on a highway or on public or
private areas to which the public has a right of access for vehicular use
in this State who refuses to submit to a chemical test, or tests, required
under section N.D.C.C. §§ 39-06.2-10.2, 39-20-01, or 39-20-14, is guilty
of an offense under this section.
(1) An individual violating this section or equivalent ordinance is guilty of a
Class B misdemeanor for the first or second offense in a seven-year
period, of a Class A misdemeanor for a third offense in a seven-year
period, of a Class C felony for any fourth or subsequent offense
regardless of the length of time since the previous offense. The
minimum penalty for violating this section is as provided in Subsection
(3). The Court shall take judicial notice of the fact that an offense would
be a subsequent offense if indicated by the records of the Director or
may make a subsequent offense finding based on other evidence.
(2) Upon conviction of a second or subsequent offense within five years
under this section or equivalent ordinance, the Court may order the
motor vehicle number plates of all of the motor vehicles owned and
operated by the offender at the time of the offense to be destroyed by
the office of the Police Officer that made the arrest. The offender shall
deliver the number plates to the Court without delay at a time certain as
ordered by the Court following the conviction. The Court shall deliver
the number plates to the office and notify the Department of the order.
An offender who does not provide the number plates to the Court at the
appropriate time is subject to revocation of probation.
(3) A person convicted of violating this section, or an equivalent ordinance,
must be sentenced in accordance with this subsection. For purposes of
this subsection, unless the context otherwise requires, "drug court
program" means a District Court-supervised treatment program
approved by the Supreme Court which combines judicial supervision
with alcohol and drug testing and chemical addiction treatment in a
licensed treatment program. The Supreme Court may adopt rules,
including rules of procedure, for drug courts and the drug court
program.
a. 1. For a first offense, the sentence must include both a fine of at
least $500 and an order for addiction evaluation by an
appropriate licensed addiction treatment program.
2. In addition, for a first offense when the convicted person has
an alcohol concentration of at least 0.16 of 1% by weight, the
§ 10-12 WILLISTON CODE § 10-13
AO:330
§ 10-13.1. Same — Commitment for violation of City ordinance/
labor in lieu of fine. [Ord. 655, § 1, 8-27-1985]
If the defendant is found guilty of a violation of a municipal ordinance and
is committed as provided in Section 40-11-12 N.D.C.C., the governing body
may provide by ordinance that the defendant work for the City at such
labor as the defendant's health and strength permit, not exceeding eight
hours in each working day. For that work, the person so imprisoned must
be allowed for each day, exclusive of board, $10 on account of the fines and
costs assessed.
offense is an aggravated first offense and the sentence must
include a fine of at least $750 and at least two days
imprisonment.
b. For a second offense within seven years, the sentence must include
at least 10 days' imprisonment, of which 48 hours must be served
consecutively; a fine of $1,500; an order for addiction evaluation by
an appropriate licensed addiction treatment program; and at least
12 months' participation in the 24 seven sobriety program under
N.D.C.C. Chapter 54-12 as a mandatory condition of probation.
c. The imposition of sentence under this section may not be deferred
under Subsection 4 of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-32-02 for an offense subject
to this section.
d. If the offense is subject to Subdivision a or b, a Municipal Court or
District Court may not suspend a sentence, but may convert each
day of a term of imprisonment to 10 hours of community service for
an offense subject to paragraph 2 of Subdivision a.
(4) As used in subdivisions b and c of Subsection (3) the term
"imprisonment" includes house arrest. As a condition of house arrest, a
defendant may not consume alcoholic beverages. The house arrest
must include a program of electronic home detention and the defendant
shall participate in the 24 seven sobriety program. The defendant shall
defray all costs associated with the electronic home detention. For an
offense under Subdivision b or c of Subsection (3) no more than 90% of
the sentence may be house arrest.
(5) As used in this title, participation in the twenty-four/seven sobriety
program under N.D.C.C. Chapter 54-12 means compliance with
N.D.C.C. §§ 54-12-27 through 54-12-1931, and requires sobriety breath
testing twice per day seven days per week or electronic alcohol
monitoring, urine testing, or drug patch testing. The offender is
responsible for all 24/7 sobriety program fees and the Court may not
waive the fees.
§ 10-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-13.2
AO:331
§ 10-13.2. Same — Diagnosis and treatment of persons convicted
while driving under the influence. [Ord. 655, § 2, 8-27-1985]
If a person is convicted under an ordinance prohibiting driving or being
in physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or a narcotic drug, the court shall order the person to an appropriate
licensed addiction treatment program for addiction evaluation.
§ 10-14. Same — Impoundment of vehicle number plates. [Ord. No.
521, § 19-1, 7-27-1976]
Upon conviction, the court may order the motor vehicle number plates of
the motor vehicle owned and operated by the offender at the time of the
offense to be impounded by the sheriff or the chief law enforcement officer
of the City, as is appropriate, for the duration of the period of suspension of
the offenders driver's license or driving privilege by the licensing authority.
The impounded motor vehicle number plates may be released, upon the
order of the court, to a bona fide purchaser of the offender's motor vehicle,
if that purchaser produces a new certificate of title issued by the motor
vehicle registrar.
§ 10-15. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No. 620, § 5, 6-28-1985]
§ 10-16. Interpretation of chemical tests. [Ord. No. 527, § 19-1-A,
7-27-1976; Ord. No. 620, § 6, 6-28-1983; Ord. No. 870, 12-9-2003]
(a) Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of
acts alleged to have been committed by any person while driving or in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor, drugs, or a combination thereof, evidence of the
amount of alcohol, drugs, or a combination thereof in the person's blood
at the time of the act alleged as shown by a chemical analysis of the
blood, breath, saliva, or urine is admissible. For the purposes of this
section:
(1) A person having, at that time, an alcohol concentration of not more
than 0.05 of 1% by weight is presumed not to be under the
influence of intoxicating liquor.
(2) Evidence that there was at that time more than five one-hundredths
of 1% by weight alcohol concentration in a person is relevant
evidence, but it is not to be given prima facie effect in indicating
whether the person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
(3) A person having an alcohol concentration of at least eight onehundredths
of 1% by weight or, with respect to a person under 21
years of age, an alcohol concentration of at least two onehundredths
of 1% by weight at the time of the performance of a
chemical test within two hours after driving or being in physical
control of a vehicle is under the influence of intoxicating liquor at
the time of driving or being in physical control of a vehicle.
§ 10-13.2 WILLISTON CODE § 10-16
AO:332
(4) Alcohol concentration is based upon grams of alcohol per 100
milliliters of blood or grams of alcohol per 210 liters of alveolar air
or grams of alcohol per 67 milliliters of urine.
(5) The results of the chemical analysis must be received in evidence
when it is shown that the sample was properly obtained and if the
test was fairly administered, and if the test is shown to have been
performed according to methods and with devices approved by the
state toxicologist, and by an individual possessing a certificate of
qualification to administer the test issued by the state toxicologist.
The state toxicologist is authorized to approve satisfactory devices
and methods of chemical analysis and determine the qualifications
of individuals to conduct such analysis, and shall issue a certificate
to all qualified operators who exhibit the certificate upon demand
of the person requested to take the chemical test.
(6) The state toxicologist may appoint, train, certify, and supervise
field inspectors of breath testing equipment and its operation, and
the inspectors shall report the findings of any inspection to the
state toxicologist for appropriate action. Upon approval of the
methods or devices, or both, required to perform the tests and the
persons qualified to administer them, the state toxicologist shall
prepare and file written record of the approval with the director
and the recorder in each county, unless the board of county
commissioners designates a different official, and shall include in
the record:
a. An annual register of the specific testing devices currently
approved, including serial number, location, and the date and
results of last inspection.
b. An annual register of currently qualified and certified
operators of the devices, stating the date of certification and its
expiration.
c. The operational checklist and forms prescribing the methods
currently approved by the state toxicologist in using the
devices during the administration of the tests.
The material filed under this section may be supplemented
when the state toxicologist determines it to be necessary, and
any supplemental material has the same force and effect as the
material that it supplements.
(7) Copies of the records referred to in subsections (5) and (6),
certified by the recorder, or designated official, must be admitted
as prima facie evidence of the matters stated in the records.
(8) A certified copy of the analytical report of a blood, urine, or saliva
analysis referred to in Subsection (5) and which is issued by the
state toxicologist must be accepted as prima facie evidence of the
§ 10-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-16
AO:333
§ 10-17. Driving on sidewalk. [Code 1957, § 23.1]
No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area except
upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
§ 10-18. Use of streets by certain vehicles. [Ord. No. 521, § 18-4,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-19. Operation of vehicles on approach of emergency vehicles.
[Ord. No. 521, § 3-8, 7-27-1976]
results of a chemical analysis performed under this chapter. The
certified copy satisfies the directive of Subsection (5).
(9) Notwithstanding any statute or rule to the contrary, a defendant
who has been found to be indigent by the court in the criminal
proceeding at issue may subpoena, without cost to the defendant,
the person who conducted the chemical analysis referred to in this
section to testify at the trial on the issue of the amount of alcohol,
drugs, or a combination thereof in the defendant's blood, breath,
saliva, or urine at the time of the alleged act. If the state
toxicologist, the director of the state crime laboratory, or any
employee of either, is subpoenaed to testify by a defendant who is
not indigent and the defendant does not call the witness to
establish relevant evidence, the court shall order the defendant to
pay costs to the witness as provided in N.D.C.C. § 31-01-16.
(10) A signed statement from the individual medically qualified to draw
the blood sample for testing as set forth in Subsection (5) is prima
facie evidence that the blood sample was properly drawn and no
further foundation for the admission of this evidence may be
required.
(a) The traffic engineer or authorized person may determine and designate
those heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited the use of
the roadway by motor-driven cycles, bicycles, horse-drawn vehicles or
other nonmotorized traffic and shall erect appropriate signs giving
notice thereof.
(b) When signs are so erected giving notice thereof, no person shall
disobey the restrictions stated on such signs.
(a) Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle
giving an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle and displaying
a visible flashing, revolving or rotating blue, white or red light, the
driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall
immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and
shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency
vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 10-16 WILLISTON CODE § 10-19
AO:334
§ 10-20. Class A emergency vehicles — Generally. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 3-7, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-21. Same — Scope of authority. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-7,
7-27-1976]
(b) Whenever an emergency vehicle is parked or stopped at the scene of an
emergency and is displaying a flashing, revolving or rotating blue,
white or red light, approaching traffic shall move to the right-hand edge
or curb of the road-way and shall stop, but once having stopped, traffic
may proceed past the scene at its own risk when the roadway is clear,
except when otherwise directed by a police officer.
(c) This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the highway.
(a) The driver of a Class A authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(3) Exceed the speed limit, so long as he does not endanger life or
property;
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
(a) The exceptions granted in § 10-20 to a Class A authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only:
(1) When the authorized emergency vehicle is in pursuit of or in
apprehension of a violator or a suspected violator requiring the use
of these exemptions;
(2) When the Class A authorized emergency vehicle is being operated
in response to a reported emergency involving a possible personal
injury, death or damage to property, and when giving audible signal
by siren or when giving adequate warning by use of a flashing red
or combination red and white lights which are visible under normal
atmospheric conditions for at least 500 feet (152.4 meters);
(3) In any instance when the head of a law enforcement agency deems
advisable within the area of his jurisdiction for the protection of
person and property and when giving audible signal by siren or
when giving adequate warning by use of a flashing red or
combination red and white lights which are visible under normal
atmospheric conditions for at least 500 feet (152.4 meters).
§ 10-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-22
AO:335
§ 10-22. Same — Red lamps generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-7,
7-27-1976]
No emergency vehicle shall display or permit to be displayed any red lamp
except when operated on official business.
§ 10-23. Class B emergency vehicles — Generally. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 3-7, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-24. Same — Scope of authority. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-7,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-25. Class C emergency vehicles. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-7,
7-27-1976]
All Class B specifications shall apply to Class C authorized emergency
vehicles, except that a rotating blue flashing light shall be displayed in place
of an amber light as provided in § 10-24.
§ 10-26. Coasters, roller skates, etc., generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-5,
7-27-1976]
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any road-way except while crossing
a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as
a play street as authorized in this chapter.
(a) The driver of a Class B authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Exceed the speed limit so long as he does not endanger life or
property during the time of a local or national disaster;
(3) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions.
(a) The exceptions granted in § 10-23 to a Class B authorized emergency
vehicle shall apply only when the authorized emergency vehicle is
displaying an amber light visible under normal atmospheric conditions
for a distance of 500 feet in any direction, and
(1) When it is necessary for the authorized emergency vehicle to use
these exemptions for the immediate protection of life or property;
(2) When an authorized emergency vehicle is stopped on a highway for
the purpose of performing a duty as required of him; or
(3) When traveling at a speed slower than the normal flow of traffic.
§ 10-22 WILLISTON CODE § 10-27
AO:336
§ 10-27. Nonmotorized traffic to obey regulations. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 3-4, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-28. Accidents involving damage to vehicle. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 19-3, 7-27-1976]
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to
a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall immediately stop
such vehicle at the scene of such accident or as close thereto as possible
but shall forthwith return to and in every event shall remain at the scene
of such accident until he has fulfilled the requirements of § 10-29. Every
such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
Any person failing to stop or comply with said requirements under such
circumstances shall be guilty of an offense.
§ 10-29. Duty upon striking unattended vehicle. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 19-4, 7-27-1976]
The driver of any vehicle which collides with any vehicle which is
unattended shall immediately stop and shall then and there either locate
and notify the operator or owner of the vehicle of the name and address, as
well as the name of the motor vehicle insurance policy carrier, of the driver
and owner of the vehicle striking the unattended vehicle or shall leave in a
conspicuous place in the vehicle struck a written notice giving the name and
address, as well as the name of the motor vehicle insurance policy carrier, of
the driver and of the owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement
of the circumstances of the collision.
§ 10-30. Duty upon striking fixtures upon highway. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 19-5, 7-27-1976]
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to
fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact and of his name and address and of the registration
number of the vehicle he is driving and shall upon request and if available
exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license and shall make report of such
accident when and as required in sections 10-31 — 10-35.
(a) Every person propelling any pushcart upon a roadway shall be granted
all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the
driver of a vehicle by this chapter and by the rules of the road portion of
the state vehicle code, except those provisions which by their very
nature can have no application.
(b) Every person riding a bicycle or an animal or driving any animal-drawn
vehicle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this
chapter, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very
nature can have no application.
§ 10-27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-31
AO:337
§ 10-31. Accident reports — Required. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-9,
7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
death of any person, or property damage to an apparent extent of $300
or more, shall immediately give notice of such accident to the local police
department. Within five days after such accident, the driver shall also
forward a written report of the accident to the highway commissioner.
§ 10-32. Same — False information. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-9, 7-27-1976]
Any person who gives information reports on accidents, as required in this
article, knowing or having reason to believe that such information is false,
shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 10-33. Same — Driver incapacitated. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-9,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-34. Same — Failure to file. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-9, 7-27-1976]
When it shall appear to the magistrate that any person has failed to file a
written report in compliance with this article, he shall notify the highway
commissioner of such failure so that appropriate action may be taken
pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 39-98-09.
§ 10-35. Same — Garages. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-9, 7-27-1976]
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any
motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in a reportable
accident as provided in § 10-31 or of being struck by any bullet, shall report
or cause a report to be made to a police officer within 24 hours after
such motor vehicle is received, and before any repairs are made to such
vehicle, giving the registration number and the name and address of the
owner, operator or person in control of such vehicle with a description of
the location and type of damage to the vehicle, or any missing parts, if
the vehicle does not have a sticker on a window thereof issued by a police
officer, sheriff or highway patrolman, bearing information to show that the
(a) An accident notice under this article is not required from any person
who is physically incapable of making the report during the period of
such incapaCity.
(b) Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving an
immediate notice of an accident and there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such occupant
shall make or cause to be given the notice by the driver.
(c) Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the
owner of the vehicle involved shall within five days after learning of the
accident make such report not made by the driver.
§ 10-31 WILLISTON CODE § 10-35
AO:338
accident in which the vehicle was involved had been investigated. The
police officer investigating any reportable accident shall attach a sticker to
the window of any damaged vehicle showing that the accident in which such
vehicle was involved has been investigated. If the vehicle does bear such a
sticker, the garage or repair shop need not make the accident report this
article requires and may begin repairs immediately. After repairs have been
made and before the vehicle is released, the sticker provided for in this
section shall be removed.
§ 10-36. Driving without liability insurance — Prohibited. [Ord. No.
586, 10-22-1981; Ord. No. 667, 4-10-1986; Ord. No. 734, 2-26-1991;
Ord. No. 752, 3-24-1992; Ord. No. 883, 7-12-2005; Ord. No. 969,
8-27-2013; Ord. No. 1012, 1-27-2015, Ord. 1029, 10-27-2015]
(1) A person may not drive, or the owner may not cause or knowingly
permit to be driven, a motor vehicle in this state without a valid policy
of liability insurance in effect in order to respond in damages for
liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use of that motor
vehicle as required by North Dakota Century Code § 39-16.1.
(2) Upon being stopped by a law enforcement officer for the purpose of
enforcing or investigating the possible violation of an ordinance or state
law, the person driving the motor vehicle shall provide to the officer
upon request satisfactory evidence, including written or electronic
proof of insurance, of the policy required under this section. If unable to
comply with the request, that person may be charged with a violation of
this section. If that person produces satisfactory evidence, including
written or electronic proof of insurance, of a valid policy of liability
insurance in effect at the time of the alleged violation of this section to
the office of the court under which the matter will be heard, that person
may not be convicted or assessed any administration fee for violation of
Subsection (1).
(3) Notwithstanding N.D.C.C. § 26.1-30-18, a person may be convicted for
failure to have a valid policy of liability insurance in effect under this
section if the time of acquisition of the policy was after the time of the
alleged incidence of driving without liability insurance. If the time of
acquisition of the policy comes into question, the driver or owner has
the burden of establishing the time of acquisition. If the driver is not an
owner of the motor vehicle, the driver does not violate this section if the
driver provides the court with evidence identifying the owner of the
motor vehicle and describing circumstances under which the owner
caused or permitted the driver to drive the motor vehicle.
(4) Violation of this section is a $150 fine. For a second or subsequent
violation within a period of three years, the fine is $300 and the court
shall order the motor vehicle number plates of the motor vehicle owned
and operated by the person at the time of the violation to be impounded
until that person provides proof of insurance and a $20 fee to the court.
The person shall deliver the number plates to the court without delay at
a time certain as ordered by the court following the conviction. The
§ 10-35 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-36
AO:339
§ 10-37. Reproducing or altering of any operator's or driver's
license or permit prohibited. [Ord. No. 611, §§ 1 — 3, 4-26-1983]
It shall be unlawful for any person to print, photograph, photostat,
duplicate, alter, or in any way reproduce any operator's or driver's license
or permit or facsimile thereof, or to print, photograph, photostat, duplicate,
alter, or in any way reproduce any document used in the production of
any operator's or driver's license or permit or facsimile thereof, in such a
manner that it would be mistaken for a valid license or document containing
valid information, or to display or have in his possession any such print,
photograph, photostat, duplicate, reproduction, or facsimile unless
authorized by the provisions of the North Dakota law.
It shall also be unlawful for any person to alter in any manner any operator's
or driver's license or permit, or to display or have in his possession any
altered operator's or driver's license or permit.
Any person, violating any of the terms or provisions of this section shall
upon conviction be punished by a fine as stated in § 1-11 of this Code.
court shall deliver the number plates to the office of the police officer
that made the arrest and notify the department of the order. A person
who does not provide the number plates to the court at the appropriate
time is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(5) For a violation of Subsection (1) or equivalent ordinance, the person
who has been convicted shall provide proof of motor vehicle liability
insurance to the department in the form of a written or electronically
transmitted certificate from an insurance carrier authorized to do
business in this state. This proof must be provided for a period of one
year and kept on file with the department. If the person fails to provide
this information, the department shall suspend that person's driving
privileges and may not issue or renew that person's operator's license
unless that person provides proof of insurance.
(6) A person who has been convicted for violation of Subsection (1) or
equivalent ordinance shall surrender that person's operator's license
and purchase a duplicate operator's license with a notation requiring
that person to keep proof of liability insurance on file with the
department. The fee for this license is $50 and the fee to remove this
notation is $50.
(7) When an insurance carrier has certified a motor vehicle liability policy,
the insurance carrier shall notify the director no later than 10 days after
cancellation or termination of the certified insurance policy by filing a
notice of cancellation or termination of the certified insurance policy;
except that a policy subsequently procured and certified shall, on the
effective date of its certification, terminate the insurance previously
certified with respect to any motor vehicle designated in both
certificates.
§ 10-36 WILLISTON CODE § 10-37
AO:340
The court shall have the power to suspend said sentence and to revoke the
suspension thereof.
§ 10-38. Operation of motor vehicle in violation of restrictions
prohibited. [Ord. No. 612, §§ 1, 2, 4-26-1983]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon the streets, avenues,
alleys, and public thoroughfares of the City a motor vehicle in any manner
in violation of the restrictions imposed in a restricted license issued to him
under state law.
Any person violating the terms or provisions of this section shall upon
conviction be punished by a fine as stated in § 1-11 of this Code. The court
shall have the power to suspend said sentence and to revoke the suspension
thereof.
§ 10-39. Child restraint devices. [Ord. No. 621, §§ 1 — 3, 6-28-1983;
Ord. No. 705, 10-27-1987; Ord. No. 753, §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 829,
4-11-2000; Ord. No. 842, 12-27-2000; Ord. No. 886, 9-27-2005]
(a) If a child under seven years of age is present in any motor vehicle, that
motor vehicle must be equipped with at least one child restraint system
for each such child. However, a child under the age of seven who is at
least 57 inches (1.45 meters) tall and who weighs at least 80 pounds
(36.98 kilograms) is not required to use a child restraint system. The
child restraint system must at least meet the standards adopted by the
United States Department of Transportation for those systems (49 CFR
571.213). While the motor vehicle is in motion, each such child must be
properly secured in the child restraint system in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. A child weighing more than 40 pounds
(18.14 kilograms) may be restrained by a lap belt if the vehicle is not
equipped with lap and shoulder belts or if all lap and shoulder belts are
in use by other occupants. While the motor vehicle is moving, each child
of seven through 17 years of age who is in the motor vehicle must be in
an approved child restraint system in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions or correctly buckled in a seat belt. Use of
child restraint systems and seat belts is not required in motor vehicles
that were not equipped with seat belts when manufactured. If a child is
being transported in an emergency situation, this section does not
apply.
(b) Violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $25.
(c) Violation of this section is not, in itself, evidence of negligence. The fact
of a violation of this section is not admissible in any proceeding other
than one charging the violation.
§ 10-37 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-40
AO:341
§ 10-40. Use of safety belts required in certain motor vehicles —
Enforcement. [Ord. No. 772, 12-27-1994; Ord. No. 828, 4-11-2000]
Subject to the limitations of Section 39-21-1941.4 N.D.C.C. and Section
39-21-1941.5 N.D.C.C., a driver may not operate upon a highway a motor
vehicle designed for carrying fewer than 11 passengers, which was
originally manufactured with safety belts unless each front seat occupant is
wearing a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. This section does not
apply to a child in a child restraint or seat belt in accordance with Section
39-21-1941.2; to drivers of implements of husbandry; to operators of farm
vehicles as defined in Subsection 5 of Section 39-04-19 N.D.C.C.; to rural
mail carriers while on duty delivering mail; to an occupant with a medical or
physically disabling condition that prevents appropriate restraint in a safety
belt, if a qualified physician states in a signed writing the nature of the
condition and the reason restraint is inappropriate; or when all front seat
safety belts are in use by other occupants. A physician who, in good faith,
provides a statement that restraint would be inappropriate is not subject to
civil liability.
§ 10-40.1. Safety belt requirements. [Ord. No. 830, 4-11-2000]
§ 10-41. Same — Secondary enforcement. [Ord. No. 772,
12-27-1994; Ord. No. 827, 4-11-2000]
A peace officer may not issue a citation for a violation of Section
39-21-1941.4 N.D.C.C. unless the officer lawfully stopped or detained the
driver of the motor vehicle for another violation. Drivers' license points may
(1) Every passenger car manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1965,
must be equipped with lap belt assemblies for use in the driver's and
one other front seating position.
(2) All motor vehicles manufactured after January 1, 1968, must be
equipped with any lap belt or shoulder belt required at the time the
vehicle was manufactured by standards of the United States
Department of Transportation. Nothing in this subsection affects the
requirement in Subsection (1) for lap belt in the driver's seating
position.
(3) Specified types of motor vehicles or seating positions within any motor
vehicle may be excepted from the requirements imposed by subsections
(1) and (2) when compliance would be impractical.
(4) No person may install, distribute, have for sale, offer for sale, or sell any
belt for use in motor vehicles unless it meets current minimum
standards and specifications of the United States Department of
Transportation.
(5) Every owner shall maintain belts and assemblies required by this
section in proper condition and in a manner that will enable occupants
to use them.
§ 10-40 WILLISTON CODE § 10-41
AO:342
not be assessed against any person for violation of Section 39-21-1941.4
N.D.C.C.
§ 10-42. Penalty. [Ord. No. 772, 12-27-1994]
Violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $20.
§ 10-43. through § 10-46. (Reserved)
§ 10-41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-43
AO:343

ARTICLE II
Disposition of Offenses
§ 10-47. Halting of violator. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-1, 7-27-1976]
Whenever any person is halted for the violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, the officer halting such person, except as otherwise provided
in § 10-49, may:
§ 10-48. Hearing. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-2, 7-27-1976]
The time to be specified in the summons or notice provided for in § 10-47
shall be within 10 days after the issuance of such summons or notice unless
the person halted shall demand an earlier hearing, and, if the person halted
desires, he may have the right, at a convenient hour, to an immediate
hearing or to a hearing within 24 hours. Such hearing shall be before
the municipal court. Upon the receipt from the person halted of a written
promise to appear at the time and place mentioned in the summons or
notice, such officer shall release him from custody. Any person refusing
to give such written promise to appear shall be taken immediately by the
halting officer before the nearest or most accessible magistrate, or to such
other place or before such person as may be provided by a statute or
ordinance authorizing the giving of bail. Any person willfully violating his
written promise to appear shall be guilty of an offense, regardless of the
disposition of the charge upon which he originally was halted.
§ 10-49. When offender not released. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-3,
7-27-1976]
(1) Take the name and address of such person;
(2) Take the license number of his motor vehicle; and
(3) Issue a summons or otherwise notify him in writing to appear at a time
and place to be specified in such summons or notice.
(a) The provisions of § 10-47 shall not apply to a person if:
(1) The halting officer shall have good reason to believe such person
guilty of any felony or when such person is halted and charged with
any of the offenses listed in § 10-50, except reckless driving; or
(2) The halting officer, acting within his discretion, deems it advisable
to release such person upon his promise to appear when halted and
charged with either of the following offenses:
a. Reckless driving; or
b. Driving in excess of speed limitations established by the state
or by local authorities in their respective jurisdictions.
(b) The halting officer forthwith shall take any person not released upon his
promise to appear before the nearest or most accessible magistrate.
§ 10-47 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-50
AO:345
§ 10-50. Offenses excepted. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-7, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-51. Administrative hearing — Request by person cited. [Ord.
No. 521, § 20-5, 7-27-1976]
If a person cited for a traffic violation, other than an offense listed in §
10-50, does not choose to follow one of the procedures set forth in § 10-60,
he may request a hearing on the issue of his commission of the violation
charged, the hearing to be held at the time scheduled in the citation or at
some future time, not to exceed 90 days later, set at that first appearance.
§ 10-52. Same — Definition. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-5, 7-27-1976]
As used in sections 10-51 — 10-60 the word "official" means the municipal
judge.
§ 10-53. Same — Finding of violation. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-5,
7-27-1976]
If the official conducting an administrative hearing under this article finds
that the person had committed the traffic violation, he shall notify the
licensing authority of that fact, and whether the person was driving more
than nine miles (14.48 kilometers) per hour in excess of the lawful limit,
stating specifically the miles (kilometers) per hour in excess of the lawful
limit, if charged with a speeding violation, within 10 days of the date of
the hearing. The fact that a person has admitted a violation, or has, in any
proceeding, been found to have committed a violation, shall not be referred
to in any way, nor be admissible as evidence in any court, civil, equity or
criminal, except in an action or proceeding involving that person's driving
license or privilege.
(a) The procedures authorized under sections 10-51 — 10-58 and 10-60
may not be utilized by a person charged with one of the following
offenses:
(1) Driving or being in actual physical control of a vehicle while under
the influence of a controlled substance or intoxicating liquor in
violation of § 10-12.
(2) Reckless driving or aggravated reckless driving in violation of §
10-8 of this Code or state law.
(3) Negligent homicide in violation of N.D.C.C. § 12.1-16-2003.
(4) Manslaughter resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle.
(5) Leaving the scene of an accident in violation of this chapter or law.
(6) Driving while license or driving privilege is suspended or revoked
in violation of § 10-11.
(7) Violating subdivisions b or c of Subsection 5 of N.D.C.C. § 39-24-09.
§ 10-50 WILLISTON CODE § 10-54
AO:346
§ 10-54. Same — Appeal authorized. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-5,
7-27-1976]
If a person is aggrieved by a finding in an administrative hearing under this
article that he committed the violation, he may, without payment of a filing
fee, appeal that finding to the district court for trial anew, and the case may
be tried to a jury, if requested. If, after trial in the district court, the person
is again found to have committed the violation, there shall be no further
appeal. Notice of appeal under this section shall be given within 30 days
after a finding of commission of a violation is entered by the official. Oral
notice of appeal may be given to the official at the time that he adjudges
that a violation has been committed. Otherwise, notice of appeal shall be in
writing and filed with the official, and a copy of the notice shall be served
upon the City Attorney. An appeal taken under this section shall not operate
to stay any reporting requirements nor to stay appropriate action by the
licensed authority upon receipt of that report.
§ 10-55. Same — Action by district court of appeal. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 20-5, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-56. Same — Stay or temporary certificate. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 20-5, 7-27-1976]
An application for a stay or temporary certificate under this article shall
be accompanied by a certified copy of the appellant's driving record, for
the furnishing of which the licensing authority may charge a fee of $2.
Any order granting a stay or a temporary certificate shall be forwarded
forthwith by the clerk of court to the licensing authority, which shall issue a
temporary certificate in accordance with the order in the manner provided
by law. A court shall not make a determination on an application under this
article without notice to the appropriate prosecuting attorney. A person who
violates or exceeds the restrictions contained in any temporary restricted
driving certificate issued pursuant to this article shall be guilty of a traffic
violation and shall be assessed a fee of $20.
(a) The district court, upon application by an appellant under this article,
may:
(1) Order a stay of any action by the licensing authority during
pendancy of the appeal, but not to exceed a period of 120 days;
(2) Order a stay and that the appellant be issued a temporary
restricted driving certificate by the licensing authority to be
effective for no more than 120 days; or
(3) Deny the application.
§ 10-54 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-57
AO:347
§ 10-57. Same — Prosecution of appeal; finding for person charged.
[Ord. No. 521, § 20-5, 7-27-1976]
If a person charged in an administrative hearing under this article is found
not to have committed the violation by the district court or the jury, the
clerk of court shall report that fact to the licensing authority immediately,
the City Attorney shall prosecute the appeal.
§ 10-58. Same — Proof of violation; procedure. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 20-5, 7-27-1976]
The City must prove the commission of a charged violation at an
administrative hearing or appeal under this article by a fair preponderance
of the evidence. Upon an appeal under sections 10-54 — 10-57, the court
and parties shall follow, to the extent applicable, the North Dakota Rules of
Civil Procedure.
§ 10-59. Same — Failure to appear, etc. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-6,
7-27-1976]
If a person fails to choose one of the methods of proceeding set forth
in §§ 10-51 — 10-58 or § 10-60, he shall be deemed to have admitted to
commission of the violation charged, and the municipal court shall report
such fact to the licensing authority within 10 days after the date set for the
hearing. Failure to appear at the time designated, after signing a promise
to appear, without paying the fee or posting and forfeiting bond, shall be
an offense. Failure to appear without just cause at the hearing shall also be
deemed an admission of commission of the violation charged.
§ 10-60. Traffic violations noncriminal. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-4,
7-27-1976]
(a) Any person cited, in accordance with the provisions of sections 10-47
and 10-48 for a traffic violation under state law or municipal ordinance,
other than an offense listed in § 10-50, shall be deemed to be charged
with a noncriminal offense and may appear before the designated
official and pay the fee for the violation charged at or prior to the time
scheduled for a hearing, or, if he has posted bond in person or by mail,
he may forfeit bond by not appearing at the designated time.
(b) If the person appears at the time scheduled in the citation, he may make
a statement in explanation of his action, and the official may at that
time, in his discretion, waive, reduce or suspend the fee or bond, or
both. If the person cited follows the foregoing procedures, he shall be
deemed to have admitted the violation and to have waived his right to a
hearing on the issue of commission of the violation. The bond required
to secure appearance before the official designated in the citation shall
be identical to the fee established by § 10-63. Within 10 days after
forfeiture of bond or payment of the fee, the official having jurisdiction
over the violation shall certify to the licensing authority:
§ 10-57 WILLISTON CODE § 10-60
AO:348
§ 10-61. Same — "moving violation" defined. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-10,
7-27-1976; Ord. No. 832, 6-13-2000]
For the purposes of § 10-63, a "moving violation" shall mean a violation of §
10-150; involving speeds of 15 miles per hour or less in excess of the lawful
speed limit; §§ 10-154, 10-10, 10-9, 10-31 — 10-35, 10-135, 10-164, 10-165
or 10-18; or a violation of the provisions of Chapter 10 except those sections
within this chapter which are specifically listed in § 10-62.
§ 10-62. Same — "nonmoving violation" defined. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 20-9, 7-27-1976; Ord. No. 832, 6-13-2000]
For the purposes of § 10-63, a "nonmoving violation" shall mean § 10-43
(Ordnance No. 830), 10-122, 10-136, or 10-137, the provisions of Article X,
or when any provision of Chapter 10 defines the violation as a "nonmoving
violation."
§ 10-63. Same-amount of fee. [Ord. No. 521, § 20-8, 7-27-1976; Ord.
No. 644, 5-28-1985; Ord. No. 875, 6-8-2004; Ord. No. 908,
6-10-2008; amended 11-26-2019 by Ord. No. 1109]
(1) Admission of the violation; and
(2) In speeding violations, whether the speed charged was in excess of
the lawful speed limit by more than nine miles per hour and the
miles per hour by which the speed limit was exceeded.
(c) This section shall not be construed as allowing a halting officer to
receive the fee or bond, unless he is otherwise authorized by law to do
so.
(a) The fees required for a noncriminal disposition shall be as follows:
(1) For a nonmoving violation, other than those separately delineated
below, as defined in § 10-62, a fee in the amount of $20.
(2) For a moving violation, other than those separately delineated
below, as defined in § 10-61, a fee in the amount of $30.
(3) For a violation of § 10-154, the penalty shall be a fee as follows:
Speed
(mph over speed
limit) Fee
1—5 $5
6—10 $5 plus $1/each mph over 5 mph over limit
11—15 $10 plus $1/each mph over 10 mph over
limit
§ 10-60 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-63
AO:349
§ 10-64. Driving across parking areas to avoid traffic control
devices. [Ord. No. 718, 8-22-1989]
No person shall drive through or utilize any private property driveway or
parking lot to cut through or across in an attempt to avoid designated traffic
control lights or stop signs. Any person who violates this ordinance shall be
guilty of an infraction subject to a maximum fine of $20.
§ 10-65. through § 10-74. (Reserved)
Speed
(mph over speed
limit) Fee
16—20 $15 plus $2/each mph over 15 mph over
limit
21—25 $25 plus $3/each mph over 20 mph over
limit
26—35 $40 plus $3/each mph over 25 mph over
limit
36—45 $70 plus $3/each mph over 35 mph over
limit
46 plus $100 plus $5/each mph over 45 mph over
limit
(4) For a violation of § 10-150 defining careless driving, a fee in the
amount of $30.
(5) For a violation of § 10-7 defining care required in driving, a fee of
not less than $10 nor more than $30.
(6) For a violation of §§ 10-102, 10-105, 10-179, 10-180, 10-189, 10-191
and 10-210, a fee of $40.
§ 10-63 WILLISTON CODE § 10-65
AO:350
ARTICLE III
Traffic-Control Devices
§ 10-75. Presumed lawful. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-7, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-76. Interference. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-9, 7-27-1976]
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof.
§ 10-77. Authority to install. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-1, 7-27-1976]
The City Engineer or any person authorized by the Board of City
Commissioners shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and
devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances of this City
to make effective the provisions of said ordinances, and may place and
maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary
to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of this City or under state
law, or to guide or warn traffic.
§ 10-78. When required for enforcement. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-7,
7-27-1976]
No provision of this chapter for which traffic-control devices are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the
alleged violation an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a state
statute does not state that devices are required, such statute shall be
effective even though no devices are erected or in place.
§ 10-79. Specifications. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-2, 7-27-1976]
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the
specifications approved by the state highway commissioner pursuant to
N.D.C.C. § 39-13-06. All signs and signals required hereunder for a
particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and
location throughout the City. All traffic-control devices so erected and not
(a) Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in positions
approximately conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such
devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
(b) Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements
pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by
competent evidence.
§ 10-75 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-79
AO:351
inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this article shall be official
traffic-control devices.
§ 10-80. Unauthorized signs. [Ord. No. 521, § 4.8, 7-27-1976]
No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street any
unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides
from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control
device or any railroad sign or signal.
§ 10-81. Signals between intersections. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-3,
7-27-1976]
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained
at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of § 10-83 shall be
applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the
pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
§ 10-82. Obedience by drivers. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-7, 7-27-1976]
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official trafficcontrol
device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle in this chapter.
§ 10-83. Signal legend. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-3, 7-27-1976]
(a) Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights, or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a
time or in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be
used, except for special pedestrian signals carrying a word or legend,
and said lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and
pedestrians as follows:
(1) Green indication:
a. Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place
prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
b. Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the
§ 10-79 WILLISTON CODE § 10-83
AO:352
§ 10-84. Flashing signals. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-4, 7-27-1976]
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the
intersection.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided for in § 10-85, pedestrians facing any green signal,
except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed
across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
(2) Steady yellow indication:
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated
or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately
thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection.
b. Pedestrians facing a steady yellow signal, unless otherwise
directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided for in §
10-85, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to
cross the roadway before a red indication is shown and no
pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
(3) Steady red indication:
a. Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
before entering the intersection and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown, except as provided for
in Subdivision b of this subsection.
b. Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular
traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the
intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one way street
into a one way street, after stopping as required by Subdivision
a of this subsection. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the rightof-
way to pedestrians lawfully within adjacent crosswalk and to
other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
c. Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided for in § 10-85, pedestrians facing a steady red signal
alone shall not enter the roadway.
(a) Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow light is used in a traffic
signal or with a traffic sign, it shall require obedience by vehicular
traffic as follows:
§ 10-83 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-84
AO:353
§ 10-85. Pedestrian control signals. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-5, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-86. Designation of walks, lanes, etc. [Ord. No. 521, § 4-6,
7-27-1976]
(1) Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line or, if none, before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, if none, then at the point nearest
the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it,
and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable
after making a stop at a stop sign.
(2) Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed
through the intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(b) This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the
rules as set forth in § 10-181.
(a) Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"Walk" or "Don't Walk" are in place, such signals shall indicate as
follows:
(1) "Walk." Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the
roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the rightof-
way by the drivers of all vehicles; and
(2) "Don't Walk." No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the
direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a
sidewalk or safety island while the "Don't Walk" signal is showing.
(a) The City Engineer or any person shall, when authorized by the Board of
City Commissioners:
(1) Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines
upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where
there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and
at such other places as directed by the board.
(2) Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such
places as may be deemed necessary for the protection of
pedestrians as determined by the board.
(3) Mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway
where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. Where such
traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator
of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of any such lane except when lawfully passing another
§ 10-84 WILLISTON CODE § 10-86
AO:354
§ 10-87. through § 10-97. (Reserved)
vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning movement or
performing other lawful traffic movements.
§ 10-86 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-87
AO:355

ARTICLE IV
Operation of Vehicles
§ 10-98. Modification of motor vehicles. [Ord. No. 527, § 4,
11-23-1976; Ord. No. 696, 6-23-1987]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate upon a street or highway
or in an area used principally for public parking a motor vehicle of a
type required to be registered under the laws of this state with a weight
of 7,000 pounds (3,175.14 kilograms) or less with alterations or
changes from the manufacturer's original design of the suspension,
steering, or braking system of the motor vehicle. The weight must be
computed on the basis of the unmodified and unloaded weight of the
motor vehicle, and without regard to any ballast that may be placed in
the vehicle. As to bumpers, motor vehicle height, and permitted
modifications, the following requirements also apply:
(1) The motor vehicle must be equipped with front and rear bumpers.
(2) The maximum body height permitted for the motor vehicle is 42
inches (106.68 centimeters). Measurement of body height is made
from a level ground surface to the floor of the cargo area.
(3) The maximum bumper height permitted is 27 inches (68.58
centimeters). Measurement of bumper height is made from a level
ground surface to the highest point on the bottom of the bumper.
(4) The vehicle may be modified in accordance with the following:
a. Any modifying equipment must meet specialty equipment
marketing association standards.
b. If tires placed on a motor vehicle have a diameter greater than
that of the tires on the motor vehicle as manufactured, those
tires must comply with department of transportation
requirements.
c. The maximum outside diameter permitted for tires is 44 inches
(111.76 centimeters).
d. A horizontal drop bumper may be used to comply with the
bumper height requirement of paragraph 3. The horizontal
bumper must:
1. Be at least three inches (7.62 centimeters) in vertical
width;
2. Extend the entire horizontal body width; and
3. Be horizontal, load bearing, and attached to the vehicle
frame to effectively transfer impact when engaged.
§ 10-98 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-98
AO:357
§ 10-99. Muffling; excess fumes or smoke. [Ord. No. 527, § 4,
11-23-1976; Ord. No. 869, 8-12-2003]
§ 10-100. Receiving police radio signals. [Ord. No. 527, § 4,
11-23-1976]
e. The maximum lift permitted in the suspension system is four
inches (10.16 centimeters).
(5) A person charged with violating this section has the burden of
proceeding to show that the modifications are permitted under this
section.
(6) Vehicles owned by law enforcement agencies, the military, fire
fighting agencies, and ambulances, may be modified without
regard to this section.
(a) Every motor vehicle shall at all times be equipped with a muffler in
good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or
unusual noise and annoying smoke, and no person shall use a muffler
cut-out, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a street or
highway or in an area used principally for public parking within the
City.
(b) The engine and power mechanism of every motor vehicle shall be so
equipped and adjusted as to prevent the escape of excessive fumes or
smoke.
(c) No motor vehicle shall activate an engine brake which increases the
usual and customary noise from the vehicle's exhaust upon a street or
highway within the City or its jurisdictional limits when the use or
activation of such an engine brake is prohibited by a sign in an area
designated by the director of public works.
(d) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be
assessed a fee of up to $20.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park on any of the streets,
alleys, public property or public parking places in the City any vehicle
equipped with or having therein a radio receiving set which is tuned to
receive signals transmitted on VHF bands assigned by the Federal
Communications Commission for police emergency purposes; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall apply to any vehicle owned or
operated by the federal government or any city, town, county or
political subdivision of any state or to any vehicle authorized by the
laws of the State of North Dakota or authorized by the chief of police
subject to the approval of the Board of City Commissioners to be
equipped with radio receivers operating on assigned police
frequencies.
§ 10-98 WILLISTON CODE § 10-100
AO:358
§ 10-101. (Reserved)
Former § 10-101, Fleeing or eluding an officer's signal, previously codified
herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 527, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 918.
§ 10-102. Vehicle entering roadway. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-18,
7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a roadway from any place
other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
§ 10-103. Drive on right side of roadway. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-6,
7-27-1976]
(b) Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine of up to $500 or a jail sentence of up to 30 days or
both.
(a) Upon all roadways of sufficient width a vehicle shall be driven upon the
right half of the roadway, except as follows;
(1) When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction under the rules governing such movement;
(2) When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper
direction upon the unobstructed portion of the highway within such
distance as to constitute an immediate hazard;
(3) Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon; or
(4) Upon a roadway restricted to one way traffic.
(b) Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the normal speed
of traffic at the time and place and under the conditions then existing
shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available for traffic, or as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway,
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction or when preparing for a left turn in an intersection or
into a private road or driveway.
(c) Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by
official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side
of the center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted
under Subdivision (2) of Subsection (a) hereof. However, this
subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the
§ 10-100 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-103
AO:359
§ 10-104. Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions. [Ord.
No. 521, § 9-7, 7-27-1976]
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction each driver shall give to the other at least 1/2 of the
main-traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
§ 10-105. Vehicle approaching or entering intersection. [Ord. No.
521, § 9-19, 7-27-1976; Ord. No. 783, 8-8-1995]
§ 10-106. Overtaking a vehicle on the left generally. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 9-8, 2-27-1976]
§ 10-107. Limitations on overtaking on the left. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 9-10, 7-27-1976]
No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction
unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for
a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the operation of any vehicle
center line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road or
driveway.
(a) When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection not controlled by
an official traffic-control device from different highways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. If the intersection is Tshaped
and not controlled by an official traffic-control device, the driver
of the vehicle on the terminating street or highway shall yield to the
vehicle on the continuing street or highway.
(b) The right-of-way rule declared in this section is modified at through
highways and otherwise as stated in this chapter.
(a) The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations,
exceptions and special rules stated in this chapter:
(1) The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and
shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely
clear of the overtaken vehicle.
(2) Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of
the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the
speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking
vehicle.
§ 10-103 WILLISTON CODE § 10-107
AO:360
approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every
event the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as
soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use
of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the opposite direction,
before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle.
§ 10-108. Overtaking and passing school bus — Generally. [Ord. No.
521, § 9-20, 7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle meeting or overtaking from either direction any
school bus stopped on the highway shall stop the vehicle before reaching
such school bus when there are in operation on said school bus the flashing
red lights specified in N.D.C.C. § 39-21-18, and said driver shall not proceed
until such school bus resumes motion or he is signaled by the school bus
driver to proceed or the flashing red lights are no longer actuated.
§ 10-109. Same — Signs on bus. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-20, 7-27-1976]
Every school bus shall bear upon the front and rear thereof plainly visible
signs containing the words "SCHOOL BUS" in letters not less than eight
inches in height. When a school bus is being operated upon a highway for
purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from
school or for a school sanctioned activity, all markings thereon indicating
"SCHOOL BUS" shall be covered or concealed.
§ 10-110. Same — Signals on bus. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-20, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-111. Same — When stop not required. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-20,
7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle upon a highway with separate roadways need not
stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway
or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in
a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where
pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway.
(a) Every school bus shall be equipped with red visual signals meeting the
requirements of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-18, which may be actuated by the
driver of said school bus whenever, but only whenever, such vehicle is
stopped on the highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging
school children. A school bus driver shall not actuate said special visual
signals:
(1) On City streets on which the receiving or discharging of school
children is prohibited by ordinance;
(2) At intersections or other places where traffic is controlled by
traffic-control signals or police officers; or
(3) In designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off
the roadway.
§ 10-107 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-112
AO:361
§ 10-112. When overtaking on the right permitted. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 9-9, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-113. Driving on left of center of roadway — Generally. [Ord.
No. 521, § 9-11, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-114. Same — Exceptions. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-11, 7-27-1976]
The limitations provided in the preceding section shall not apply upon a oneway
roadway, nor under the conditions described in § 10-103, nor to the
driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road or driveway.
§ 10-115. No-passing zones. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-12, 7-27-1976]
(a) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass upon the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
(1) When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
(2) Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being
traveled by the overtaking vehicle.
(b) The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting such movement in safety. Such
movement shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
(a) No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
(1) When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach
from the opposite direction;
(2) When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing; or
(3) When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of
any bridge, viaduct or tunnel.
(a) The state highway commissioner and local authorities are hereby
authorized to determine those portions of any highway under their
respective jurisdictions where overtaking and passing or driving on the
left side of the roadway would be especially hazardous and may by
appropriate signs or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning
and end of such zones and when such signs or markings are in place
and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant person, every driver of a
vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
(b) Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as set
forth in Subsection (a), no driver shall at any time drive on the left side
§ 10-112 WILLISTON CODE § 10-115
AO:362
§ 10-116. Driving on roadways laned for traffic. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 9-13, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-117. Divided highways. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-15, 7-27-1976]
Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by
leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle
shall be driven only upon the right-hand roadway, unless directed or
permitted to use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police
officers. No vehicle shall be driven over, across or within any such dividing
space, barrier or section, except through an opening in such physical
barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection as
established by public authority, unless such crossing is specifically
prohibited and such prohibition is indicated by appropriate traffic-control
devices.
of the roadway within such no-passing zone or on the left side of any
pavement striping designed to mark such no-passing zone throughout
its length.
(c) This section does not apply under the conditions described in § 10-103
nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private
road or driveway.
(a) Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, the following rules in addition to all others
consistent herewith shall apply:
(1) A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver
has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
(2) Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
two way traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in
the same direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a
safe distance, or in preparation for making a left turn or where
such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic
moving in the same direction that the vehicle is proceeding and
such allocation is designated by official traffic-control devices.
(3) Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specified
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be
used by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the
center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such device.
(4) Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles
shall obey the directions of every such device.
§ 10-115 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-118
AO:363
§ 10-118. Restricted access. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-16, 7-27-1976]
No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 10-119. Use of controlled-access roadway. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-17,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-120. Backing. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-22, 7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can
be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
§ 10-121. Obstruction to driver's view or driving mechanism. [Ord.
No. 521, § 9-23, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-122. Opening and closing doors. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-24,
7-27-1976]
No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
§ 10-123. Coasting. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-25, 7-27-1976]
(a) The state highway commissioner may by order, and the City may by
ordinance, with respect to any controlled-access roadway under their
respective jurisdictions, prohibit the use of any such roadway by
pedestrians, bicycles or other nonmotorized traffic or by any person
operating a motor-driven cycle.
(b) The state highway commissioner or the City, as the case may be, shall
erect and maintain official signs on the controlled-access roadway on
which such regulations are applicable and when so erected no person
shall disobey the restrictions stated on such signs.
(a) No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are
in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three, as to
obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or as
to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle.
(b) No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with
the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with his control
over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
(a) The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a downgrade shall
not coast with the gears or transmission of such vehicle in neutral.
§ 10-118 WILLISTON CODE § 10-123
AO:364
§ 10-124. Following too closely. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-14, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-125. Following fire apparatus. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-26,
7-27-1976]
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet
or stop such vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in answer
to a fire alarm.
§ 10-126. Crossing fire hose. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-27, 7-27-1976]
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
when laid down on any street, private road or driveway to be used at any
fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in
command.
§ 10-127. Driving through safety zone. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-29,
7-27-1976]
No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety zone.
§ 10-128. Permits for parades, assemblies and demonstrations.
[Ord. No. 521, § 9-5, 7-27-1976; Ord. No. 588, 11-24-1981]
(b) The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down-grade shall not
coast with the clutch disengaged.
(a) The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed
of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway;
(b) The driver of any truck or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle when
traveling upon a roadway outside of a business or residence district and
which is following another truck or motor vehicle drawing another
vehicle shall, whenever conditions permit, leave sufficient space so that
an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy such space without danger,
except that this shall not prevent a truck or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle from overtaking and passing any vehicle or
combination of vehicles; and
(c) Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade, whether or not towing
other vehicles, shall be so operated as to allow sufficient space between
each such vehicle or combination of vehicles so as to enable any other
vehicle to enter and occupy such space without danger. This provision
shall not apply to funeral processions.
(a) Enforcement. Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the
authority of any officer to arrest a person engaged in any act or activity
granted a permit under this article, if the conduct of such person
§ 10-123 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-128
AO:365
violates the laws of the state, provisions of this Code or ordinances of
this City, or unreasonably obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of
this City, or engages in acts that cause, or would tend to cause, a breach
of the peace.
(b) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to organize or hold
or participate in any parade, meeting, assembly or procession of
persons and/or vehicles on the streets or sidewalks of this City unless
such activity shall have first been authorized by a written permit
therefor. This requirement shall not apply to funeral processions or
processions consisting of the forces of the police or fire departments of
the City of Williston.
(c) Application for permit. Any person desiring a permit required by the
provisions of this article shall make application therefor to the chief of
police. The application shall be made in writing on a form approved by
the chief of police.
(d) Matters considered in determining issuance of permit. In deciding
whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this article, the chief
of police shall consider:
(1) Number of persons to participate;
(2) Anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the
activity;
(3) Schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have
been issued;
(4) Adequacy of adult supervision for any minors scheduled to
participate;
(5) Availability of City personnel whose presence on duty may be
required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general
public;
(6) Adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the
activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal
public use of public facilities in the proposed location.
(e) Issuance. The permit required by the provisions of this article shall be
issued by the chief of police upon application therefor; provided
however, that such permit may be denied or refused if it shall appear
that the applicant therefor or the act or activity requested by such
application shall be violative of any applicable provision of this Code,
state law or City ordinance. Upon denial by the chief of police of an
application made pursuant to paragraph (c) of this ordinance, the
applicant may appeal from the determination of the chief of police
within 10 days thereafter to the Williston City Commission by filing a
written notice of appeal for hearing by the City Commission at its next
§ 10-128 WILLISTON CODE § 10-128
AO:366
§ 10-129. Funeral processions to be identified. [Ord. No. 521, §§ 2 —
9, 9-4, 7-27-1976]
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such
by headlights burning in daylight hours on all vehicles in the procession, or
by a pennant or such other identifying insignia as may be determined and
designated by the chief of police.
§ 10-130. Drivers in a procession. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-3, 7-27-1976]
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the righthand
edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practicable and safe.
§ 10-131. Driving between vehicles in procession. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 9-1, 7-27-1976]
No driver of a vehicle (or motorman of a streetcar) shall drive between the
vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are
in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required
in this chapter. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic
is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers.
§ 10-132. Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 9-1, 7-27-1976]
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there
is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage
meeting. Upon such appeal, the City Commission may reverse, affirm
or modify in any regard the determination of the chief of police.
(f) Deviation from permit. It shall be unlawful for any person participating
in any act or activity for which a permit has been granted under the
provisions of this article to deviate from or alter any of the terms or
contents of such permit.
(g) Display of permit. Every person having a permit issued under the
provisions of this article shall have such permit in his possession during
the activity permitted thereby, and shall display such permit upon the
request of any law enforcement officer.
(h) Revocation of permit. Any permit issued under the provisions of this
article may be revoked by the chief of police for the violation by the
permittee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or City
ordinance.
(i) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine of up to $500, a jail sentence of up to
30 days, or both such fine and such jail sentence. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each violation of this ordinance.
§ 10-128 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-132
AO:367
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
§ 10-133. Moving heavy equipment at railroad grade crossings.
[Ord. No. 521, § 9-30, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-134. Alteration of mileage recorders or hour recorders. [Ord.
No. 521, § 9-31, 7-27-1976]
Any person altering a motor vehicle odometer or other mileage recorder,
hour meter on tachometer or other hour recorder for the purpose of
deceiving another, shall be guilty of an infraction.
§ 10-135. Open bottle law. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-32, 7-27-1976; Ord.
653, 8-27-1985]
No person shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages, as defined in the
North Dakota Century Code, in or on any motor vehicle when such vehicle
is upon a public highway or in an area used principally for public parking.
No person shall have in his possession on his person while in or on a private
motor vehicle upon a public highway or in an area used principally for
public parking, any bottle or receptacle containing such alcoholic beverages
which has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have
been partially removed. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any private
motor vehicle or the driver, if the owner is not then present in or on the
motor vehicle, to keep or allow to be kept in a motor vehicle when such
vehicle is upon the public highway or in an area used principally for public
parking any bottle or receptacle containing such alcoholic beverages which
has been opened, or the seal broken, or the contents of which have been
partially removed except when such bottle or receptacle shall be kept in
the trunk of the motor vehicle when such vehicle is equipped with a trunk,
(a) No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam shovel,
derrick, roller or any equipment or structure having a normal operating
speed of 10 or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load clearance of
less than one-half inch per foot of the distance between any two
adjacent axles or in any event of less than nine inches, measured above
the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad
grade crossing without first complying with this section.
(b) Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than 15 feet
nor more than 50 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and while so
stopped shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train,
and shall not proceed until the crossing can be made safely.
(c) No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagman or otherwise of the immediate
approach of a railroad train or car. If a flagman is provided by the
railroad, movement over the crossing shall be under his direction.
§ 10-132 WILLISTON CODE § 10-135
AO:368
or kept in some other area of the vehicle not normally occupied by the
driver or passengers, if the motor vehicle is not equipped with a trunk. A
utility compartment or glove compartment shall be deemed to be within the
area occupied by the driver and passengers. The provisions of this section
shall not prohibit the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages
in a house car, as defined by Subsection 21.1 of N.D.C.C. § 39-01-01, if
the consumption or possession occurs in the area of the house car used
as sleeping or living quarters and that area is separated from the driving
compartment by a solid partition, door, curtain or some similar means of
separation; however, consumption is not authorized while the house car is in
motion. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be assessed
a fee of $50; however, the licensing authority shall not record the violation
against the driving record of such person unless he was the driver of the
automobile at the time that the violation occurred.
§ 10-136. Permitting unauthorized person to drive generally. [Ord.
No. 521, § 9-34, 7-27-1976]
No person shall authorize or knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by
him or under his control to be driven upon any highway by any person who
is not authorized under the laws of this state.
§ 10-137. Permitting unauthorized minor to drive. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 9-33, 7-27-1976]
No person shall cause or knowingly permit his child or ward under the age
of 18 years to drive a motor vehicle upon any highway when such minor is
not authorized under the laws of this state to drive.
§ 10-138. Unattended motor vehicle. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-21,
7-27-1976]
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without first stopping the engine, effectively setting the brake
thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the
curb or side of the highway.
§ 10-139. Driving while view is obstructed — Windshield wipers
required. [Ord. No. 707, 12-8-1987; Ord. No. 735, 2-26-1991; Ord.
No. 919, 4-14-2009]
(a) Every motor vehicle must be equipped with a windshield. No person
may drive any motor vehicle with any sign, poster, or other
nontransparent material upon the front windshield, side wings, or side
or rear windows which obstructs the driver's clear view of the highway
or any intersecting highway.
(b) The windshield on every motor vehicle must be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield, which
must be so constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of
the vehicle.
§ 10-135 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-139
AO:369
§ 10-140. Right-of-way for construction and maintenance vehicles.
[Ord. No. 796, §§ 1, 2, 2-25-1997]
§ 10-141. Use of a wireless communications device prohibited. [Ord.
No. 1057, 6-13-2017]
(c) Every windshield wiper upon a motor vehicle must be maintained in
good working order.
(d) A person may not operate a motor vehicle with any object, material, or
tinting displayed, affixed, or applied on the front windshield or any
window unless the object, material, or tinting in conjunction with the
windshield upon which it is displayed, affixed, or applied has a light
transmittance of at least 70% or the object, material, or tinting in
conjunction with a window other than the windshield on which it is
displayed, affixed, or applied has a light transmittance of at least 50%.
This subsection does not apply to windows behind the operator if the
motor vehicle is equipped with outside mirrors on both sides that meet
the requirements of N.D.C.C. § 39-21-1938.
(a) The driver of the vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any authorized
vehicle or pedestrian actually engaged in work upon a street, road, or
alleyway within any construction or maintenance area indicated by
official traffic control devices.
(b) The driver of the vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any authorized
vehicle obviously and actually working on a City street, road, or
alleyway wherever such vehicle displays flashing lights.
(1) The operator of a motor vehicle that is part of traffic may not use a
wireless communications device to compose, read, or send an
electronic message.
(2) Under this section:
a. Electronic message means a self-contained piece of digital
communication that is designed or intended to be transmitted
between physical devices. The term includes electronic mail, a text
message, an instant message, a command or request to access a
worldwide web page, or other data that uses a commonly
recognized electronic communications protocol. The term does not
include:
1. Reading, selecting, or entering a telephone number, an
extension number, or voice mail retrieval codes and commands
into an electronic device for the purpose of initiating or
receiving a telephone or cellular phone call or using voice
commands to initiate or receive a telephone or cellular phone
call;
2. Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system device or other navigation system device;
§ 10-139 WILLISTON CODE § 10-141
AO:370
§ 10-142. Headlamps required on motor vehicle. [Ord. No. 1047,
4-11-2017; Ord. No. 1077, 2-27-2018]
3. Using a device capable of performing multiple functions, such
as fleet management systems, dispatching devices,
smartphones, citizen band radios, music players, or similar
devices, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited;
4. Voice or other data transmitted as a result of making a
telephone or cellular phone call; or
5. Data transmitted automatically by a wireless communication
device without direct initiation by an individual.
b. Traffic means operation of a motor vehicle while in motion or for
the purposes of travel on any street or highway and includes a
temporary stop or halt of motion, such as at an official trafficcontrol
signal or sign. The term does not include a motor vehicle
that is lawfully parked.
(3) This section does not apply if a wireless communications device is used
for obtaining emergency assistance to report a traffic accident, medical
emergency, or serious traffic hazard or to prevent a crime about to be
committed, in the reasonable belief that an individual's life or safety is
in immediate danger, or in an authorized emergency vehicle while in
the performance of official duties.
(4) An individual at least 16 and under 18 years of age who has been issued
a Class D license may not operate an electronic communication device
to talk, compose, read, or send an electronic message while operating a
motor vehicle that is in motion unless the sole purpose of operating the
device is to obtain emergency assistance, to prevent a crime about to be
committed, or in the reasonable belief that an individual's life or safety
is in danger.
(5) The fee for violation of this section is $100.
1. Every motor vehicle must be equipped with at least two headlamps with
at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle, which
headlamps must comply with the requirements and limitations set
forth.
2. Every headlamp upon every motor vehicle must be located at a height
measured from the center of the headlamp of not more than 54 inches
[137.16 centimeters] nor less than 24 inches [60.96 centimeters] to be
measured as set forth in Subsection 2 of Subsection 3.
3. Visibility distance and mounted height of lamps:
a. Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to distance from
which certain lamps and devices must render objects visible or
within which such lamps or devices must be visible, said provisions
§ 10-141 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-142
AO:371
§ 10-143. through § 10-149. (Reserved)
apply during the times stated in City or state code in respect to a
vehicle without load when upon a straight, level, unlighted highway
under normal atmospheric conditions unless a different time or
condition is expressly stated.
b. Whenever requirement is hereinafter declared as to the mounted
height of lamps or devices it means from the center of such lamp or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such
vehicle is without a load.
4. Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer and pole trailer, and any other
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, must be
equipped with at least one taillamp mounted on the rear, which, when
lighted as hereinbefore required, must emit a red light plainly visible
from a distance of 100 feet [304.8 meters] to the rear, provided that in
the case of a train of vehicles only the taillamp on the rearmost vehicle
need actually be seen from the distance specified. Every such abovementioned
vehicle, other than a truck tractor, registered in this state
and manufactured or assembled after January 1, 1964, must be
equipped with at least two taillamps mounted on the rear, on the same
level and as widely spaced laterally as practicable, which, when lighted
as herein required, comply with the provisions of this section.
5. Every taillamp upon every vehicle must be located at a height of not
more than 72 inches [182.88 centimeters] nor less than 15 inches [38.1
centimeters].
6. Either a taillamp or a separate lamp must be so constructed and placed
as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and render
it clearly legible from a distance of 50 feet [15.24 meters] to the rear.
Any taillamp or taillamps, together with any separate lamp for
illuminating the rear registration plate, must be so wired as to be
lighted whenever the headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
§ 10-142 WILLISTON CODE § 10-143
AO:372
ARTICLE V
Speed Limits
§ 10-150. Generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-1, 7-27-1976; Ord. No. 527,
§ 1, 11-23-1976]
No person shall drive a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential
hazards then existing. Consistent with the foregoing, every person shall
drive at a safe and appropriate speed when approaching and crossing
an intersection or railroad grade crossing, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, and when special hazards exist with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Any person who shall drive a vehicle upon a highway or private or public
property open to the public for the operation of motor vehicles without heed
to the requirements or restrictions of this section shall have committed
careless driving and shall be assessed a fee of up to $30.
§ 10-151. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-4, 7-27-1976]
The speed limitations provided for in this article shall not apply to Class A
authorized emergency vehicles. The exemptions provided for in this section
shall not protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of a
reckless disregard of the safety of others.
§ 10-152. Traffic signals. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-6, 7-27-1976]
The traffic engineer or authorized person may regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe
manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable
within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof.
§ 10-153. Radar evidence. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-8, 7-27-1976]
The speed of any motor vehicle may be checked by the use of radio
microwaves or other electrical device. The results of such checks shall be
accepted as prima facie evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any
court or legal proceedings where the speed of the motor vehicle is at issue.
The driver of any such motor vehicle may be arrested without a warrant
under this section, provided the arresting officer is in uniform or displays
his badge of authority; provided that such officer has observed the record of
the speed of such motor vehicle by the radio microwaves or other electrical
device, or has received a radio message from the officer who observed
the speed of the motor vehicle recorded by the radio microwaves or other
electrical device.
§ 10-154. Specific applications. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-2, 7-27-1976;
Ord. No. 979, 10-22-2013]
§ 10-150 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-154
AO:373
(a) Subject to the provisions of § 10-150, and except in those instances
where a lower speed is specified in this chapter, it presumably shall be
lawful for the driver of a vehicle to drive the same at a speed not
exceeding:
(1) Twenty miles an hour when approaching within 50 feet of a grade
crossing of any steam, electric or street railway when the driver's
view is obstructed. A driver's view shall be deemed to be
obstructed when at any time during the last 200 feet of his
approach to such crossing he does not have a clear and
uninterrupted view of such railway crossing and of any traffic on
such railway for a distance of 400 feet in each direction from such
crossing;
(2) Twenty miles an hour when passing a school during school recess
or while children are going to or leaving school during opening or
closing hours;
(3) Twenty miles an hour when approaching within 50 feet and in
traversing an intersection of highways when the driver's view is
obstructed. A driver's view shall be deemed to be obstructed when
at any time during the last 50 feet of his approach to such
intersection, he does not have a clear and uninterrupted view of
such intersection and of the traffic upon all of the highways
entering such intersection for a distance of 200 feet from such
intersection;
(4) Twenty miles an hour when the driver's view of the highway ahead
is obstructed within a distance of 100 feet;
(5) Twenty-five miles an hour on any highway in a business district or
in a residence district or in a public park, unless a different speed
limit is designated and posted by local authorities; and
(6) Fifty-five miles an hour under other circumstances, unless
otherwise permitted, restricted or required by conditions.
(b) The Director may designate and post special areas of State highways
where lower speed limits apply. Differing limits may be established for
different times of the day within highway construction zones which are
effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable speed limit
signs.
(c) Except as provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon a highway at a speed that is unsafe or at a speed
exceeding the speed limit prescribed by law or established pursuant to
law.
(d) In charging a violation of the provisions of this section, the complaint
shall specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven
and the speed which this section describes shall be prima facie lawful at
the time and place of the alleged offense.
§ 10-154 WILLISTON CODE § 10-155
AO:374
§ 10-155. Special cases. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-3, 7-27-1976; Ord. No.
527, § 2, 12-1-1976]
Subject to the subsection above, the following speed limits within the City
limits are established, and it shall be prima facie unlawful for anyone to
exceed them:
30 miles per hour
East Broadway from University Avenue to City limits; University Avenue
from Broadway to north City limits; Second Street West from Second
Avenue West to west City limits; Second Avenue West from Eleventh
Street West to 18th Street West; 11th Street West from Second Avenue
West to west City limits
35 miles per hour
Second Avenue West from 18th Street to 26th Street
25 miles per hour
All streets and avenues not listed above
§ 10-156. Alteration — Generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-3, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-157. Same — Number; adjacent limits. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-3,
7-27-1976]
Not more than six alterations of the maximum speed permitted authorized
in this article shall be made per mile along a street or highway, except in the
case of reduced limits at intersections, and the difference between adjacent
limits shall not be more than 10 miles per hour.
§ 10-158. Same — Arterial streets. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-3, 7-27-1976]
The City shall determine by an engineering and traffic investigation the
proper maximum speed for arterial streets and shall declare a reasonable
and safe maximum limit thereon which may be greater or less than the
minimum speed permitted under this chapter for an urban district.
(a) Whenever the City, on the basis of an engineering and traffic
investigation, determines that the maximum speed permitted under this
chapter is greater or less than is reasonable and safe under the
conditions found to exist upon a highway or part of a highway, the City
may determine and declare a reasonable and safe maximum limit
thereon which:
(1) Decreases the limit at intersections;
(2) Increases the limit within an urban district but not to more than 55
miles per hour; or
(3) Decreases the limit outside an urban district, but not to less than
35 miles per hour.
§ 10-155 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-159
AO:375
§ 10-159. Same — State highways. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-3, 7-27-1976]
Any alteration of maximum limits on state highways or extensions thereof
in the City shall not be effective until such alteration has been approved by
the state highway commissioner.
§ 10-160. Same — When effective. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-3, 7-27-1976]
Any altered limit established as authorized in this article shall be effective
at all times or during hours of darkness or at other times as may be
determined when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon
such street or high-way.
§ 10-161. Exhibition driving and drag racing — Prohibited.
No person shall engage in exhibition driving of any vehicle on a highway,
street, alley, sidewalk or any public or private parking lot or area in a
race, nor shall any person engage in a speed competition, drag race or
acceleration contest, test of physical endurance or exhibition of speed or
acceleration. Any person who violates this section shall be assessed a fee of
$50 if engaged in exhibition driving and assessed a fee of $100 if engaged
in drag racing or a race.
§ 10-162. Same — Definitions. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-7, 7-27-1976]
As used in § 10-161:
DRAG RACE — The operation of two or more vehicles from a point side-byside
by accelerating rapidly in a competitive attempt to cause one vehicle
to outdistance the other; or the operation of one or more vehicles over a
common selected course from the same point to the same point for the
purpose of comparing the relative speed or powers of acceleration of such
vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or time limit.
EXHIBITION DRIVING — Driving a vehicle in a manner which disturbs the
peace by creating or causing unnecessary engine noise, tire squeal, skid or
slide upon acceleration or braking; or driving and executing or attempting
one or a series of unnecessarily abrupt turns.
RACE — The use of one or more vehicle in an attempt to outgain,
outdistance or to arrive at a given distance ahead of another vehicle or
vehicles; or the use of one or more vehicles to willfully prevent another
vehicle from passing the racing vehicle or vehicles, or to test the physical
stamina or endurance of the persons driving the vehicles over a long
distance driving route.
§ 10-163. Same — When permitted. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-7, 7-27-1976]
Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting drag racing,
exhibition driving or similar events when carried out in an organized
manner on a track or other privately owned area specifically set aside
§ 10-159 WILLISTON CODE § 10-163
AO:376
and used solely for such purposes by drivers of motor vehicles, including
snowmobiles.
§ 10-164. Minimum speed limits — Generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-5,
7-27-1976]
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the
normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
§ 10-165. Same — Speed declared. [Ord. No. 521, § 5-5, 7-27-1976]
Whenever the state highway commissioner and the superintendent of the
highway patrol, acting jointly, or the City, determine on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on any highway
or part of a highway impede the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, the commissioner and superintendent or the City may determine and
declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a vehicle
except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law, and
that limit shall be effective when posted upon appropriate fixed or variable
signs.
§ 10-166. Maximum speed limit in alleys. [Ord. No. 878,
12-28-2004]
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in the alleys of this City at a speed
greater than 15 miles per hour.
§ 10-167. Same — Amount of fee. [Ord. No. 880, 1-25-2005; Ord.
No. 903, 5-27-2008]
The fees for a noncriminal disposition pursuant to § 10-166 shall be as
follows:
Speed
(mph over speed limit) Fee
1 — 5 $5
6 — 10 $5 plus $1/each mph over 5 mph over limit
11 — 15 $10 plus $1/each mph over 10 mph over limit
16 — 20 $15 plus $2/each mph over 15 mph over limit
21 — 25 $25 plus $3/each mph over 20 mph over limit
26 — 35 $40 plus $3/each mph over 25 mph over limit
36 — 45 $70 plus $3/each mph over 35 mph over limit
46 plus $100 plus $5/each mph over 45 mph over limit
§ 10-168. through § 10-177. (Reserved)
§ 10-163 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-168
AO:377

ARTICLE VI
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 10-178. General authority. [Ord. No. 521, § 8-1(a), 7-27-1976]
The commissioner, with reference to state highways, and the City, with
reference to highways under its jurisdiction, may, by proclamation,
designate as through highways any highway, street or part thereof and erect
stop signs or yield signs at specified entrances thereto, or may designate
any intersection as a stop intersection or as a yield intersection and erect
stop signs or yield signs at one or more entrances to such intersection.
§ 10-179. Approaching stop intersection generally. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 8-3, 7-27-1976]
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer, every driver of a vehicle
approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or, if none,
then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a
view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it.
After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle
in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time when such driver is moving
across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
§ 10-180. Approaching yield intersection generally. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 8-3, 7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall in obedience to such
sign slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions and, if
required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, or,
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before
entering it. After slowing or stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way
to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways. Provided,
however, that if a driver is involved in a collision with a vehicle in the
intersection or junction of roadways after driving past a yield sign without
stopping, such collision shall be deemed prima facie evidence of his failure
to yield the right-of-way.
§ 10-181. Obedience to signal indicating approach of train. [Ord.
No. 521, § 8-5, 7-27-1976]
(a) Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can
do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
§ 10-178 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-181
AO:379
§ 10-182. Vehicles stop at certain grade crossings. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 8-6, 7-27-1976]
The state highway department and the City, with respect to highways
under their respective jurisdictions, are hereby authorized to designate
particularly dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect
stop signs thereat. When such stop signs are erected, the driver of any
vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest
rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.
§ 10-183. Vehicles that stop at all grade crossings — Generally.
[Ord. No. 521, § 8-7, 7-27-1976]
The driver of a bus carrying passengers, or of any school bus carrying any
school child, or of any vehicle carrying any chlorine, empty or loaded cargo
tank vehicles used to transport dangerous articles or any liquid having a
flashpoint below 200° F., cargo tank vehicles transporting a commodity
having a temperature above its flashpoint at the time of loading, certain
cargo tank vehicles transporting commodities under special permits issued
by the hazardous materials regulations board and every motor vehicle
which must have the following placards: "Explosives," "poison," "flammable
oxidizers," "compressed gas," "corrosives," "flammable gas," "radioactive"
or "dangerous" before crossing at a grade any track or tracks of a railroad,
shall stop such vehicle within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad and while so stopped shall listen and look in
both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals
indicating the approach of a train and shall not proceed until he can do so
safely. After stopping as required in this section and upon proceeding when
it is safe to do so the driver of any said vehicle shall cross only in such gear
of the vehicle that there will be no necessity for manually changing gears
(1) A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
(2) A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or
continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad
train;
(3) A railroad train approaching within approximately 1,320 feet of the
highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and
such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such
crossing, is an immediate hazard; or
(4) An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to such crossing.
(b) No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed. No person shall drive any vehicle
past any human flagman at a railroad crossing until the flagman signals
that the way is clear to proceed.
§ 10-181 WILLISTON CODE § 10-183
AO:380
while traversing such crossing and the driver shall not manually shift gears
while crossing the track or tracks.
§ 10-184. Same — Exception.
No stop need be made at any crossing described in the preceding section at
which traffic is controlled by a police officer for the purposes of this section,
a United States marshal shall be considered a police officer.
§ 10-185. Stop signs and yield signs — Use generally. [Ord. No. 521,
§§ 8-2, 8-3, 7-27-1976]
Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs
or yield signs as authorized in § 10-178.
§ 10-186. Same — Location. [Ord. No. 521, § 8-2, 7-27-1976]
Every stop sign and every yield sign shall be erected as near as practicable
to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if
there is no crosswalk, then as near as practicable to the nearest line of the
intersecting roadway.
§ 10-187. Same — Contents. [Ord. No. 521, § 8-2, 7-27-1976]
Every stop sign shall bear the word "STOP" in letters not less than eight
inches in height. Every yield sign shall bear the word "YIELD" in letters not
less than six inches in height.
§ 10-188. Same — Illumination. [Ord. No. 521, § 8-2, 7-27-1976]
Every stop sign and every yield sign shall at nighttime be rendered luminous
by internal illumination or by a light projected on the face of the sign or by
efficient reflecting elements in the face of the sign.
§ 10-189. Same — Approaching stop intersection. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 8-2, 7-27-1976]
Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated
by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on
the intersecting roadway.
§ 10-190. Same — Approaching yield intersection. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 8-2, 7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for safety to stop
shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection
or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line, but if
§ 10-183 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-190
AO:381
none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
§ 10-191. Emerging from alley, driveway, private road or building.
[Ord. No. 521, § 8-4, 7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, private road
or building within a business or residence district shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across such alley, building entrance, road or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
§ 10-192. Through streets. [Ord. No. 521, § 8-1 (b), 7-27-1976]
The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to be through
streets for purposes of this chapter: Second Street from west City limits
to Second Avenue East. Broadway from Second Avenue West to east City
limits. Sixth Street from University Avenue to west City limits. Eleventh
Street from University Avenue to Dakota Drive. Fourteenth Street from
University Avenue to Dakota Drive. Eighteenth Street from University
Avenue to Dakota Drive. University Avenue from Broadway to 26th Street.
Main Street from Front Street to Eleventh Street. Second Avenue West from
Second Street to north City limits. Sixth Avenue West from Second Street
to Nineteenth Street. Ninth Avenue West from Second Street to Eighteenth
Street.
§ 10-193. through § 10-203. (Reserved)
§ 10-190 WILLISTON CODE § 10-193
AO:382
ARTICLE VII
Turning Movements
§ 10-204. Traffic-control devices generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-1,
7-27-1976]
The traffic engineer or other authorized person may place official trafficcontrol
devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to
be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be
traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by
law.
§ 10-205. Restricted turn signs — Placement. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-2,
7-27-1976]
The traffic engineer or other authorized person may determine those
intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or Uturn,
and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at
other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs
or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.
§ 10-206. Same — Obedience. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-3, 7-27-1976; Ord.
No. 527, § 3, 12-1-1976]
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn is
permitted, no left turn is permitted or no U-turn is permitted, a driver of a
vehicle shall not disobey the directions of any such sign.
§ 10-207. Turning on curve or crest of grade. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-6,
7-27-1976]
No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon
any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where such
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
§ 10-208. Position and method of turning at intersections. [Ord. No.
521, § 6-4, 7-27-1976]
(a) The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
(1) Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn
shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge
of the roadway;
(2) Left turns on two way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the
intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be made in that
portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line
§ 10-204 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-208
AO:383
§ 10-209. Safety. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-7, 7-27-1976]
No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is in
proper position upon the roadway as required in § 10-208 or turn a vehicle
to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a direct
course or move right or left upon a roadway unless and until such movement
can be made with reasonable safety. No person shall so turn any vehicle
without giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this article
in the event any other traffic may be affected by such movement.
§ 10-210. Turning left. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-5, 7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection
or into an alley, private road or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the
intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
§ 10-211. Signal — When given for turning. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-7,
7-27-1976]
A signal or intention to turn right or left when required shall be given
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle
before turning.
thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it
enters the intersection and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the
center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left
of the center of the intersection;
(3) Left turns on other than two way roadways. At any intersection
where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the
roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any such
intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme lefthand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle and after entering the intersection the left
turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as
practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving
in such direction upon the roadway being entered, and;
(4) The City may cause markers, buttons or signs to be placed within or
adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that a
different course from that specified in this section be traveled by
vehicles turning at an intersection, and when markers, buttons or
signs are so placed no driver of a vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an
intersection other than as directed and required by such markers,
buttons or signs.
§ 10-208 WILLISTON CODE § 10-212
AO:384
§ 10-212. Same — When given for stopping or slowing. [Ord. No.
521, § 6-7, 7-27-1976]
No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without
first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this article to
the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity
to give such signal.
§ 10-213. Same — By hand and arm or lamps. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-8,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-214. Same — Methods by hand and arm. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-9,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-215. U-turns — Generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 6-3, 7-27-1976; Ord.
No. 527, § 3, 12-1-1976]
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction unless such movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
§ 10-216. Same — Intersection with traffic-control devices. [Ord.
No. 521, § 6-3, 7-27-1976; Ord. No. 527, § 3, 12-1-1976]
The driver of any vehicle shall not make any U-turn at any intersection
controlled by official traffic-control devices.
§ 10-217. through § 10-227. (Reserved)
(a) Any stop or turn signal when required in this article shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm or by signal lamps, except as
otherwise provided in Subsection (b) of this section.
(b) Any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and
required signals shall be given by, signal lamps when the distance from
the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the
body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet. The latter measurement
shall apply to any single vehicle and to any combination of vehicles.
(a) All signals required in this article given by hand and arm shall be given
from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and such
signals shall indicate as follows:
(1) Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally;
(2) Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward;
(3) Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward.
§ 10-212 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-217
AO:385

ARTICLE VIII
One-Way Streets and Alleys
§ 10-228. Authority to sign. [Ord. No. 521, § 7-1, 7-27-1976]
The traffic engineer or authorized person may determine and designate oneway
streets or alleys and shall place and maintain official traffic-control
devices giving notice thereof. No such designation shall be effective unless
such devices are in place.
§ 10-229. Designation during certain periods. [Ord. No. 521, § 7-2,
7-27-1976]
The traffic engineer or authorized person may determine and designate
streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular
traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite
direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain
appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice
thereof. The traffic engineer or authorized person may erect signs
temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway.
§ 10-230. Specified. [Ord. No. 521, § 7-3, 7-27-1976]
In accordance with sections 10-228 and 10-229 of this chapter, and when
properly posted, traffic shall move in the following streets and alleys only in
the direction herein stated:
Highway 2 North - Twenty-sixth Street to north City limits
A divided highway - Traffic shall move only in a northerly direction on the
two east lanes and only in a southerly direction on the two west lanes
On the curve leading from Highway 2 North to Dakota Drive only in a
westerly direction.
§ 10-231. through § 10-241. (Reserved)
§ 10-228 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-231
AO:387

ARTICLE IX
Truck Routes
§ 10-242. Definitions. [Ord. No. 439, § 1, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 868,
7-8-2003]
For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
DESTINATION POINT — Shall be a point of stoppage to load or unload
property being transported and to be delivered or picked up at that point.
DEVIATING TRUCK — Is a truck which leaves and departs from a truck
route while traveling inside the City.
TRUCK — Is any motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property and, for the purposes of this article, whose
body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds 20,000
pounds registered gross weight.
TRUCK ROUTE — Is a way over certain streets, as designated in this article,
over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the City must
operate.
§ 10-243. Application generally. [Ord. No. 439, § 2, 10-24-1967; Ord.
No. 868, 7-8-2003]
All trucks within the City shall be operated only over and along the truck
routes established in this article or otherwise permitted in this article.
Trucks operated by the City or used for municipal services are excluded
from this restriction.
§ 10-244. Enforcement — Auditor maintains maps. [Ord. No. 439,
§ 6, 10-24-1967]
The City auditor shall keep and maintain accurate maps setting out truck
routes and streets upon which truck traffic is permitted; the maps shall be
kept on file in the office of the City auditor and shall be available to the
public.
§ 10-245. Same — Chief of police maintains signs. [Ord. No. 439,
§ 6, 10-24-1967]
The chief of police shall cause all truck routes and those streets upon which
truck traffic is prohibited to be clearly signposted to give notice that this
article is in effect.
§ 10-246. Same — Weigh-in. [Ord. No. 439, § 6, 10-24-1967]
The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving
or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route
or street over which truck traffic is permitted to proceed to any public
§ 10-242 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-246
AO:389
or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining
whether this article has been complied with.
§ 10-247. Penalties. [Ord. No. 439, § 7, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 1099,
3-12-2019]
Any person who violates this article shall be punished by a fine of $500 for
each such offense. This offense is classified as an infraction.
§ 10-248. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 439, § 2, 10-24-1967; Ord. No. 868,
7-8-2003]
§ 10-249. Truck traffic in the City-outside origin. [Ord. No. 439, § 4,
10-24-1967]
(a) This article shall not prohibit:
(1) Operation on street of destination. The operation of a truck on any
street or alley where necessary to the conduct of business at a
destination point, provided streets designated as truck routes are
used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point.
(2) Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon
any street in the City.
(3) Public utilities, etc. The operation of trucks owned or operated by
the City, public utilities; any contractor or material man while
engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets,
street improvements or street utilities within the City.
(4) Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially
established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be
operated upon the street for which such detour is established.
(5) Loading or unloading. The operation of a truck for the purpose of
loading or unloading any cargo or part of cargo, provided that
streets designated as truck routes in this article are used until
reaching the intersection nearest the destination point.
(6) Service or repair. The operation of a truck for the purpose of having
such truck serviced or repaired.
(a) One inside destination point. All trucks entering the City for a
destination point in the City shall proceed only over an established
truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street,
upon which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the destination point.
Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the
truck route by the same route.
(b) Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the City for
multiple destination points shall proceed over only established truck
routes and shall deviate only at the intersection with the street, upon
§ 10-246 WILLISTON CODE § 10-249
AO:390
§ 10-250. Same — Inside origin. [Ord. No. 439, § 4, 10-24-1967]
§ 10-251. Multiple deliveries. [Ord. No. 439, § 5, 10-24-1967]
Trucks making more than one delivery on any one trip may take the most
direct route between one delivery and the next.
§ 10-252. Designated truck routes. [Ord. No. 439, § 3, 10-24-1967;
Ord. No. 868, 7-8-2003]
which such traffic is permitted, nearest to the first destination point.
Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed
to other destination points by the shortest direction and only over
streets upon which such traffic is permitted. Upon leaving the last
destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by
the shortest permissible route.
(a) Outside destination point. All trucks, on a trip originating in the City,
and traveling in the City for a destination point outside the City, shall
proceed by the shortest direction over streets on which such traffic is
permitted to a truck route as established in this article.
(b) Inside destination points. All trucks, on a trip originating in the City,
and traveling in the City for destination points in the City, shall proceed
only over streets upon which such traffic is permitted.
(1) There are hereby established within the City the following truck routes
to provide cross-town traffic for U.S. Highway 2 & 85 and N.D. Highway
1804, as well as a local truck route to provide cross-town traffic for
local businesses established within the vicinity of the City.
U.S. Highway 2 & 85 Truck Route: Begins at the intersection of 42nd
Street and North U.S. Highway 2 & 85 and proceeds south along U.S.
Highway 2 & 85 and the West Dakota Parkway (known as the West By-
Pass) to the west City limits.
N.D. Highway 1804 Truck Route: Begins at the intersection of 27th
Avenue East and N.D. Highway 1804 and proceeds west along N.D.
1804 (also known as East Broadway) to 7th Avenue East; then south two
blocks onto 1st Street; then west along 1st Street to 2nd Avenue West;
then north one block to 2nd Street West; thence west on 2nd Street
West to the west City limits and connection to U.S. Highway 2 & 85.
Local Truck Route (known as East Dakota Parkway & 26th Street):
Begins at the intersection of 2nd Avenue West and 26th Street and
proceeds east along 26th Street to East Dakota Parkway (known as East
By-Pass); then south along East Dakota Parkway to the intersection of
East Broadway and connection to N.D. Highway 1804 truck route.
(2) The City public works director shall have the authority to place
temporary restrictions upon the use of the local truck route when, in
§ 10-249 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-252
AO:391
§ 10-253. through § 10-263. (Reserved)
the director's discretion, such restrictions are necessary to prevent
damage to the roads.
§ 10-252 WILLISTON CODE § 10-253
AO:392
ARTICLE X
Stopping, Standing and Parking21
DIVISION 1. Generally
§ 10-264. Parking consecutively over 48 hours prohibited. [Ord. No.
577, 1-26-1982; Ord. No. 684, 10-28-1986; Ord. No. 700, § 4,
8-11-1987]
§ 10-265. Lamps on parked vehicles. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any
public street or highway in the City, any vehicle for a period longer than
48 hours consecutively, provided, however, that this section shall not
include any area where a shorter time is provided for parking, nor shall
this section be construed to permit parking for a longer time than is
provided in such areas.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any
parking lot owned, controlled or operated by the City any automobile,
truck or other motor vehicle or other property for a period of more than
24 hours consecutively.
(c) Any vehicle parked in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and may be removed as provided in § 10-297.
(a) Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked upon a street or highway during
the hours between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise
and in the event there is sufficient light to reveal any person or object
within a distance of 500 feet upon such street or highway no lights need
be displayed upon such parked vehicle.
(b) Whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto, whether attended or unattended, during the hours
between 1/2 hour after sunset and 1/2 hour before sunrise and there is
not sufficient light to reveal any person or object within a distance of
1,000 feet upon such highway, such vehicle so parked or stopped shall
be equipped with one or more lamps meeting the following
requirements: At least one lamp shall display a white or amber light
visible from a distance of 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle, and the
same lamp or at least one other lamp shall display a red light visible
from a distance of 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, and the location
of said lamp or lamps shall always be such that at least one lamp or
combination of lamps meeting the requirements of this section is
installed as near as practicable to the side of the vehicle which is
closest to passing traffic.
21.Editor's Note: Article X was amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982 and
further amended by Ord. No. 617, 5-10-1983.
§ 10-264 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-266
AO:393
§ 10-266. No parking and parking time limit signs necessary. [Ord.
No. 577, 1-26-1982; Ord. No. 942, § 2, 11-22-2011]
Whenever by any provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the City any
parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets
it shall be the duty of the director of public works to erect appropriate signs
giving notice thereof and no such regulations shall be effective unless the
signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense, provided,
however, that signing shall not be required throughout the City for the oddeven
parking restrictions contained in § 10-298, the truck route parking
prohibitions under § 10-273, nor shall signing be required for the fortyeight-
hour parking limitation contained in § 10-264.
§ 10-267. Parking in fire limits between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
prohibited. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
(a) The owner, driver, or any other person having under his control or
charge, any motor vehicle, of any kind whatever, shall not cause, permit
or allow such vehicle, or trailer, to stand, remain or be parked in any
one place between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., upon the
following avenues on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday in the City of
Williston:
On Second Avenue East from First Street to Fourth Street;
On First Avenue East from Front Street to Sixth Street;
On Main Street from Front Street to Seventh Street;
On First Avenue West from First Street to Fifth Street;
On Washington Avenue from First Street to Fourth Street;
On Second Avenue West from Broadway to Second Street.
(b) The owner, driver, or any other person having under his control or
charge, any motor vehicle, of any kind whatever, shall not cause, permit
or allow such vehicle, or trailer, to stand, remain or be parked in any
one place between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., upon the
following streets on Monday, Wednesday and Friday in the City of
Williston.
On Front Street from Second Avenue to Main Street;
On First Street from Second Avenue East to Washington Avenue;
On Second Street from Second Avenue East to Gate Avenue;
On Broadway from University Avenue to Second Avenue West;
On Fourth Street from Second Avenue East to Second Avenue West;
On Fifth Street from First Avenue East to First Avenue West.
§ 10-266 WILLISTON CODE § 10-267
AO:394
§ 10-268. Parking prohibited — All times. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, it shall be unlawful for any
person to park or leave standing, either attended or unattended, any motor
vehicle in such areas.
§ 10-269. Parking prohibited — Certain purposes. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose
of:
§ 10-270. Parking prohibited — Hazardous or congested places.
[Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
§ 10-271. Parking prohibited — Narrow streets. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
Any vehicle or trailer parked in violation of this ordinance is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and may be impounded by the police
department.
(a) Displaying such vehicle for sale.
(b) Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairing such
vehicle necessitated by an emergency.
(a) The director of public works, the chief of police, or other person
designated by the governing body is hereby authorized to determine
and designate by proper signs places in which the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or
would cause unusual delay to traffic.
(b) When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as
authorized in this section, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle
in any such designated place.
(a) The director of public works, the chief of police, or other person
designated by the governing body is authorized to erect signs indicating
no parking upon any street, avenue or public thoroughfare when the
width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a
street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does
not exceed 30 feet. In addition, the director of public works, the chief of
police, or other person designated by the governing body is hereby
authorized to post signs indicating no parking upon any street, avenue
or public thoroughfare when the width of the roadway has been
reduced by virtue of the piling of snow thereon during snow removal
operations of the City, to a width of less than 25 feet of usable driving
lanes by virtue of embankments of snow on either or both sides of the
thoroughfare; signs required in any of the situations referred to in this
section shall need to state only the words "No Parking."
§ 10-267 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-271
AO:395
§ 10-272. Parking prohibited — Alleys. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley nor shall be stop a commercial
vehicle so as to leave available less than 12 feet of the width thereof for
free movement of vehicular traffic, nor shall be stop in such a position as to
block the driveway entrance to any abutting property.
§ 10-273. Parking prohibited — Truck parking. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982; Ord. No. 942, § 2, 11-22-2011]
It shall be unlawful for any truck, trailer, semitrailer, or commercial vehicle
to be parked or left standing on any public street not specified as part of
the truck route for a period longer than the time necessary for loading or
unloading of cargo as provided in § 10-289. Further, the restrictions shall
not apply to any truck in use on any repair, maintenance, or construction
project in progress on any such street or any such truck used in the
process of moving. Except as otherwise allowed by permit issued by the City
Engineer's office, in no case shall any semi-truck trailer be parked on any
public street while the semi-truck trailer is disconnected from the tractor.
§ 10-274. Restriction on parking of trailers. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982; Ord. No. 917, § 1, 3-24-2009]
§ 10-275. Prohibited in specified places. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
(b) When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets
as authorized in this section, no person shall park a vehicle upon any
such street in violation of any such sign.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing on any
public street or alley of the City a trailer, unless the trailer is attached to
the tractor or other vehicle suitable for towing it. For the purpose of
this section, trailer shall mean any non-self-propelled vehicle or
wheeled vehicle, including but not limited to semi-trailers, boat trailers,
snowmobile trailers, pulltype campers, and house trailers.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to park or lever standing any boat, bumper
pull travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, pull type camper, motor home,
house car, bus, mini motor home or trailer on the public right-of-way in
any residentially zoned area from December 1 to March 31. Any person
violating this section is subject to a fine of $20 per each day of violation.
A boat, bumper pull travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, pull type camper,
motor home, house car, bus, mini-motor home, or trailer parked or left
standing in violation of this section for a consecutive period longer than
48 hours shall be considered abandoned.
(a) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
§ 10-271 WILLISTON CODE § 10-275
AO:396
§ 10-276. Manner of parking — Two way roadway. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
Except as otherwise provided in sections 10-277 to 10-280, every vehicle
stopped or parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked
with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches
of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the
right-hand shoulder.
§ 10-277. Manner of parking — One-way roadway. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
(1) On a sidewalk;
(2) In front of a public or private driveway;
(3) Within an intersection;
(4) Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
(5) On a crosswalk;
(6) Within 10 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
(7) Within 15 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
(8) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 15 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless the state highway department or the City indicates a
different length by signs or markings;
(9) Within 15 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
(10)Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within
75 feet of said entrance when properly signposted;
(11) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
(12)On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at edge or
curb of a street;
(13) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
(14) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; or
(15)On the boulevard, except the portion of the boulevard improved for
driveway use.
(b) No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
§ 10-275 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-277
AO:397
§ 10-278. Manner of parking — Traffic-control devices. [Ord. No.
577, 1-26-1982]
The state highway department with respect to highways under its
jurisdiction may place official traffic-control devices prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on any highway
where in its opinion such stopping, standing or parking is dangerous to
those using the highway or where the stopping, standing or parking of
vehicles would unduly interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon.
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in violation of the
restrictions indicated by such devices.
§ 10-279. Separate roadways on street. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic
is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand
or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The director of public
works, the chief of police, or other person designated by the governing body
is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon
the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving
notice thereof.
§ 10-280. Angle parking — Authority of City. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
(a) Except where otherwise provided by ordinance, every vehicle stopped
or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked
parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction of
authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12
inches of the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge
of the right-hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches
of the left-hand curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the
left-hand shoulder.
(b) The director of public works, the chief of police, or other person
designated by the governing body may erect signs upon the left-hand
side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of
vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign.
(a) Authority of City. The City may permit angle parking on any roadway,
except that angle parking shall not be permitted on any federal-aid or
state highway.
(b) Marking of streets. The director of public works, the chief of police, or
other person designated by the governing body shall mark or sign
streets upon which angle parking will be permitted.
(c) Compliance with marking. Upon those streets which have been signed
or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
§ 10-277 WILLISTON CODE § 10-280
AO:398
§ 10-281. Outside of business or residence districts. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
Upon any highway outside of a business or residence district no person shall
stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended,
upon the paved or main-traveled part of the highway when it is practicable
to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of said highway, but
in every event an unobstructed width of the highway of not less than 12
feet opposite a standing vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other
vehicles and a clear view of such stopped vehicles shall be available from a
distance of 200 feet in each direction upon such highway.
§ 10-282. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
Sections 10-276 to 10-280 shall not apply to the driver of any vehicle which
is disabled while on the paved or main-traveled portion of a highway in
such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving such disabled vehicle in such position.
§ 10-283. Physically handicapped — Privilege. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by
such signs or markings.
(d) Streets designated. Angle parking shall be permitted on the following
streets: None.
(a) Privilege. Any physically handicapped person who displays prominently
upon an automobile parked by him or under his direction and for his
use, the distinguishing certificate or insignia specified in § 10-283(c)
shall be entitled to courtesy in the parking of such automobile.
Provided, however, that the City may, by ordinance, prohibit parking on
any street or highway for the purpose of creating a fire lane, or to
provide for the accommodation of heavy traffic during morning and
afternoon rush hours, and the privileges extended to such handicapped
persons shall not apply on streets or highways where and during such
times as parking is prohibited.
(b) Definition. "Physically handicapped," as used in this division, shall
include any person who has sustained an amputation or material
disability of either or both legs, or who has been otherwise disabled in
any manner rendering it difficult and burdensome for him to walk.
(c) Certificate. The motor vehicle registrar shall issue without charge a
special identifying certificate or insignia for a marked motor vehicle to
any physically handicapped applicant upon submission by the applicant
of a certificate issued by a qualified physician to the motor vehicle
registrar that he is a physically handicapped person within the meaning
of § 10-283(b). The motor vehicle registrar shall determine the form and
§ 10-280 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-283
AO:399
§ 10-284. Time limit parking zones — Obedience to signs. [Ord. No.
577, 1-26-1982]
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park or leave
standing, either attended or unattended, any motor vehicle for more than
five consecutive minutes on street areas so posted or for more than 10
consecutive minutes on street areas so posted, or more than 30 consecutive
minutes on street areas so posted, or for more than 120 consecutive
minutes on street areas so posted, when said areas have been made
available for parking.
§ 10-285. Time limit parking zones — Authority of director of public
works and chief of police. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
The director of public works, the chief of police, or other person designated
by the governing body shall establish time limit parking zones from time
to time in such places and in such manner as he shall determine, or as
the Board of City Commissioners shall specifically designate to promote the
greatest benefit and convenience to the public and the best use of the street
areas.
§ 10-286. Designation of no parking areas adjacent to schools. [Ord.
No. 577, 1-26-1982]
The director of public works, the chief of police, or other person designated
by the governing body is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking
upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property
when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or create a
hazardous situation. When official signs are erected indicating no parking
upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized
herein, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place.
size of the certificate or insignia and shall promulgate rules and
regulations governing the issuance thereof.
(d) Violations. If the police of this City shall find that such certificate or
insignia is being improperly used, they shall report to the motor vehicle
registrar any such violation, and the motor vehicle registrar may, in his
discretion, remove the privilege. Any person who is not physically
handicapped and who exercises the privileges granted a physically
handicapped person under this section shall be guilty of an infraction.
(e) Marking of parking spaces. Whenever any public or private agency or
authority designates parking spaces for use by motor vehicles operated
by physically handicapped persons, those reserved spaces shall be
indicated by blue paint on the curb or edge of the paved portion of the
street or parking lot adjacent to the space. In addition to blue paint, the
space reserved shall also be indicated by signs or other suitable means.
The law enforcement agency of the City may enforce the provisions of
this section in any parking lot or parking facility that is generally open
to the public, whether publicly or privately owned.
§ 10-283 WILLISTON CODE § 10-287
AO:400
§ 10-287. Reserved parking areas — Specified. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
No person shall, when signs are erected giving notice thereof, park or
leave standing, either attended or unattended, any motor vehicle on street
areas which are reserved for the following temporary uses: Loading and
unloading, bus parking, guest parking, taxi parking, emergency parking, no
parking, police or fire use.
§ 10-288. Reserved parking areas — Authority of director of public
works and chief of police. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
The director of public works, the chief of police, or other person designated
by the governing body shall establish from time to time areas for loading
and unloading, bus parking, guest parking, taxi parking, emergency
parking, no parking, police and fire use on such public streets in such places
and in such number as such official or person shall determine or as the
Board of City Commissioners may specifically designate to be of greatest
benefit and convenience to the public and to promote the best use of the
streets for traffic to pedestrians and designate the same by appropriate
signs.
§ 10-289. Loading and unloading of freight and merchandise. [Ord.
No. 577, 1-26-1982]
(a) A vehicle may be allowed to double park for the purpose of loading or
discharging passengers or for unloading freight when there is no alley
reasonably available for such purpose and no other curb side parking
space available and the freight to be unloaded is of a heavy or bulky
nature, but only for such length of time as is absolutely necessary for
such loading and unloading and conclusion of that business transaction,
except that in the central business district no merchandise or freight
pickups or deliveries whatsoever shall be made from double-parked
vehicles between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. and 11:30 a.m. to
1:30 p.m. on any day except Sundays and legal holidays and no vehicle
shall double park for such purposes between such hours.
(b) Any person owning, driving, operating or having under his control any
vehicle shall not permit the same to stand or be parked in any alley,
except while loading or unloading freight or merchandise. If any vehicle
is left parked or standing in any alley during such loading or unloading
operations it shall be located so that it does not block the alley if space
permits and shall be located as close to the edge of the alley as possible.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive or
permit to be driven any semi-trailer or truck having more than two axles
by backing the vehicle into a curb unless such person, firm or
corporation shall provide a person or arrange with some person, in
addition to the driver, to act as flagman during all operations. Such
flagman shall station himself in a position so that he can warn both
§ 10-287 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-289
AO:401
§ 10-290. Standing in passenger curb loading zone. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
§ 10-291. Removal of stopped vehicles — Illegal parking. [Ord. No.
577, 1-26-1982]
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of any of the provisions of § 10-281, such officer is hereby
authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or maintraveled
part of such highway.
pedestrians and moving traffic so that the driver can back the vehicle
in a safe manner.
(d) If any person owning or having under his control a vehicle used for the
loading or unloading of freight or merchandise is unable to carry out
reasonable deliveries of such freight or merchandise to a particular
business establishment or customer and be in compliance with the
provisions of this section and all other applicable traffic ordinances of
the City, he may apply to the chief of police for a temporary permit
allowing deliveries to be made in accordance with written criteria
prepared by the chief of police or his designee. Whether such
temporary permit is granted will be in the discretion of the chief of
police.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to block any
sidewalk in its entirety during the loading or unloading of freight or
merchandise so as to preclude safe pedestrian passage along the
sidewalk.
(f) For each violation of the provisions of this section there shall be
imposed a fine of up to $100.
(a) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of
passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone
during the hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading
zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed five minutes,
except in a hospital loading and unloading zone.
(b) No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period
of time other than for the expeditious loading, or unloading and transfer
of persons or patients in any place marked as a hospital passenger curb
loading zone during the hours when the regulations are applicable to
such curb loading zone designated as a hospital loading zone and then
only for a period not to exceed 15 minutes.
§ 10-289 WILLISTON CODE § 10-292
AO:402
§ 10-292. Removal of stopped vehicles — Obstruction to traffic.
[Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any highway,
bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an
obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the
removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
§ 10-293A. Removal of stopped vehicles — When authorized
generally. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
Any police officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed
to the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a
highway when:
§ 10-293B. Unauthorized parking on private property unlawful and
declared a nuisance — Abatement procedure. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
(a) A report has been made that such vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner;
(b) The person or persons in charge of such vehicle are unable to provide
for its custody or removal; or
(c) When the person driving or in control of such vehicle is arrested for an
alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the
person arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay.
(a) It shall be unlawful and is declared a nuisance to trespass upon, drive
or park a motor vehicle, trailer, or vehicle of any kind, upon private
property within the City limits, where there is displayed upon the
property a sign "Private Property — No Parking" without first having
obtained permission in writing from the owner or lessee of the private
property.
(b) Upon a complaint being filed with the municipal judge it shall be lawful
for the police department to proceed to abate the nuisance, described
above, in accordance with the allegations of the complaint, by
impounding the vehicle and causing the same to be removed to a place
of safekeeping. The vehicle shall be kept impounded until the owner has
paid the full cost of the removal and impounding and the costs which
may be assessed against the owner or operator in conjunction with the
issuance of the complaint and legal proceedings to the municipal judge.
(c) It shall be the duty of the municipal judge to recover the full cost of all
towing and impounding charges from the owner or operator of the
vehicle prior to issuing an order to release the impounded vehicle.
(d) Where the person charged by the complainant is found not guilty, the
complaint is withdrawn, or the complainant does not appear at the
appointed trial time to give testimony, or the cause of action is
§ 10-292 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-293B
AO:403
§ 10-294. Interfering with parking control markings. [Ord. No. 577,
1-26-1982]
No person, other than a police officer shall alter, remove, or in any way
interfere with chalk or other marks placed on a motor vehicle by police
officers or a car marker, in enforcing parking controls.
§ 10-295. Evidence time parked. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
When said five minutes, 10 minutes, 30 minutes, 60 minutes, or 120
minutes, as the case may be, shall have elapsed and said vehicle shall
not have been moved for a distance of more than one block, said vehicle
shall be construed to have remained stationary, and each such additional
or succeeding five minutes, 10 minutes, 30 minutes, 60 minutes, or 120
minutes, as the case may be, shall be a separate violation.
§ 10-296. Presumption in reference to illegal parking. [Ord. No.
577, 1-26-1982]
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing
the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle
described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or regulation,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the
time of such parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle
was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for
the time during which, the violation occurred.
§ 10-297. Parking violations — Vehicles of violators towed away.
[Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982]
dismissed as being without sufficient grounds to proceed to trial, the
full cost of towing and impounding the vehicle shall be taxed against
the complainant as costs of the proceedings. Failure of the complainant
to pay the costs shall be deemed an offense.
(a) Parking of a vehicle in violation of any provision of this ordinance, or of
any ordinance or rule prohibiting or regulating parking now in effect or
which may later be adopted, is hereby declared to constitute an
obstruction of the streets or designated fire lane, a misdemeanor, and a
public nuisance; and the members of the police department are hereby
empowered to determine if such vehicle is endangering public health
and/or safety, or if such vehicle is found to have overdue tickets or
warrants pending, the members of the police department shall order
such vehicle removed as hereinafter provided in this section.
(b) If such vehicle is not endangering public health and/or safety, or if such
vehicle is found not to have overdue tickets or warrants pending, the
members shall affix thereto a complaint and notice of a nuisance and
misdemeanor, and order or abatement. Such complaint and notice shall
order the abatement of the nuisance within 24 hours.
§ 10-293B WILLISTON CODE § 10-297
AO:404
§ 10-298. Restricted parking areas — Street cleaning program.
[Ord. No. 603, 7-27-1982; Ord. No. 617, § 2, 5-10-1983; Ord. No.
660, § I, 12-13-1985]
The person in possession of or the owner of a vehicle found to be a
nuisance to which a complaint and notice has been affixed shall, within
the 24 hours, abate such nuisance.
Each separate period of time that a vehicle is found to be in violation of
any ordinance or rule prohibiting or regulating parking shall constitute
a separate and distinct nuisance and misdemeanor, and a separate and
distinct complaint and notice shall be affixed to such vehicle for each
such period of time.
(c) Whenever any vehicle constitutes an obstruction of the streets and
public nuisance, or if such vehicle is found to have overdue tickets or
warrants pending, as provided in paragraph (a) of this section, the same
shall be removed by a police officer and taken by him, or others acting
under his supervision and direction, to a garage or lot designated, as
provided in said paragraph (a). Such vehicle shall not be released
therefrom, except upon payment by the owner to the person or persons
in charge of the garage or lot of the cost of towing, daily storage, and
any other administrative costs incurred by the City. A receipt for such
fee shall be issued to the owner of such vehicle.
(d) It shall be the duty of the person or persons in charge of the garage or
lot designated by the chief of police to keep a record of the names of the
owners of all vehicles towed in under the provisions of this section
together with the registration number of each vehicle, and the nature
and circumstances of each violation, and the amount of fees collected
hereunder, and to deliver a report of each day's transactions to the chief
of police not later than one day following the day for which the report is
made.
(e) When the owner of any towed-in vehicle protests to the person in
charge of the garage or lot against the payment of the fees, provided for
by this section, the person in charge shall, upon payment of the fees,
issue a receipt therefor marked "Paid Under Protest." Thereupon it
shall be the duty of the owner or operator of the garage or lot to safely
keep such fees and report such fact to the chief of police, who shall
forthwith cause a complaint to be filed against the owner of such
vehicle charging him with causing or contributing to the creation of, or
maintenance of, a public nuisance. If, upon trial thereof, such person
shall be found not guilty of this offense, it shall be the duty of the
operator or owner of the garage or lot to refund to the said person the
fees so paid by him under protest.
(a) A street cleaning program established for the purpose of allowing street
cleaning, snow removal, street repair, forestry maintenance, and
similar work to be performed by the City during certain restricted
hours, is hereby created. No parking shall be allowed in restricted
§ 10-297 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-298
AO:405
§ 10-298A. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 679, 9-23-1986; Ord. No. 684,
10-28-1986; Reserved by Ord. No. 700, §§ 1, 3, 8-11-1987]
§ 10-299. Penalty. [Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1982; Ord. No. 617, § 3,
5-10-1983; Ord. No. 675, 8-12-1986; Ord. No. 679, 9-23-1986; Ord.
No. 700, § 2, 8-11-1987; Ord. No. 931, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 942, § 2,
11-22-2011; Ord. No. 1003, 9-9-2014]
The Police Department shall be responsible for enforcement of parking
violations. Vehicles illegally parked shall be cited by the attachment of a
notice to said vehicle which shall inform the owner or operator thereof
that said vehicle has been parked illegally under one or more of these
sections and instructing the owner or operator to report to the City of
Williston Police Headquarters. Said notice shall also contain the following
information:
areas as established by the City of Williston Director of Public Works.
Upon establishing such restricted areas, the director of public works
shall file with the chief of police and the auditor of the City of Williston a
description of such restricted parking areas and shall also file with the
chief of police and the auditor of the City of Williston a map designating
the various parking restricted areas.
(b) The signing requirements provided in § 10-266 of this code shall not
apply to these parking restrictions, provided, however, that because of
heavy parking demands within certain areas of the City, these parking
restrictions may not apply for the entire time period, and it shall be the
duty of the director of public works to designate such parking demand
areas and to sign such areas accordingly to prohibit parking for
designated periods of time. The director of public works may elect to
place signs throughout the City establishing limitations on parking at
certain times and days. In the event the director public works elects to
post such signs, the restricted parking areas shall not be modified until
the appropriate signs indicating the changes have been posted.
(c) In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of
any law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in
the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of
such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption
that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or
placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which,
such violation occurred.
(d) Vehicles parked in violation of any provision of this section shall be
deemed to constitute an obstruction of the streets and a public
nuisance.
(a) Date and hour of violation;
(b) Make of vehicle;
§ 10-298 WILLISTON CODE § 10-299
AO:406
§ 10-300. Starting parked vehicles. [Ord. No. 754, 3-24-1992]
No person may start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked unless
and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
DIVISION 2. Parking Lots
22
§ 10-301. Definitions. [Code 1957, § 14.56; Ord. No. 489, § 1,
7-9-1974]
In this division, unless the context of subject matter otherwise requires:
PARKING METER — A mechanical device located upon a municipal parking
lot or adjacent sidewalk in a place regularly designed as a parking meter
zone defined in this section, which device shall record a certain number of
minutes by the use of a clock mechanism determining the period of time for
which parking privileges may be extended to the person depositing a coin
therein.
PARKING METER ZONE — Includes such off-street municipal parking lots
as may from time to time be established by ordinance.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curb lines and the
adjacent property lines.
VEHICLE — Includes every device in, upon or by which any person or
property may be transported or drawn upon a public highway, except
devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
§ 10-302. Violations. [Code 1957, § 14.68; Ord. No. 489, § 9,
7-9-1974]
Any person convicted of violating this division shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100 or by imprisonment
(c) License number and state of issuance;
(d) Location of place of violation; and
(e) A description of the violation. With the exception of violations of §
10-273, the penalty for violation of any of these sections shall be $50. If
not paid within 30 days from the date of the violation, the penalty shall
increase to $100. The penalty for violation of § 10-273 shall be $100. If a
summons is used to compel appearance for a violation of any of these
sections, the general penalty provisions of the City of Williston, namely,
a fine of up to $1,500 a jail sentence of up to 30 days, or both such fine
and jail sentence, shall be applicable, at the discretion of the Municipal
Judge.
22.Division 2 was deleted in its entirety by Ord. No. 577 and reinstated in its entirety by Ord.
No. 167, § 1.
§ 10-299 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-302
AO:407
in jail for a period not exceeding 30 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 10-303. Parking meter zones. [Code 1957, § 14.57; Ord. No. 489,
§ 12, 7-9-1974]
The parking meter zones presently existing and hereby created are as
follows:
Parking lot No. 1: Lots 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 of Block 9 of the original
townsite of the City.
Parking lot No. 2: Lots 23, 24, 25 and 26 of Block 6 of the original townsite
of the City.
Parking lot No. 3: Lots 20 and 21 of Block 12 of the original townsite of the
City.
Parking lot No. 4: Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Block 18 of the original townsite of
the City.
Parking lot No. 5: Lots 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 of Block 18 of the original townsite
of the City.
Parking lot No. 6: Lots 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 in Block 3, except
the east 46 2/3rds feet in lots 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 in said Block 3 in
the original townsite of the City.
Parking lot No. 7: Lots 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 of Block 14 of the original
townsite of the City.
§ 10-304. Supervision. [Code 1957, § 14.58; Ord. No. 489, § 2,
7-9-1974]
The municipal parking lots now or hereafter acquired or established by
the City shall be under the supervision of the Williston Municipal Parking
Authority. The police and fire commissioner and the chief of police shall
be ex officio members of the board of the Williston Municipal Parking
Authority.
§ 10-305. Marked parking spaces. [Code 1957, § 14.59; Ord. No.
489, § 5, 7-9-1974]
The Williston Municipal Parking Authority shall have markings painted or
placed upon the municipal parking lots for the purpose of designating the
parking space and the angle at which vehicles are parked. Each vehicle
parking within any parking meter zone shall park with the front end of the
vehicle driven first into the stall within the line of markings so established.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle across any such line
or markings or to park said vehicle in such position that the same shall not
be entirely within the area designated by such lines or markings, or to park
vehicles in driveways leading into or out of said parking lots.
§ 10-302 WILLISTON CODE § 10-306
AO:408
§ 10-306. Parking places and meters authorized. [Code 1957,
§ 14.60; Ord. No. 489, § 3, 7-9-1974]
The Williston Municipal Parking Authority, with the prior approval of the
Board of City Commissioners, is authorized and directed to install and
maintain on the municipal parking lots such parking places and parking
meters in such numbers and at such places as in its judgment and discretion
may be necessary for the regulation and control of vehicles on said parking
lots. Each parking meter shall be placed or set in such a manner as to show
or display a signal whether or not the parking place adjacent to such meter
is legally in use.
§ 10-307. Illegal parking. [Code 1957, § 14.61; Ord. No. 489, § 4,
7-9-1974]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or to permit a
vehicle to remain parked, in any parking meter zone for a period longer
than designated on such meter, between the hours designated thereon,
except on Sundays and holidays (the term "holiday" shall include those days
designated as such by N.D.C.C. §§ 1-03-01 and 1-03-02) or to park a vehicle
in any zone without paying the fee designated in this division; or to permit
a vehicle to remain parked longer in any zone than for the period for which
the fee was paid; except on Sundays and holidays.
§ 10-308. Parking meter fees. [Code 1957, § 14.62; Ord. No. 489,
§ 6, 7-9-1974; Ord. No. 601, 6-8-1982]
Any person desiring to park any vehicle within such parking meter zone
shall deposit no more than the proper coins for the time desired as follows:
§ 10-309. Tampering with parking meters; use of slugs, etc. [Code
1957, §§ 14.63, 14.64; Ord. No. 489, § 7, 7-9-1974]
§ 10-310. Enforcement. [Code 1957, § 14.65; Ord. No. 489, § 8,
7-9-1974]
(a) For parking lot No. 1 (Old Courthouse), $0.10 per hour and $0.50 per
eight hours; for parking lot No. 2 (Service Drug), $0.15 per hour; for
parking lot No. 6 (Williston Herald), $0.15 per hour; and parking lot No.
8 (East of Ivan's Corner Bar), $0.50 per eight hours;
(b) All other parking meter zones presently existing and created shall be
charged at the existing rates.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to open, or for any
person to deface, injure, tamper with or wilfully break, destroy or
impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed or maintained
pursuant to this division, or to hitch any animal thereto.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any slug, device or metal
or other substitute for a coin in any parking meter.
§ 10-306 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-310
AO:409
§ 10-311. Keeping account of parking violations; report. [Code
1957, § 14.65]
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all policemen of the City, under
the direction of the police and fire commissioner, to keep an account of all
violations of this division, and to keep an account of and report the number
of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicles so occupying the
parking place adjacent to such parking meter is or has been parked in
violation of any of the provisions of this division, the date and hour of such
violation, the make and state license number of such vehicle and any other
facts a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the
circumstances attending such violation.
§ 10-312. Duties of parking authority generally; funds. [Code 1957,
§ 14.67; Ord. No. 489, § 10, 7-9-1974]
(a) The police department shall be responsible for enforcement of parking
violations of this division. Vehicles illegally parked shall be cited by the
attachment of a notice on said vehicle, which notice shall advise the
owner or operator thereof that said vehicle has been parked illegally
under this division and instructing the owner or operator to report to
the City police station; said notice shall also contain the following
information:
(1) Parking meter number;
(2) Date and hour of violation;
(3) Make of vehicle;
(4) State and license numbers;
(5) Any other facts necessary to an understanding of the
circumstances of the violation.
(b) The penalty for violation of this division shall be the sum of $1 if the
same is paid to the police department within 24 hours after the notice
hereinabove referred to is attached to said vehicle. Failure to pay said
penalty within said time period shall subject such owner or operator to
the penalties provided in § 1-11 of this Code.
(a) It is the duty of the Williston Municipal Parking Authority to supervise
the maintenance and operation of all municipal parking lots and to
supervise the collection and accounting of all fees collected under this
division except penalties or fines. To this end the Williston Municipal
Parking Authority is authorized and directed to enter into such
agreements with the department of public works and the police
department as are necessary to effectuate the same.
(b) All fees collected pursuant to this division shall be delivered by the
Williston Municipal Parking Authority or its agents to the City auditor,
whose duty it shall be to account for said funds, deposit the same in a
§ 10-310 WILLISTON CODE § 10-312
AO:410
§ 10-313. Use of parking lot fund. [Code 1957, § 14.66; Ord. No.
489, § 11, 7-9-1974]
The fees deposited in the "parking lot fund" are hereby levied and assessed
as a fund for the payment of valid and existing revenue bonds issued on
parking lot special assessment improvement district warrants according
to the terms thereof, costs of operation, maintenance, enforcement and
regulation of said parking lots including without limitation the cost of
painting or otherwise marking said parking lots, the cost of maintenance
and replacement of parking meters and the cost of collection and
enforcement personnel. The special fund so created shall be denoted
exclusively to such purposes.
§ 10-314. Article cumulative. [Ord. No. 489, § 13, 7-9-1974]
This division shall, whenever possible, be deemed to be in addition to and
not in conflict with existing ordinances.
§ 10-315. Parking in spaces designated for mobility-impaired
prohibited. [Ord. No. 723, 9-12-1989; Ord. No. 751, 3-24-1992; Ord.
No. 881, 4-26-2005]
A person may not stop, stand, or park any vehicle in any designated parking
space that is reserved for the mobility-impaired unless the vehicle displays
a mobility-impaired identification certificate issued by the director to a
mobility-impaired person. A mobility-impaired person may not permit the
use of a certificate issued under this section by a person who is not mobilityimpaired
when that use is not in connection with the transport of the
mobility-impaired person. The registered owner of a vehicle may not allow
that vehicle to be used in a manner that violates this section. Proof of intent
is not required to prove a registered owner's violation of this section. The
registered owner, however, may be excused from a violation if the owner
provides the citing authority with the name and address of the person
operating the vehicle at the time of the violation. A vehicle may temporarily
use a space reserved for mobility-impaired persons without a mobilityimpaired
certificate for the purpose of loading and unloading mobilityimpaired
persons. A violation of this section is a nonmoving violation for
which a fee of $100 must be imposed. Notwithstanding N.D.C.C. §
29-27-02.1, 100% of the fee imposed and collected under this section is
appropriated on a continuing basis to the local committee on persons with
disability for the development of job opportunities for disabled individuals
in the community.
If a law enforcement officer finds that the certificate is being improperly
used, the officer may report to the director any such violation and the
special fund, to be known as the "parking lot fund," to disburse said
funds only for the purposes set forth in § 10-313 of this division, and to
render an annual accounting of receipts and expenditures to the Board
of City Commissioners and the Williston Municipal Parking Authority.
§ 10-312 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-315
AO:411
director may, in the director's discretion, remove the privilege. Any person
who is not mobility-impaired and who exercises the privileges granted a
mobility-impaired person under this section is guilty of an infraction for
which a fee of $100 must be imposed.
Any motor vehicle licensed in another state which displays a special
authorized vehicle designation issued by the licensing authority in that
state for vehicles used in the transportation of mobility-impaired persons
must be accorded the same privileges provided in this section for similar
vehicles licensed in this state if the laws of the other state provide the same
privileges to North Dakota motor vehicles displaying the special identifying
certificate authorized in this section.
§ 10-316. Parking of motorized vehicles during removal of snow and
ice. [Ord. No. 924, 2-23-2010]
(a) Snow emergency routes. The following streets in the City of Williston
are declared snow emergency routes as follows:
Snow emergency routes are those streets normally traversing the
entire City or a major part of the City and are essential to the rapid
movement of emergency vehicles and normally carry the heaviest
traffic volumes. The following streets or portions of streets in the City
are hereby designated as snow emergency routes:
List Routes and Exhibit Map23.
The Board of City Commissioners by resolution may designate and
amend streets or portions of streets which shall constitute snow
emergency routes within the City.
(b) Snow emergency defined. When winter weather conditions exist that
make it necessary for motorized vehicle travel to be expedited such that
parking on snow emergency routes be prohibited for snow plowing and/
or hauling, an emergency condition exists. Whenever the director of
public works or the City Street Commissioner determines that three
inches or more of snow, sleet, or freezing rain has accumulated on the
designated snow emergency routes, and that a public service
announcement to the local media has been issued stating that snow
route plowing will begin, a parking prohibition on said routes shall
become necessary.
A parking prohibition under this section shall remain in effect until
such time as the City plows have completed plowing and/or hauling
snow on a particular street designated as a snow emergency route. It
is City policy to start plowing snow emergency routes within 12 hours
of a snow event ending that creates the emergency situation. While the
parking prohibition is in effect, no person shall park, or allow to remain
23.Editor's Note: The routes and Exhibit Map may be found as an attachment to this chapter.)
§ 10-315 WILLISTON CODE § 10-316
AO:412
§ 10-317. through § 10-325. (Reserved)
parked, any vehicle or trailer on any portion of the designated snow
emergency route.
Nothing herein contained will be construed to permit parking at any
time or place where it is forbidden by any other ordinance provision.
(c) Signs to mark route. Snow emergency routes shall be posted with
special signs with wording "EMERGENCY SNOW ROUTE — NO
PARKING IF OVER THREE INCHES."
(d) Stalled vehicles. Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason on
a snow emergency route on which there is a parking prohibition in
effect, the person operating the vehicle shall take immediate action to
have the vehicle towed or pushed off the snow emergency route. No
person shall abandon or leave his vehicle on a snow emergency route
except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time
necessary to go to a nearby telephone or nearby garage or gasoline
station or other place of assistance, and return without delay, (one-half
hour maximum allowed).
(e) Impounding vehicles. Any vehicle stopped on any snow emergency
route in violation of the provisions of this section or on any other street
of the City in violation of this section providing for the completion of
plowing of snow or ice may be impounded by members of the Williston
Police Department and held in accordance with City ordinance or state
law.
(f) Evidence with respect to vehicles parked or left in violation of section.
In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in place in
violation of any provision of this section, proof that the particular
vehicle described in the complaint was parked or left in violation of a
provision of this section, together with proof that the defendant named
in the complaint was at the time the registered owner of such vehicle,
shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person
who parked or left the vehicle in violation of this section.
(g) Effective date. This section shall be in full force and effect from and
after the passage, approval, and publication of the listed streets when
signed as snow emergency routes in accordance with this section.
(h) Violations — traffic citation — complaint. Whenever any motor vehicle
is found stopped or parked contrary to the provisions of this section, the
owner of such vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section.
Any person violating this section is subject to a fine of $20 per each day
of violation.
§ 10-316 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-317
AO:413

ARTICLE XI
Motorcycles
§ 10-326. Application of regulations. [Ord. No. 521, § 11-1,
7-27-1976]
Every person operating a motorcycle shall be granted all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other
vehicle under this chapter, except as to special regulations in this chapter
and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature
cannot have application.
§ 10-327. Riding generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 11-2, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-328. Roadways laned for traffic. [Ord. No. 521, § 11-3,
7-27-1976]
(a) A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent
and regular seat attached thereto, and such operator shall not carry any
other person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless
such motorcycle is designed to carry more than one person, in which
event a passenger may ride upon the permanent and regular seat if
designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached to the
motorcycle at the rear or side of the operator.
(b) A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the seat,
facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
(c) No person shall operate a motorcycle while carrying any package,
bundle or other article which prevents him from keeping both hands on
the handlebars.
(d) No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride in a
position that will interfere with the operation or control of the
motorcycle or the view of the operator.
(a) The provisions of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.2.05 shall be and no motor vehicle
shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorcycle of the full
use of a lane. This subsection shall not apply to the operation of
motorcycles two abreast in a single lane as authorized in Subsection
(d).
(b) The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass in the same
lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken.
(c) No person shall operate a motorcycle between lanes of traffic or
between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles.
(d) Motorcycles shall not be operated more than two abreast in a single
lane.
§ 10-326 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-328
AO:415
§ 10-329. Equipment for riders. [Ord. No. 521, § 11-6, 7-27-1976;
Ord. No. 689, 4-14-1987]
§ 10-330. Footrests. [Ord. No. 521, § 11-5, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-331. Clinging to other vehicles. [Ord. No. 521, § 11-4,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-332. Other applicable law. [Ord. No. 521, § 11-7, 7-27-1976]
All of the provisions of Article II of this chapter, pertaining to the disposition
of traffic offenses, shall apply to this article, and §§ 10-327, 10-328 and
10-331 shall be considered moving violations within the definition in §
10-61.
§ 10-333. through § 10-343. (Reserved)
(e) Subsections (b) and (c) shall not apply to police officers in the
performance of their official duties.
(a) No person under the age of 18 years shall operate or ride upon a
motorcycle unless protective headgear, which complies with standards
established by the North Dakota Motor Vehicle Department, is being
worn on the head of the operator and rider, except when participating
in a lawful parade. If the operator of a motorcycle is required to wear
protective headgear, any passenger must also wear protective headgear
regardless of the age of the passenger.
(b) This section shall not apply to persons riding within an enclosed cab or
on a golf cart.
(c) No person shall operate a motorcycle if a person under the age of 18
years is a passenger upon that motorcycle and is not wearing protective
headgear as provided in paragraph (a).
(a) The provisions of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.2-05 shall be and are hereby
incorporated by reference in this chapter.
(b) Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or
enclosed cab, shall be equipped with footrests for such passenger.
(a) The provisions of N.D.C.C. § 39-10.2-04 shall be and are hereby
incorporated by reference in this chapter.
(b) No person riding upon a motorcycle shall attach himself or the
motorcycle to any other vehicle on a roadway.
§ 10-328 WILLISTON CODE § 10-333
AO:416
ARTICLE XII
Bicycles
DIVISION 1. Generally
§ 10-344. Effect of regulations. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-1, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-345. Application of traffic ordinances. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-2,
7-27-1976]
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this chapter, except as to special regulations in this division and
except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have
no application.
§ 10-346. Penalties. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-11(a), 7-27-1976]
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this division shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $20 or by imprisonment for not more
than five days or by impounding of such person's bicycle for a period not to
exceed 10 days or by any combination thereof.
§ 10-347. Point system not applicable. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-11(b),
7-27-1976]
Any violation of the provisions of this division, or any moving violation as
defined in § 10-61, or any non-moving violation as defined in § 10-62 when
committed on a bicycle as defined in § 10-1 shall not be cause for the
licensing authority to assess points against the driving record of the violator
pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 39-06.1-10. Any other legally authorized penalty for
a criminal traffic offense or noncriminal traffic violation shall be applicable
to bicyclists.
§ 10-348. Equipment. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-8, 7-27-1976]
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
(a) It is a violation of this chapter for any person to do any act forbidden or
fail to perform any act required in this division.
(b) The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(c) These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a bicycle
is operated upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles subject to those exceptions stated in this
division.
§ 10-344 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-348
AO:417
by the motor vehicle department. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
§ 10-349. Riding generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-9, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-350. Obedience to traffic-control devices. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-3,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-351. Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. [Ord. No. 521,
§ 12-5, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-352. Carrying articles. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-7, 7-27-1976]
No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article
which prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
§ 10-353. Clinging to vehicles. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-6, 7-27-1976]
No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled or toy vehicle
shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway, except a
sled being pulled by a snowmobile.
§ 10-354. Riding on sidewalks. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-4, 7-27-1976]
(a) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(b) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
(a) Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic-control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
(b) Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from
the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall
then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians.
(a) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
(b) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of road-ways set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
(c) Wherever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the
roadway.
§ 10-348 WILLISTON CODE § 10-354
AO:418
§ 10-355. Parking. [Ord. No. 521, § 12-10, 7-27-1976]
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 10-356. through § 10-362. (Reserved)
DIVISION 2. Abandonment
§ 10-363. Intent. [Ord. No. 535, § 1, 9-13-1977]
This division is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Subsection 20 of
Section 40-05-02 of the North Dakota Century Code for the purpose of
safeguarding property, protecting the public peace, safety and welfare and
for disposing by public sale pursuant to public notice certain items of
tangible personal property, namely bicycles, abandoned or left unclaimed,
and subsequently held by the City at unnecessary burden and expense.
§ 10-364. Scope. [Ord. No. 535, § 2, 9-13-1977]
Any bicycles abandoned or left unclaimed upon the streets, alleys or other
public ways of the City for a period exceeding 10 days may be sold after the
same has been held in storage by the City for a period of not less than 60
days.
§ 10-365. Removal. [Ord. No. 535, § 3, 9-13-1977]
The police department shall remove any bicycles abandoned or unclaimed
for more than 10 days and shall take custody of the same, placing them in
storage.
§ 10-366. Notice of removal. [Ord. No. 535, § 4, 9-13-1977]
The police department shall give notice to the owners of abandoned or
unclaimed bicycles, if the names and addresses of such owners are known,
said notice containing the location where such bicycles are stored, the costs
incurred for removal and the cost of storage.
(a) No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within a business
district.
(b) The chief of police or authorized person may erect signs on any
sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any
person and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey the
same.
(c) Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible
signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian.
§ 10-354 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-367
AO:419
§ 10-367. Disposition. [Ord. No. 535, § 5, 9-13-1977]
The police department may dispose of abandoned or unclaimed bicycles by
conducting public sales from time to time. Any such property sold must be
first duly noticed as provided in § 10-368 of this division.
§ 10-368. Contents of public sale notice. [Ord. No. 535, § 6,
9-13-1977]
§ 10-369. Public sale. [Ord. No. 535, § 7, 9-13-1977]
The bicycles included under this division shall be sold to the highest and
best bidder. Terms of sale shall be cash. The buyer shall pay to the City,
in addition to the selling price, the necessary expense of taking, storing
and selling the bicycles. At the time of payment of the purchase price and
expenses, the City shall convey to the purchaser a merchantable title by bill
of sale. Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the City's liability shall be
limited to the return of the purchase price.
§ 10-370. Report and disposition of proceeds. [Ord. No. 535, § 9,
9-13-1977]
The chief of police shall make a full report of the results of any sales
conducted under this division within 30 days of such sales, shall file such
report with the City auditor and shall turn over the net proceeds from such
sales to the City treasury, subject to the owner's right to recover proceeds
as provided in § 10-371 of this division.
§ 10-371. Redemption by owner. [Ord. No. 535, § 8, 9-13-1977]
The owner of any property covered by this division may reclaim said
property at any time prior to the sale upon payment of the necessary
expense of taking and storage. At any time within six months after the sale,
the owner of the property, upon written application, shall be entitled to
(a) At least 10 days before the sale of a bicycle under this division, the chief
of police shall give notice of public sale by running the same in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. The notice of sale shall
state:
(1) The sale is of abandoned or unclaimed bicycles.
(2) The bicycle (bicycles) has (have) been held for more than 60 days
by the City.
(3) A description of the bicycle, including serial number, make, model
and license number, if any, and any other information which will
accurately identify the bicycle.
(4) The terms of sale.
(5) The date, time and place of sale.
§ 10-367 WILLISTON CODE § 10-371
AO:420
receive the proceeds of the sale from the City, less the necessary expense of
taking, storing and selling the property.
§ 10-372. through § 10-382. (Reserved)
§ 10-371 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-372
AO:421

ARTICLE XIII
Snowmobiles and All-Terrain Vehicles (Off-Highway Vehicles)
§ 10-383. Definitions. [Ord. No. 469, § 1, 1-18-1972; Ord. No. 648,
7-9-1985; Ord. No. 920, 5-12-2009]
§ 10-384. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 648, 7-9-1985]
§ 10-385. Prohibited generally. [Ord. No. 469, § 2, 1-18-1972; Ord.
No. 510, § 2, 9-23-1975; Ord. No. 648, 7-9-1985; Ord. No. 920,
5-12-2009]
(a) For the purpose of this article, the following definitions are hereby
adopted:
(1) ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE/OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE - Shall mean a
motor vehicle using more than two low pressure tires and with a
dry weight of less than 1,200 pounds (544.31 kilograms).
(2) OPERATE - Shall mean to ride in or on and control the operation of
a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle.
(3) OPERATOR - Shall mean every person who operates or is in actual
physical control of a snowmobile.
(4) OWNER - Shall mean a person, other than a lienholder, having the
property in or title to a snowmobile or all-terrain vehicle, who is
entitled to the use or possession thereof.
(5) PERSON - Shall mean and include an individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, trustee, association, estate and its agencies and
subdivision and any body of persons, whether incorporated or not,
and with respect to acts prohibited or required herein shall include
employees and licensees.
(6) ROADWAY - Shall mean that portion of a highway, street,
boulevard, avenue, or alley improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
(7) SNOWMOBILE - Shall mean a self-propelled vehicle designed for
travel on snow or ice or a natural terrain steered by wheels, skis or
runners.
(8) STREET, HIGHWAY, BOULEVARD, AVENUE OR ALLEY - Shall
mean the entire width between the boundary lines of the same.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any snowmobile
or within the corporate limits of the City, subject to the following
exceptions:
(1) A police officer may operate a snowmobile for the purpose of
enforcing this article.
§ 10-383 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-385
AO:423
§ 10-386. Parent or guardian's responsibility. [Ord. No. 469, § 3,
1-18-1972; Ord. No. 510, § 3, 9-23-1975; Ord. No. 648, 7-9-1985;
Ord. No. 920, 5-12-2009]
Any parent or guardian who knowingly allows his or her child or ward to
operate his or her snowmobile upon or over the City streets, highways,
boulevards, avenues or alleys except with the permission of the chief of
police or his designate in the case of an emergency shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to the penalties of this article.
§ 10-387. General regulations. [Ord. No. 469, § 2, 1-18-1972; Ord.
No. 513m, 11-12-1975; Ord. No. 591, 3-23-1982; Ord. No. 648,
7-9-1985; Ord. No. 920, 5-12-2009]
(2) In the event of an emergency, the chief of police or his designate
may authorize temporary use of a snowmobile within the City.
(a) No person shall drive a snowmobile on City streets, avenues,
boulevards, or alleys, except under the provisions of this article and as
necessary to go from his residence to outside the City limits and return
in a reasonably direct route, and then only subject to the following rules
and regulation. No person shall drive:
(1) In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or to cause injury or damage to such
person's property.
(2) While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance.
(3) In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or
destroys growing stock.
(4) Without a manufacturer-installed or equivalent muffler in good
working order and connected to the snowmobile or all-terrain
vehicle's exhaust system.
(5) The driver of a snowmobile must yield the right-of-way to all
oncoming traffic which constitute an immediate hazard.
(6) In violation of any rules or regulations promulgated for regulating
the use of snowmobiles by the state highway commissioner where
applicable within the geographical limits of the City.
(7) While towing a sled, skid or other vehicle, unless the sled, skid or
other vehicle is connected to the snowmobile by a hinged swivel
and secured hitch and lighted or reflectorized at night.
(8) Abreast of another snowmobile upon any highway as defined in this
article.
§ 10-385 WILLISTON CODE § 10-387
AO:424
§ 10-388. Liability insurance required for snowmobiles. [Ord. No.
804, 9-23-1997]
A person may not operate a snowmobile, and an owner of a snowmobile
may not knowingly permit the snowmobile to be operated, within the City
without a valid policy of liability insurance in effect in order to respond
in damages for liability arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or use
of such snowmobile. The policy of liability insurance shall be equal to or
greater than the amount required by state law.
A person violating any provisions of this section is guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor and such person shall be assessed a fine of at least $100.
§ 10-389. Fleeing or eluding an officer's signal while operating a
snowmobile. [Ord. No. 806, §§ 1, 2, 9-23-1997]
(9) Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., except when
returning to the City at a reasonably direct route to the residence
of an operator.
(10) In any municipal park or recreation area or school grounds except
when posted as open to snowmobiles within the hours permitted.
(11) Upon private property within the corporate limits of the City.
(12) At any time with more than two persons riding therein in addition
to the operator.
(13)Without observing all traffic signs, signals, rules and regulations
applying to motor vehicles when also applicable to snowmobiles.
(14) At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the
surrounding circumstances and in no event at a speed greater than
20 miles per hour.
(15)No person shall drive on any street or highway or through street
except to cross, and then only at a 90° angle.
(b) Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person under 16 years of
age who is not in possession of a valid operator's license or permit to
operate a snowmobile may not, except upon the lands of the person's
parents or guardian, operate a snowmobile.
(a) Any driver of a snowmobile who willfully fails or refuses to bring the
snowmobile to a stop or who otherwise flees or attempts to elude, in any
manner, a pursuing police vehicle or peace officer, when given a visual
or audible signal to bring the snowmobile to a stop, is guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor for a first or second offense and a Class A misdemeanor
for a subsequent offense. A signal complies with this section if the
signal is perceptible to the driver and:
§ 10-387 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-389
AO:425
§ 10-390. Operation of off-highway vehicles. [Ord. No. 920,
5-12-2009]
(1) If given from a vehicle, the signal is given by hand, voice,
emergency light, or siren, and the stopping vehicle is appropriately
marked showing it to be an official police vehicle; or
(2) If not given from a vehicle, the signal is given by hand, voice,
emergency light, or siren, and the officer is in uniform and
prominently displays the officer's badge of office.
(b) Any person who violates this section must be assessed a fine of at least
$500.
(1) An individual may operate a registered and insured off-highway vehicle
on any City street except divided four-lane roadways within the City
limits. An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle on the
roadway, shoulder, or inside bank or slope of any road, street or
highway except as provided in this chapter. Except in emergencies, an
individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle within the right-ofway
of any controlled-access City street. An individual may operate a
registered off-highway vehicle on a gravel, dirt, or loose surface
roadway. All terrain vehicles must observe all City speed limits.
(2) The operator of an off-highway vehicle may make a direct crossing of a
street or highway only if:
a. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately 90° to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction
prevents a quick and safe crossing;
b. The off-highway vehicle is brought to a complete stop before
crossing the shoulder or main traveled way of the highway;
c. The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which
constitutes an immediate hazard; and
d. In crossing a divided highway, the crossing is made only at an
intersection of the highway with another public street or highway.
(3) Unless an individual is operating a Class 1 off-highway vehicle, an
individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle unless it is equipped
with at least one headlamp, one tail lamp, and brakes, all in working
order, which conform to standards prescribed by rule of the director,
except when under the direct supervision of an off-highway vehicle
instructor teaching a certified off-highway vehicle safety training
course, the requirement for a headlamp and tail lamp may be waived.
(4) The emergency conditions under which an off-highway vehicle may be
operated other than as provided by this chapter are only those that
render the use of an automobile impractical under the conditions and at
the time and location in question.
§ 10-389 WILLISTON CODE § 10-390
AO:426
(5) An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle in the following
ways, which are declared to be unsafe and a public nuisance:
a. At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under all the
surrounding circumstances.
b. In a careless, reckless, or negligent manner so as to endanger the
person or property of another or to cause injury or damage to
another person or the property of another person.
c. While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance.
d. Without a lighted headlamp and tail lamp except when used by an
off-highway vehicle instructor during a certified off-highway vehicle
safety training course.
e. In any tree nursery or planting in a manner that damages growing
stock.
f. Without a manufacturer-installed or equivalent muffler in good
working order and connected to the off-highway vehicle's exhaust
system.
g. On any private land where the private land is posted prohibiting
trespassing. The name and address of the person posting the land
and the date of posting must appear on each sign in legible
characters. The posted signs must be readable from outside the
land and be placed conspicuously at a distance of not more than
880 yards (804.68 meters) apart. Land entirely enclosed by a fence
or other enclosure is sufficiently posted by posting of these signs at
or on all gates through the fence or enclosure.
(6) An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle without having in
possession a valid driver's license or permit.
(7) When an off-highway vehicle is operated within the right-of-way of any
road, street, or highway, during times or conditions that warrant the
use of lights by other motor vehicles, the off-highway vehicle must be
operated in the same direction as the direction of other motor vehicles
traveling on the side of the roadway immediately adjacent to the side of
the right-of-way traveled by the off-highway vehicle.
(8) An individual may not operate an off-highway vehicle within the rightof-
way of any highway while towing a sled, skid, or other vehicle, unless
the object towed is connected to the off-highway vehicle by a hinged
swivel and secure hitch.
(9) An individual under the age of 18 years may not operate, ride, or
otherwise be propelled on an off-highway vehicle unless the person
wears a safety helmet meeting United States department of
transportation standards.
§ 10-390 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-390
AO:427
§ 10-391. Equipment. [Ord. No. 920, 5-12-2009]
To operate an off-highway vehicle on a paved City street or gravel, dirt, or
loose surface roadway under Subsection (1) of § 10-390, the off-highway
vehicle must be equipped with a mirror, a horn, a speedometer and
odometer, a brake light, a lighted headlamp, and a motor of at least 350
cubic centimeters.
§ 10-392. Operation by persons under age 16. [Ord. No. 920,
5-12-2009]
Except as otherwise provided in this section, an individual under 16 years
of age who is not in possession of a valid operator's license or permit
to operate an off-highway vehicle may not, except upon the lands of the
individual's parent or guardian or as a participant in an organized sporting
event that involves the use of off-highway vehicles, operate an off-highway
vehicle.
§ 10-393. Penalties. [Ord. No. 920, 5-12-2009]
Violation of Subdivision (b), (c) or (g) of Subsection (5) of § 10-390 is a Class
B misdemeanor. Violation of any other provision of § 10-390 is an infraction
for which a fee of $20 must be assessed. Failure to register an off-highway
vehicle is an infraction, for which a fee of $50 must be assessed. If the
individual provides proof of registration since the violation, the fee may be
reduced by one-half.
§ 10-394. through § 10-499. (Reserved)
This ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its final passage,
approval and publication.
(10) An operator of an off-highway vehicle may not carry a passenger while
operating the vehicle unless the off-highway vehicle is equipped and
recommended by the manufacturer to carry a passenger and the
passenger is carried as recommended by the manufacturer.
(11) Unless otherwise provided by law, an off-highway vehicle may be
operated on an aggregate road surface only when designated as part of
an active off-highway vehicle trail by the managing entity.
(12) A person who is performing pest control or survey work for a political
subdivision may operate an all-terrain vehicle on the bottom, backslope,
inside slope, and shoulder of a highway other than a controlledaccess
highway.
§ 10-390 WILLISTON CODE § 10-394
AO:428
ARTICLE XIV
Pedestrians
§ 10-500. Obedience generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-1, 7-27-1976]
§ 10-501. Right-of-way on sidewalks. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-8,
7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on a
sidewalk.
§ 10-502. Use of roadways generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-7,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-503. Yield to emergency vehicles. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-9,
7-27-1976]
(a) A pedestrian shall obey the instruction of any official traffic-control
device specially applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.
(b) Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals as
provided for in sections 10-81, 10-83 and 10-85.
(a) Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.
(b) Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder as far as practicable from
the edge of the roadway.
(c) Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to
an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two way roadway, shall walk
only on the left side of the roadway.
(d) Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(a) Upon immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle and displaying
a visible flashing, revolving or rotating blue, white or red light, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the authorized emergency
vehicle.
(b) This section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway nor from the duty to exercise due care to
avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
§ 10-500 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-504
AO:429
§ 10-504. Drivers to exercise due care. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-4,
7-27-1976]
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter, every driver of
a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian
upon any roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn when
necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or
any confused or incapacitated person upon a roadway.
§ 10-505. Crossing at other than crosswalks. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-3,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-506. Use right half of crosswalks. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-6,
7-27-1976]
Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
§ 10-507. Right-of-way in crosswalks. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-2,
7-27-1976]
(a) Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(b) Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the rightof-
way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(c) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control devices are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
(d) No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
(a) When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a
crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon
which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so
closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger.
(b) No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute
an immediate hazard.
(c) Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply under the conditions stated
in Subsection (b) of § 10-328.
§ 10-504 WILLISTON CODE § 10-507
AO:430
§ 10-508. Bridge and railroad signals. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-12,
7-27-1976]
No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while such gate or barrier
is closed or is being opened or closed.
§ 10-509. Soliciting rides or business. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-13,
7-27-1976]
§ 10-510. Blind or incapacitated pedestrians generally. [Ord. No.
521, § 10-5, 7-27-1976]
(d) Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross
the highway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear
shall not overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
(a) No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride.
(b) No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting
employment, business or contributions from the occupant of any
vehicle.
(c) No person shall stand on or in proximity to a street or highway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while
parked or about to be parked on a street or highway.
(a) No person on any public street or highway, unless such person is totally
or partially blind, or is otherwise incapacitated, shall carry in a raised
or extended position any cane or walking stick which is white in color,
or white tipped with red.
(b) Whenever any pedestrian is crossing or attempting to cross a public
street or highway, guided by a guide dog, or carrying in a raised or
extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color or
white tipped with red, the driver of every vehicle approaching the
intersection, or other place where such pedestrian is attempting to
cross, shall bring his vehicle to a full stop before arriving at such
intersection or place of crossing and before proceeding shall take such
precautions as may be necessary to avoid injuring such pedestrian.
(c) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to deprive any
totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated person, not carrying
such a cane or walking stick, or not being guided by a dog, of any of the
rights or privileges conferred by law upon pedestrians, nor shall the
failure of such totally or partially blind or otherwise incapacitated
person to carry a cane or walking stick, or to be guided by a guide dog
upon the streets, highways or sidewalks of this state, be held to
constitute or be evidence of contributory negligence.
§ 10-507 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-510
AO:431
§ 10-511. Blind pedestrian right-of-way. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-11,
7-27-1976]
The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any blind pedestrian
carrying a clearly visible white cane or accompanied by a guide dog.
§ 10-512. Alcohol; drugs. [Ord. No. 521, § 10-11, 7-27-1976]
A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree
which renders him a hazard shall not walk or be upon a roadway.
(d) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
assessed a fee of up to $20.
§ 10-510 WILLISTON CODE § 10-512
AO:432
ARTICLE XV
Motorized Scooters Within City Limits
§ 10-513. Motorized scooters. [Ord. No. 874, 2-10-2004]
§ 10-514. Penalty and fee. [Ord. No. 874, 2-10-2004]
A violation of § 10-513 is a traffic violation if it is committed by a licensed
driver and otherwise is an infraction. A fee of up to $50 may be assessed.
(1) Motorized scooter means a wheeled, open vehicle, regardless of
number of wheels, powered by any style motor of less than 50 cc or if
powered by electric motor is capable of going in excess of 10 miles per
hour and not capable of being licensed as a motor vehicle under North
Dakota law.
(2) The provisions of this section are not intended to apply to the following:
a. A vehicle which may be defined as a scooter but is being used to
provide mobility to a handicapped or physically impaired person.
b. A child's electric, motorized toy not capable of exceeding 10 m.p.h.
on a flat surface.
(3) A person may operate a motorized scooter within the City of Williston
subject to the following conditions:
a. A motorized scooter may not be operated on a public sidewalk.
b. An operator of a motorized scooter on public property must be at
least 12 years of age.
c. An operator of a motorized scooter under 18 years of age must
wear a helmet.
d. No passengers are allowed on a motorized scooter.
e. Motorized scooters shall be operated only during the hours from
sunrise to sunset.
f. Operators of motorized scooters shall follow and be entitled to the
benefit of the rules of the road applicable to motor vehicles.
g. A motorized scooter shall not exceed a maximum of 15 miles per
hour.
h. All motorized scooters operated within the City must be equipped
with factory supplied stock mufflers, exhaust systems and braking
systems.
i. Unless otherwise allowed by Williston Parks and Recreation,
motorized scooters shall not be operated upon the Williston Parks
and Recreational trail system within the City.
§ 10-513 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-514
AO:433
Chapter 11
MUNICIPAL JUDGE
§ 11-1. Bond. [Code 1957, § 18.1]
The municipal judge shall give a bond in the sum of $1,000.
§ 11-2. Duties generally. [Code 1957, § 18.2]
The municipal judge shall perform the duties as required by law and by the
ordinances of the city.
§ 11-3. Monthly reports. [Code 1957, § 18.3]
It shall be the duty of the municipal judge to make monthly reports of all
criminal proceedings in the municipal court for the preceding month, on
the first day of each month, and to have the same on file with the city
auditor before the first weekly meeting of each month of the board of city
commissioners.
§ 11-4. Disposition of fees. [Code 1957, § 18.4; Ord. No. 785,
12-12-1995]
§ 11-5. Deferring, suspending sentence; commitment.
The municipal judge may, in his discretion, upon the conviction of any
person of any offense against any of the ordinances of the city, then and
there impose a sentence of imprisonment as may be regulated by such
ordinances, or defer imposition of sentence or suspend the sentence
imposed on such person for a period not to exceed one year from date
of such conviction; and may, during such period, allow the defendant to
go upon his own recognizance, or upon such bail as may be regulated by
law or the ordinances of this city; and may, in his discretion, at or before
the expiration of such period have the defendant brought before him and
commit such defendant or cause such sentence or imprisonment to be then
and there imposed and executed in like manner, so far as applicable, as may
be provided by law or the ordinance in cases where the commitment and
imposition of the sentence of imprisonment is not deferred or suspended
and may then and there forthwith commit such defendant and require that
such sentence of imprisonment be executed and carried out.
(a) All fees for arrests and fines received by the municipal judge shall be
paid into the city treasury by the municipal judge and the same shall
inure to the benefit of the city and not to the municipal judge. His salary
shall be his only remuneration.
(b) All fines, penalties, and forfeitures collected as a result of a judgment
from a district court rendered pursuant to Section 40-18-15.1 N.D.C.C.
(transfers to district court for jury trial) shall be paid into the city's
general fund at least once each quarter.
§ 10-514 WILLISTON CODE § 11-6
AO:434
§ 11-6. Authorization to enforce orders and judgments and punish
for contempt. [Ord. No. 739, 2-26-1991]
A municipal judge has the power to enforce due obedience to the court's
orders and judgments. The judge may fine or imprison for contempt
committed in the judge's presence while holding court, as well as for
contempt of process issued, and of orders made by the judge. When an act
or omission constituting a contempt in a municipal court is not committed
in the presence of the municipal judge, an affidavit alleging the facts
may be filed and a warrant of arrest thereupon may issue on which the
person accused may be arrested and brought before the municipal judge
immediately. The person must be given a reasonable opportunity to employ
counsel and defend against the alleged contempt. After hearing the
allegations and proofs, the municipal judge may discharge the person or
adjudge the person guilty and may punish by fine or imprisonment or both.
The fine in any case may not be more than $500 and the imprisonment may
not be more than 30 days.
§ 11-7. Authorization to impose a $25 victim impact fee upon
conviction of a criminal offense. [Ord. No. 790, 4-23-1996; Ord. No.
1064, 6-13-2017]
The Municipal Judge is authorized to assess a fee of $25 as a part of a
sentence imposed on a defendant who pleads guilty to or is convicted of a
criminal offense for which the maximum penalty that may be imposed by
law for the offense includes imprisonment.
The fee assessed is in addition to any fine, penalty, costs, or administrative
fee prescribed by law. The Municipal Judge may assess the fee when
sentence is imposed or when sentence is suspended or imposition of
sentence is deferred, unless the defendant is indigent and unable to pay the
fee.
All fees paid to the City must be deposited monthly in the City Treasury for
allocation on an annual basis by the Governing Body of the City to one or
more of the following programs as determined by the Governing Body.
Chapter 12
OFFENSES — MISCELLANEOUS
(a) A victim witness assistance program of which the primary function is to
provide direct services to victims of and witnesses to crime.
(b) A private, nonprofit domestic violence or sexual assault program.
(c) The Statewide automated victim information and notification system, as
provided for under N.D.C.C. § 12.1-34.
§ 11-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1
AO:435
§ 12-1. Drunkenness. [Code 1957, § 15.9]
Any person who shall be found in an apparent state of intoxication or
drunkenness in any street or public place within the limits of the City may
be taken by a police officer to his home, to a local hospital or, whenever
such persons constitutes a danger to himself or others, to a jail for purposes
of detoxification.
§ 12-2. Obstructing public officers. [Code 1957, §§ 15.23, 15.30]
No person shall wilfully delay, obstruct, hinder or interfere with any officer
of the City or other public officer in the discharge or attempt to discharge
any duty of his office.
§ 12-3. Resisting arrest; escaping or assisting in escape from
custody. [Code 1957, § 15.30]
No person shall resist any peace officer or policeman of the City, nor refuse
to assist him in the discharge of his duties when called upon, nor being held
in lawful custody of any such officer or confined in any jail in the City shall
attempt to escape therefrom, nor shall aid or assist any person so confined
or held in custody to escape.
§ 12-4. False reports to police. [Code 1957, § 15.11]
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make or submit to the police
department, or any officer or employee thereof, any report or complaint
of the violation of any law of this state or of the United States, or any
ordinance of the City, which report or complaint shall in fact be false or
untrue, and known to the person making or submitting the same to be false
and untrue.
§ 12-5. False alarms. [Code 1957, § 15.10]
No person shall give, or cause to be given, any false fire alarm or police
alarm with intent to deceive, or tamper with or set off any fire alarm or
police alarm or signal box with like intent.
§ 12-6. Assault and battery. [Code 1957, § 15.3]
No person shall commit any assault or battery upon the person of another
or cause any affray within the limits of the City.
§ 12-7. Malicious injury to property generally. [Code 1957, § 15.16]
It shall be unlawful for any person, personally or by agent or otherwise,
to maliciously or mischievously deface, remove, damage, tear down or
destroy any real or personal property of whatsoever kind or nature, whether
publicly or privately owned, in the City or its police jurisdiction.
§ 12-1 WILLISTON CODE § 12-8
AO:436
§ 12-8. Fire or police department property; injuring; hindrance.
[Code 1957, § 15.12]
No person shall, in any manner whatever, intentionally interfere with or
injure any property of the fire department or the police department, or
hinder or delay any apparatus or equipment or vehicle belonging to the fire
department or the police department.
§ 12-9. Posting bills, painting signs, etc. [Code 1957, § 15.26]
It shall be unlawful for any person to post or cause to be posted any bills,
or paint, write or print, or cause to be painted, written or printed, any signs
or devices on any sidewalk, street, bridge, viaduct, pole, tree, post or on
any wall, building or structure or other property of another, unless, in the
case of private property, the prior consent of the owner thereof has been
secured.
§ 12-10. Signs, writings, etc., tending to disturb peace. [Code 1957,
§ 15.31]
No person shall show or expose in public any writing, sign, drawing, print,
caricature, statue or any other object which may incite scandal or has a
tendency to disturb the public peace.
§ 12-11. Spitting; littering generally. [Code 1957, § 15.32]
No person shall spit or expectorate nor throw fruit, fruit parings or skins,
nuts or nut shells upon the sidewalks or crossings of any street, avenue,
alley or driveway within the corporate limits of the City, nor in or upon the
floors, stairs or hallways within or sidewalks leading to or from any public
building, theatre, public hall or any taxicab stand, bus depot, airport or
railway depot or platform connected therewith or leading thereto whether
such public building, theatre, hall or depot belongs to the City or not.
§ 12-12. Garbage, glass, debris or rubbish on streets or public
property. [Ord. No. 478, 9-12-1972; Ord. No. 1068, 8-22-2017]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the following
provisions:
(1) No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or public property
any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, rubbish, or any
other litter. In addition, an individual may not deposit any
substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle, or throw or
deposit debris or rubbish of any kind upon the streets or public
property;
(2) Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, or
deposited, upon any street or public property any destructive or
injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to
be removed; and
§ 12-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-12
AO:437
§ 12-13. Throwing filthy matter into water. [Code 1957, § 11.10]
No person shall throw or leave any vegetables or any liquid waste or filth
whatsoever, solid or liquid into any pool of water in the City.
§ 12-14. Trespassing on private property. [Code 1957, § 15-35; Ord.
No. 706, 11-24-1987]
§ 12-15. Theft of property or services. [Code 1957, § 15.24-1; Ord.
No. 640, 2-12-1985]
(3) Any person moving a wrecked or damaged vehicle shall remove any
glass or other injurious substance dropped or falling upon the
street or public property from such vehicle.
(4) The penalty for violation of this section is $500.
(a) No person shall trespass upon the premises or property of another.
(b) Property which is generally opened to the public or is considered a
public or semi-public place or is property of a business or commercial
establishment may prohibit trespassing by posting the property in a
manner reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders. If such
property is posted, no persons shall trespass upon the premises or
property in violation of the terms set forth in the posting.
(c) Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not
more than $500, or shall be imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or
may be punished by both fine and imprisonment.
(1) Theft not exceeding $500 shall be a violation of this Code if:
a. The theft was not committed by threat;
b. The theft was not committed by deception by one who stood in a
confidential or fiduciary relationship to the victim of the theft;
c. The defendant was not a public servant or an officer or employee of
a financial institution who committed the theft in the course of his
official duties.
(2) Theft under this Code constitutes a single offense designed to include
the separate offenses known as larceny, stealing, purloining,
embezzlement, obtaining money or property by false pretenses,
extortion, blackmail, fraudulent conversion, receiving stolen property,
possessing stolen property, misappropriation of public funds, swindling,
theft of property or services, and the like.
§ 12-12 WILLISTON CODE § 12-16
AO:438
§ 12-16. Public libraries; withholding, etc., books. [Code 1957,
§ 15.18-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to keep or withhold any book,
pamphlet, magazine, manuscript or other lending material borrowed from
the James Memorial Library, or from any other institution maintaining a
public library or providing public library service within the City, after the
expiration of 30 days following written notice to return the same, given by
registered or certified mail pursuant to the lending rules of the institution.
§ 12-17. Peeping person. [Code 1957, § 15.24; Ord. No. 610, §§ 1, 2,
12-14-1982]
The term "peeping person" means one who peeps through windows or doors
or other like places on the premises of another for the purpose of spying
upon or invading the privacy of the person spied upon, and the doing of any
other act of a similar nature which invades the privacy of such persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be a "peeping person" on the premises
of another, or to go upon the premises of another for the purpose of
becoming a "peeping person."
§ 12-18. through § 12-21. (Reserved)24
§ 12-22. Indecent exposure, dress, etc. [Code 1957, § 15.15; Ord.
No. 815, 10-12-1999]
No person shall appear in any public place in a state of nudity or in an
indecent dress or lewd dress or make an indecent exposure of his person
or be guilty of any indecent act or behavior, except as allowed in a licensed
premises under § 3-75.
§ 12-23. Persuading another to visit gambling place. [Code 1957,
§ 15.13]
Every person who persuades another to visit any building or part of a
building, or any vessel or float used or occupied for the purpose of
gambling, in consequence whereof such other person gambles therein,
is guilty of a violation of this Code and, in addition to the punishment
prescribed therefor, is liable to such other person in an amount equal to any
money or property lost by him at play in such place, to be recovered in a
civil action.
§ 12-24. Gambling generally. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
Any person who risks any money, credit, deposit or other thing of value
for gain, contingent, wholly or partially, upon lot, chance, the operation of
gambling apparatus or the happening or outcome of an event, including an
24.Editor's Note: Former sections 12-18 through 12-21, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Code 1957, §§ 15.19 — 15.22, were repealed in their entirety by
Ordinance No. 815.
§ 12-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-24
AO:439
election or sporting event, over which the person taking the risk has no
control, is guilty of gambling.
§ 12-25. Gambling apparatus common nuisance. [Code 1957,
§ 15.13]
Any device, machine, paraphernalia or equipment that is used or usable in
the playing phases of any gambling activity, whether that activity consists
of gambling between persons or gambling by a person involving the playing
of a machine, is a common nuisance.
§ 12-26. Maintaining gambling house common nuisance. [Code
1957, § 15.13]
§ 12-27. Lotteries — Generally. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
A lottery is any plan for the distribution of a thing of value, whether tangible
or intangible, or a person or persons selected by chance from among
participants, some or all of whom have given a consideration for the chance
of being selected. Every lottery is a common nuisance and is unlawful.
§ 12-28. Same — Maintenance of office. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
No person shall open, set up or keep, by himself or by any other person,
any office or other place for registering the numbers of any ticket in any
lottery, or for making, receiving or registering any bets or wagers upon the
drawing, determination or result of any lottery.
§ 12-29. Same — Drawing. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
Every person who contrives, prepares, sets up, proposes or draws any
lottery shall be punished as provided in § 1-11 of this Code.
§ 12-30. Same — Advertising. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
(a) Any location or structure, stationary or movable, wherein gambling is
permitted or promoted, or where a lottery is conducted or managed, is
a common nuisance.
(b) Any person who owns or keeps such place, and any person who aids,
abets or assists the owner or keeper of such common nuisance, shall be
punished as provided in § 1-11 of this Code.
(a) Each person who, by writing or printing, by circulars or letters or in any
other way, advertises or publishes any:
(1) Account of any lottery, stating when or where the same is to be or
has been drawn, or what are the prices, or any of them therein, or
the price of a ticket, or of any share or interest, or where it may be
obtained, or in any way aiding or assisting the same, or which is
adapted to inducing persons to adventure therein;
§ 12-24 WILLISTON CODE § 12-30
AO:440
§ 12-31. Same — Sale of tickets. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
Every person who sells, gives or in any manner whatever furnishes or
transfers to or for any other person, any ticket, chance, share or interest
or any paper, certificate or instrument, purporting or represented or
understood to be or to represent any ticket, chance, share or interest in or
depending upon the event of any lottery, or who endorses a book or any
other document for the purpose of enabling others to sell or vend lottery
policies, is guilty of a violation of this Code.
§ 12-32. Same — Purchase of tickets. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
No person shall buy or in any manner whatever accept or receive for himself
or another, any ticket, chance, share or interest, or any paper, certificate
or instrument, purporting, represented or understood to be or to represent,
any ticket, chance, share or interest in or depending upon the event of any
lottery.
§ 12-33. Same — Insuring tickets. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
(2) Account of the opening, setting up or keeping of any office or other
place for either of the purposes prohibited by the preceding
paragraph; or
(3) Offer, notice or proposal for insuring or receiving consideration for
insuring the drawing of tickets, shares or interest in any lottery; is
guilty of a violation of this Code. The provisions of paragraphs (1)
and (2) are applicable wherever the advertisement was published,
or the letter or circular sent or delivered through or in this City,
notwithstanding that the person causing or procuring the same to
be published, sent or delivered was out of this City at the time of so
doing.
(a) Any person who commits any of the following acts is guilty of a violation
of this Code:
(1) Insures or receives any consideration for insuring for or against the
drawing of any ticket, share or interest in any lottery, or for or
against the drawing of any number, ticket or number of any ticket
in any lottery;
(2) Receives any valuable consideration upon any agreement to pay
any sum, or to deliver any property or thing in action in the event
that any ticket, share or interest in any lottery, or any number,
ticket or number of any ticket in any lottery, shall prove fortunate
or unfortunate or shall be drawn or not drawn on any particular day
or in any particular order;
(3) Promises, agrees or offers to pay any sum of money, to deliver any
property or thing in action or to do or forbear to do anything for the
§ 12-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-33
AO:441
§ 12-34. Same — Property offered for sale. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
Every person who, in any way, offers for sale, distribution or disposition
any real or personal property, thing in action or any interest therein, to be
determined by lot or chance, which shall be dependent upon the drawing of
any lottery within or without this City, and every person, who sells, furnishes
or procures, or causes to be sold, furnished or procured in any manner
whatsoever, any chance, share or interest whatever in any property offered
for sale, distribution or disposition in violation of this section, or any ticket
or other evidence of any chance, share or interest in such property, is guilty
of a violation of this Code.
§ 12-35. Same — Property offered for sale forfeited. [Code 1957,
§ 15.13]
Any property offered for sale, distribution or disposition in violation of the
provisions of § 12-34 shall be forfeited to the City before as well as after
the determination of the chance on which the same is dependent. The
City Attorney shall demand, sue for and recover, in behalf of this City all
property so forfeited, cause the same to be sold when recovered and pay
the proceeds of the sale and any moneys that may be collected in any such
suit into the City treasury.
§ 12-36. Same — Without City. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply in respect to lotteries drawn or
to be drawn without this City, whether authorized or not by the laws of the
state where they are drawn or to be drawn, in the manner in which they
apply to lotteries drawn or to be drawn within this City.
§ 12-37. Prostitution, etc. — Definitions. [Code 1957, § 15.28]
As used in this chapter:
ASSIGNATION — Includes the making of any appointment or engagement
for prostitution or lewdness or any act in furtherance of such appointment
or engagement.
LEWDNESS — Includes any indecent or obscene act.
PROSTITUTE — A person who engages in sexual activity for hire.
PROSTITUTION — Includes:
benefit of any other person, with or without consideration, upon
any event whatever connected with any lottery.
Being an inmate in a house of ill fame or being otherwise engaged in
sexual activity as a business; or
(1)
Soliciting another person with the intention of being hired to engage in
sexual activity.
(2)
§ 12-33 WILLISTON CODE § 12-38
AO:442
§ 12-38. Same — Prohibited. [Code 1957, § 15.28]
§ 12-39. Same — Receiving proceeds. [Code 1957, § 15.28]
Any person who knowingly shall accept or receive in whole or in part
support or maintenance or revenue from the proceeds or earnings of any
person engaged in prostitution is guilty of a violation of this Code.
§ 12-40. Same — Enticing. [Code 1957, § 15.28]
Every person who inveigles or entices any other person into any house of
ill fame or assignation or elsewhere, for the purpose of prostitution, and
every person who aids or assists in such abduction for such purpose, shall
be guilty of a violation of this Code.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person:
(1) To keep, set up, maintain or operate any place, structure, building
or conveyance for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or
assignation, or to aid, abet or assist the owner or keeper of such
place;
(2) To occupy any place, structure, building or conveyance for the
purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or for any person
to permit any place, structure, building or conveyance owned by
him or under his control to be used for the purpose of prostitution,
lewdness or assignation, with knowledge or reasonable cause to
know that the same is, or is to be, used for such purpose;
(3) To receive, or to offer or agree to receive, any person into any
place, structure, building or conveyance for the purpose of
prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or to permit any person to
remain there for such purpose;
(4) To direct, take or transport, or to offer or agree to take or
transport, any person to any place, structure or building or to any
other person with knowledge or reason to know that the purpose of
such directing, taking or transporting is prostitution, lewdness or
assignation;
(5) To procure or to solicit, or to offer to procure or solicit, for the
purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation;
(6) To reside in, enter or remain in any place, structure or building, or
to enter or remain in any conveyance, for the purpose of
prostitution, lewdness or assignation; or
(7) To engage in prostitution, lewdness or assignation or to aid or abet
prostitution, lewdness or assignation by any means whatsoever.
(b) Any place kept in violation of paragraph (1) is a common nuisance.
§ 12-38 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-41
AO:443
§ 12-41. Sunday baseball. [Code 1957, § 15.33]
The playing of baseball shall be permitted within the City after 1:00 p.m.
on the Sabbath Day; provided, that such game of baseball is played more
than 500 feet from a church edifice, and that such game is conducted in a
quiet and orderly manner so as not to interfere with the peace, repose and
comfort of the community.
§ 12-42. Disorderly house. [Code 1957, § 15.28]
Any disorderly house or place of public resort by which the peace, comfort
or decency of the immediate neighborhood habitually is disturbed is a
common nuisance. Any person who keeps such place is guilty of maintaining
a common nuisance and shall be punished as provided in § 1-11 of this Code.
§ 12-43. Disorderly conduct — Generally. [Code 1957, § 15.6]
No person shall make or assist in any riot, improper noises or disturbances
or shall be guilty of any disorderly, indecent, immoral or insulting conduct,
language or behavior, and no persons shall collect in bodies or crowds in the
City for unlawful purposes, to the annoyance or disturbance of the citizens
or travelers, or commit any act constituting a breach of the peace.
§ 12-44. Same — Permitting disorderly conduct in building. [Code
1957, § 15.7]
No person shall commit or suffer to be committed in any building occupied
by him within the City limits any roistering, reveling, drunkenness, fighting
or improper noises or disorderly conduct calculated to disturb the
neighborhood, or annoy or disturb the passers-by or others.
§ 12-45. Profane or indecent language. [Code 1957, § 15.27]
No person shall use any profane or indecent language nor shall curse or
swear in any street or public place.
§ 12-46. Disturbing religious worship. [Code 1957, § 15.8]
No person shall disturb a congregation or assembly of any sect or church
met for religious worship in the City or its police jurisdiction, by making a
noise or by rude or indecent behavior or profane discourse within the place
of worship or on the street or elsewhere so near as to disturb the order or
solemnity of the meeting.
§ 12-47. Affrays. [Code 1957, § 15.1]
If any two or more persons in any public place in the City shall voluntarily
or by agreement engage in any fight or use any blows or violence towards
each other, in angry or quarrelsome manner, or do each other any willful
mischief, every person so offending shall be deemed guilty of an affray.
§ 12-41 WILLISTON CODE § 12-48
AO:444
§ 12-48. Throwing missiles. [Code 1957, § 15.34]
No person within the City shall wantonly or mischievously throw or project
any stone, brick, metal or other hard substance in, upon, over or across any
street, thoroughfare or other public place, or in, upon, over or across any
private property without lawful permission.
§ 12-49. Curfew. [Code 1957, § 15.5; Ord. No. 786, 1-23-1996]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or
drive or ride in cars idly or aimlessly in or upon the public streets,
avenues, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds and other public
grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement or
entertainment, and vacant lots or other under-supervised places in the
City between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day
during the days of Sunday p.m. through Friday a.m., and from 12:00
a.m. to 5:00 a.m. on Saturday and Sunday. This section shall not apply
to a minor while attending or while en route to or from an activity
supervised by a school, church, civic or fraternal organization or
governmental agency, nor shall such provisions apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her parents, guardian or other adult person
having the care and custody of such minor. If it is claimed that such
minor is upon an emergency errand, such minor must carry a written
permit signed by the chief of police, parent or legal guardian of the
child, stating the nature of the errand, time of departure and the place
where the errand is to be performed.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person
having the lawful care, custody or control of any minor person to allow
or permit such minor person to violate the provisions of this section, or
to aid or abet such violation, and it shall be unlawful for any other
person to aid or abet such violation.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person operating or in charge of any place of
amusement, entertainment or refreshment or other place of business,
to permit any minor to loiter, loaf or idle in such place during the hours
prohibited by this section.
(d) Whenever the owner or person in charge of any place of amusement,
entertainment or refreshment or other place of business shall find a
minor, during the hours prohibited, loitering, loafing or idling in such
place of business, he shall immediately order the minor to leave, and if
the minor refuses to leave the premises the owner or person in charge
shall immediately notify the police department and inform the
department of such refusal.
(e) This section shall not be construed so as to permit the presence of any
minor in any place where his presence is now prohibited by law or
ordinance.
§ 12-48 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-49
AO:445
§ 12-50. Contributing to delinquency of minor. [Ord. No. 465,
6-15-1971]
Any person who by any act willfully encourages, causes or contributes to
the delinquency or deprivation of any minor is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 12-51. Marijuana. [Ord. No. 525, § 15.50, 11-9-1976; amended
8-13-2019 by Ord. No. 1105]
(f) Any police officer is hereby authorized to arrest without a warrant any
person or persons observed by him to be violating the provisions of this
section.
(a) Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the
"Marijuana Ordinance of the City of Williston."
(b) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
MARIJUANA — All parts of the plant Cannabis whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation
of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture or preparation of mature stalks (except the resin extracted
therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is
in capable of germination. The term "marijuana" does not include hemp,
as defined by Title 4.1 of the North Dakota Century Code.
(c) Prohibited acts.
1. It shall be unlawful to possess marijuana within the corporate limits
of the City, unless the marijuana was obtained in accordance with
Chapter 19-24.1 of the North Dakota Century Code.
2. It shall be unlawful to use or possess with the intent to use drug
paraphernalia to ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce marijuana
into the human body, or possess with the intent to use drug
paraphernalia to store or contain marijuana, within the corporate
limits of the City.
3. It shall be unlawful to intentionally ingest, inhale, inject, or
otherwise take into the body a controlled substance unless the
substance is medical marijuana obtained in accordance with
N.D.C.C. § 19-24.1.
(d) Penalties.
1. A person violating Subsection (c)1 by possessing marijuana in an
amount of less than 1/2 ounce (14.175 grams) is guilty of an
infraction.
§ 12-49 WILLISTON CODE § 12-51
AO:446
§ 12-52. Noise — Loud radios, phonographs, etc. [Code 1957,
§ 15.17]
It is hereby prohibited and made unlawful for any person within the City
or the police jurisdiction thereof, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., to play any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in a manner
so loud as to be calculated to disturb the sleep of ordinary persons in nearby
residences or so loud as to unreasonably disturb or interfere with the peace
and comfort of the occupants of a nearby residence.
§ 12-53. Same — Phonographs with loudspeakers. [Code 1957,
§ 15.18]
It is expressly prohibited and made unlawful for any person to operate
or allow the operating of a phonograph or similar instrument with a
loudspeaker at or near the entrance of the place of business of such person
within the City or its police jurisdiction.
§ 12-54. Hotels, etc.; registering under false name. [Code 1957,
§ 15.14]
It shall be unlawful for any person to write or cause to be written, in any
hotel or lodging house register, any other or different name than the true
name of such person or the name by which he is generally known or to give
any false name to the proprietor of any such hotel or lodging house.
§ 12-55. Drilling, etc., for oil and natural gas. [Code 1957, § 8.3]
The drilling for and production of oil and natural gas within the corporate
limits of the City are declared unlawful and prohibited.
§ 12-56. Nuisances — Enumerated generally. [Code 1957, § 11.8]
2. A person violating Subsection (c)2 by possessing at least 1/2 ounce
(14.175 grams) but not more than 500 grams of marijuana is guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor.
3. A person violating Subsection (c)2 by using or possessing with the
intent to use drug paraphernalia to ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce marijuana into the human body, or possess with the
intent to use drug paraphernalia to store or contain marijuana, is
guilty of an infraction.
4. A person who is under 21 years of age and violates Subsection c(3),
intentionally ingests, inhales, injects, or otherwise takes into the
body a controlled substance that is marijuana, unless the substance
was medical marijuana obtained in accordance with N.D.C.C.
§ 19-24.1, is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
§ 12-51 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-56
AO:447
§ 12-57. Same — Abatement. [Code 1957, § 11.9]
(a) Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sound, animals or things
which interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of any
person in the City constitute a public nuisance.
(b) Offensive, nauseous or dangerous things. Anything which is made,
permitted, used, kept, maintained or operated, or any building or any
animal that is kept in the City or outside of the City, but within one-half
mile of its limits, in a manner which is offensive, nauseous, dangerous
to life, limb or property or detrimental to the health of the persons
residing in that area shall be a public nuisance. Provided that this
subsection shall apply to unwholesome businesses within one mile of
the City limits.
(c) Tanneries, soap factories, etc. Whoever shall, within the limits of the
City, establish or maintain any tallow chandlery, tannery, bone or soap
factory, or shall steam, boil or render any tainted lard, tallow, offal or
other unwholesome animal substance shall be deemed guilty of a
nuisance; or whoever shall without the City limits, and within one mile
thereof, establish or maintain any such chandlery, factory, tannery or
rendery, without having first obtained the consent of the Board of City
Commissioners; or whoever, having obtained permission and consent
shall so conduct or carry on any such business as to taint the air and
render it offensive or unwholesome, or so as to affect the health or
comfort of persons residing in the neighborhood thereof, shall be
deemed guilty of a nuisance.
(d) Discharge of offensive matter. Whoever shall, within the City, place or
throw, or permit to be discharged, or to flow from or out of any house or
premises, any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into
any street, alley or any public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground,
or shall allow or permit the same to be done by any person connected
with the premises, under his control, shall be deemed guilty of a
nuisance.
(e) The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other
nuisances described and prohibited by this Code.
(a) When it is necessary for the protection of the public health to abate or
remove any nuisance, source of filth or cause of sickness found on any
private property, the Board of Health shall cause a notice to be served
on the owner or occupant thereof, requiring him to remove the same at
his own expense within a reasonable time, not to exceed 24 hours. If the
owner or occupant refuses or neglects to comply with such notice, or if
the nuisance, source of filth or cause of sickness exists on the property
of nonresident owners or upon property, the owners of which cannot be
found, the Board of Health shall cause the nuisance, source of filth or
cause of sickness to be removed or destroyed under its direction, at the
§ 12-56 WILLISTON CODE § 12-57
AO:448
§ 12-58. Letting building for illegal purpose. [Code 1957, § 15.13]
Every person who lets or permits to be used any building or portion of any
building, knowing that it is intended to be used for any of the purposes
declared punishable by this chapter, is guilty of a violation of this Code.
§ 12-59. Loitering — Generally. [Ord. No. 472, 3-7-1972]
No person shall loiter in or about or be or remain in or on any public
building or grounds at any time when the same shall not be open to the
public or to the specific class of the public to which he or she may belong,
except only such persons as shall have a legitimate reason for being there
in connection with the purpose or purposes for which such building or
grounds are maintained, and then only for such time as may be reasonable
to accomplish such purpose.
§ 12-60. Same — Failure to answer to or comply with order of
official. [Ord. No. 472, 3-7-1972]
Any official, police officer, superintendent of schools, principal, dean of a
college, professor, associate professor, instructor, park superintendent or
other person having authority in connection with any public building or
grounds may, after identifying himself or herself as such, inquire of any
person found loitering or being in or on any such building or grounds as to
his purpose in being there, and if such person refuses to answer or fails to
disclose a legitimate reason for being there in connection with the purpose
or purposes for which the building or grounds are maintained, may order
him to leave, and failure to obey such order shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
§ 12-61. Barbed wire fences. [Code 1957, § 15.4]
No person shall within the limits of the City erect, construct or maintain any
fence or enclosure of any premises, piece or parcel of ground with what is
known as barbed wire.
expense of the City, but such expense shall be charged against the lots,
pieces or parcels of land upon which the work was done.
(b) The cost of the removal or destruction of a nuisance, source of filth or
cause of sickness by the Board of Health shall be assessed against the
property by the City engineer, who shall return the assessment and file
it in the office of the City Auditor. The City Auditor shall cause the
amount of the assessment, together with a notice of the time when and
the place where the Board of City Commissioners will meet to consider
thereof, to be published in one issue of the official newspaper of the City
at least 10 days prior to the meeting of the board at which the approval
of the assessment will be considered. The City Auditor shall deliver the
assessment roll to the county auditor, who shall extend the assessment
in the proper column against the property assessed. Each assessment
shall be collected and paid as other taxes are collected and paid.
§ 12-57 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-62
AO:449
§ 12-62. Abandoning refrigerators. [Code 1957, § 15.29]
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside
of any dwelling, building or other structure or within any unoccupied or
abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under his control, in a
place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded
icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an airtight door or lid,
snap lock or other locking device which may not be released from the inside,
without first removing such door or lid, snap lock or other locking device
from the icebox, refrigerator or other container.
§ 12-63. Adoption of state law relating to reportable diseases. [Code
1957, § 11.11]
The provisions of N.D.C.C. § 23-07-01 et seq., relating to contagious and
reportable diseases, are hereby adopted and made a part of this Code.
§ 12-64. BB guns. [Code 1957, § 15.39]
It shall be unlawful within the limits of the City for anyone to fire off or
discharge any air gun or BB gun.
§ 12-65. Discharging firearms. [Code 1957, § 15.38]
It shall be unlawful within the limits of the City for any person, except law
enforcement officers in the performance of their duty, to fire off or discharge
any gun or firearms, except at such times and places as the chief of police
or the Board of City Commissioners may expressly permit or direct.
§ 12-66. Concealed weapons. [Code 1957, § 15.37]
No person, except as authorized by law, shall carry concealed about his
person firearms of any description, or any sharp or dangerous weapon, such
as is usually employed in attack or in defense of the person.
§ 12-67. Aircraft and parachute landing. [Ord. No. 587, §§ 1 — 3,
12-22-1981; Ord. No. 778, 6-27-1995]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to ascend or land with any aircraft,
including gliders, balloons, helicopters and parachutes within the City
limits. This proscription shall not apply to emergency landings nor to
military or National Guard personnel. This proscription shall not apply
to any medical helicopter operating in a medical emergency. This
proscription shall not apply to any landing at an established airport, or
heliport.
(b) Special permission. Special permission for a regular landing area for
helicopters or balloons may be granted, provided, however, that the
party seeking such special permission shall apply to the City of Williston
in writing for such approval and shall present such application to the
Williston Planning and Zoning Commission which shall act upon the
§ 12-62 WILLISTON CODE § 12-67
AO:450
§ 12-68. Imitation controlled substances. [Ord. No. 622, §§ 1 — 4,
6-28-1983]
same following a public hearing, and shall recommend approval or
recommend denial of the request to the Board of City Commissioners,
which will also hold a public hearing prior to acting upon the request.
Special permission for a one-time event may be granted in the
discretion of the Board of City Commissioners, without a hearing and
without application to the planning and zoning commission, for an
ascent or landing of aircraft, gliders, balloons, helicopters, and
parachutes within City limits. Such permission shall be conditioned
upon notice to fire department, airport manager, and police department
and agreement of applicant to indemnify the City for any and all claims
and that applicant will provide insurance for the event in a sum to be
determined by the City commission.
(c) Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine of up to $500, a jail sentence of up to
30 days, or both such fine and such jail sentence. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each violation of this ordinance.
(a) Definitions.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — Any substance as so defined by the laws
of the state as presently enacted or later amended.
IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A substance that is not a
controlled substance, but which by appearance, including color, shape,
size, markings, or packaging, or by representations made, would lead
a reasonable person to believe that the substance is a controlled
substance.
(b) Determination of imitation controlled substance. When the appearance
of the dosage unit is not reasonably sufficient to establish that the
substance is an "imitation controlled substance" as in the case of a
powder or a liquid substance, the court or authority concerned should
consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, all of the
following factors as related to "representations made" in determining
whether the substance is an "imitation controlled substance":
(1) Statements made by an owner or by anyone else in control of the
substance concerning the nature of the substance, or its use or
effect.
(2) Statements made to the recipient that the substance may be resold
for inordinate profit.
(3) Whether the substance is packaged in a manner normally used for
illicit controlled substances.
(4) Evasive tactics or actions utilized by the owner or person in control
of the substance to avoid detection by law enforcement authorities.
§ 12-67 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-68
AO:451
§ 12-69. Harassment by telephone. [Ord. No. 666, 4-10-1986]
§ 12-70. through § 12-72. (Reserved)25
§ 12-73. Fleeing or eluding an officer's signal by a person not
operating a motor vehicle. [Ord. No. 805, §§ 1, 2, 9-23-1997]
(5) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or anyone in control of the
object, under state or federal law related to controlled substances,
imitation controlled substances, or fraud.
(6) The proximity of the substances to controlled substances.
(c) Unlawful to use or possess. It shall be unlawful for a person to use, or to
possess with intent to use, an imitation controlled substance.
(d) Penalty. Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this section
shall be punished by a fine as stated in § 1-11 of this Code.
(a) It shall be unlawful and shall be an offense for any person with intent to
frighten or harass another, to commit any of the following acts:
(1) Make a telephone call anonymous or in offensively coarse
language;
(2) Make repeated telephone calls, whether or not a conversation
ensues, with no purpose of legitimate communication; or
(3) Communicate a falsehood in writing or by telephone and causes
mental anguish.
(b) Any offense defined herein and committed by use of a telephone may be
deemed to have been committed at either the place at which the
telephone call or calls were made, or at the place where the telephone
call or calls were received.
(c) A person violating any provision of this section is guilty of an offense
and such person shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail
for not more than 30 days and not more than $500.
(a) Any person, other than the driver of a motor vehicle or snowmobile,
who willfully fails or refuses to stop or who otherwise flees or attempts
to elude, in any manner, a pursuing peace officer, when given a visual or
audible signal to stop, is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor for a first or
second offense and a Class A misdemeanor for a subsequent offense. A
signal to stop complies with this section if the signal is perceptible to
the person and:
25.Editor's Note: Sections 12-70 — 12-72 containing Ord. Nos. 781, 787, 848, 851 and 987
pertaining to sale of tobacco products was repealed by Ordinance No. 1059. See Chapter
9, Article VIII for Licensing and Sale of Tobacco Products.
§ 12-68 WILLISTON CODE § 12-73
AO:452
§ 12-74. Order prohibiting contact with victim of a crime involving
domestic violence. [Ord. No. 736, §§ 1 — 4, 2-26-1991]
(1) If given from a vehicle, the signal is given by hand, voice,
emergency light, or siren, and the stopping vehicle is appropriately
marked showing it to be an official law enforcement vehicle; or
(2) If not given from a vehicle, the signal is given by hand, voice,
emergency light, or siren, and the officer is in uniform and
prominently displays the officer's badge of office.
(b) Any person who violates this section must be assessed a fine of at least
$500.
(1) If a person charged with or arrested for a crime involving domestic
violence is released from custody before arraignment or trial, the court
authorizing the release of the person shall consider and may issue, if
there is no outstanding restraining or protection order prohibiting the
person from having contact with the victim, an order prohibiting the
person from having contact with the victim. The order must contain the
court's directives and must inform the person that any violation of the
order constitutes a criminal offense. The court shall provide a copy of
the order to the victim. The court shall determine at the time of the
person's arraignment whether an order issued pursuant to this section
will be extended. If the court issues an order pursuant to this section
prior to the time the person is charged, the order expires at the
person's arraignment or within 72 hours of issuance if charges against
the person are not filed.
(2) If the court has probable cause to believe that the person charged or
arrested is likely to use, display, or threaten to use a firearm or
dangerous weapon as defined in Section 12.1-01-04 of the North Dakota
Century Code in any further acts of violence, the court may require that
the person surrender for safekeeping any firearm or dangerous weapon
in the person's immediate possession or control, or subject to the
person's immediate possession or control, to the sheriff of the county or
chief of police of the City in which the person resides.
(3) Whenever an order prohibiting contact is issued, modified, extended, or
terminated under this section, the clerk of court shall forward a copy of
the order on or before the next business day to the appropriate law
enforcement agency specified in the order. Upon receipt of the copy of
the order, the law enforcement agency shall enter the order for one
year or until the date of expiration specified by the order into any
information system available in the state that is used by law
enforcement agencies to list outstanding warrants. The order is
enforceable in any jurisdiction in this state.
(4) A person who willfully violates a court order issued under this section is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
§ 12-73 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-75
AO:453
§ 12-75. Same — Authorizing arrest without warrant. [Ord. No. 737,
§§ 1, 2, 2-26-1991]
§ 12-76. Written reports by law enforcement officers of the
investigation of any alleged domestic violence. [Ord. No. 738,
2-26-1991]
A law enforcement officer shall make a written report of the investigation
of any allegation of domestic violence regardless of whether an arrest was
made. The officer shall submit the report to the officer's supervisor or to any
other person to whom the officer is required to submit similar reports.
§ 12-77. Shooting of a bow and arrow within City limits. [Ord. No.
843, 2-27-2001]
(1) A law enforcement officer may arrest a person without a warrant if:
(a) The person has committed the offense of violating a protection
order under Section 14-07.1-06 of the North Dakota Century Code,
whether or not the violation was committed in the presence of the
officer; or
(b) The officer has probable cause to believe the person, within four
hours of the ascertainment of probable cause, has assaulted that
person's family or household member as defined in Section
14-07.1-01 of the North Dakota Century Code, although the assault
did not take place in the presence of the officer. A law enforcement
officer may not arrest a person pursuant to this subdivision without
first observing that there has been recent physical injury to, or
impairment of physical condition of, the alleged victim.
(2) A law enforcement officer may not be held criminally or civilly liable for
making an arrest pursuant to this ordinance if the officer acts in good
faith on probable cause and without malice.
(1) No person under the age of 17 may shoot a bow and arrow within the
City limits, unless the shooting is done under direct adult supervision or
within an enclosed building of such construction or design as to keep an
arrow from traveling outside the building. This restriction does not
apply to bows of less than 20 pounds of pull measured at peak weight
shooting blunted non-metallic tips.
(2) No person may shoot a bow and arrow within the City limits, unless the
shooting is done with a backstop sufficient to prevent an arrow from
traveling beyond the back stop or from traveling onto another person's
property or onto or across a public sidewalk or right-of-way.
(3) No person may shoot a bow and arrow within the City limits in any
manner which endangers the safety of another person or another's
property.
§ 12-75 WILLISTON CODE § 12-78
AO:454
§ 12-78. Sellable and non-sellable used tires. [Ord. No. 913,
2-10-2009]
§ 12-79. Ingestion of marijuana prohibited. [Ord. No. 978,
10-22-2013]
A person who intentionally ingests, inhales, or otherwise takes into the body
marijuana is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. The venue for a violation
of this section exists in either the jurisdiction in which the controlled
substance was ingested, inhaled, or otherwise taken into the body or the
jurisdiction in which the controlled substance was detected in the body of
the accused.
§ 12-80. Smoking in public places and places of employment.
§ 12-80.1. Statutory authorization. [Ord. No. 975, 9-10-2013]
The Legislature of the State of North Dakota has in North Dakota Century
Code, Chapters 40-47, 11-33 and 58-03, delegated responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.
§ 12-80.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 975, 9-10-2013]
(1) Commercial, industrial, and residential.
(a) All properties not in the business of selling used tires shall:
1. Store the tires indoors;
2. If stored outdoors, tires shall be screened from view of public
rights-of-way and neighboring properties.
3. Also, if stored outdoors, tires shall be protected from obtaining
standing water inside of tires to harbor mosquitoes.
(b) Commercial and industrial in business of selling new and used tires
shall:
1. Store tires outdoors;
2. If stored outdoors, tires shall be screened from view of all
highways and major streets;
3. Also, if stored outdoors, tires shall be protected from obtaining
standing water inside of tires to harbor mosquitoes;
4. Maximum used tire storage shall be 300 tires on hand at one
time;
5. Maximum non-sellable tire storage shall be no longer than 30
days and stacked neatly.
§ 12-78 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-80.2
AO:455
(1) BAR - Means a retail alcoholic beverage establishment licensed under
N.D.C.C. Chapter 5-02 that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the
serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages.
The term includes a bar located within a hotel, bowling center,
restaurant, or other establishment that is not licensed primarily or
exclusively to sell alcoholic beverages.
(2) BUSINESS - Means a sole proprietorship, partnership, association, joint
venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for profit or not for
profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold
and professional corporations and other entities where professional
services are delivered.
(3) E-CIGARETTE - Means any electronic oral device, such as one
composed of a heating element, battery or electronic circuit, or both,
which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use
or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any
such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as
an e-cigarette, e-cigar, and e-pipe or under any other product, name or
descriptor.
(4) EMPLOYEE - Means an individual who is employed by an employer in
consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, or an
individual who volunteers services for an employer.
(5) EMPLOYER - Means an individual, business, or private club, including a
municipal corporation or trust, or the state and its agencies and
political subdivisions that employs the services of one or more
individuals.
(6) ENCLOSED AREA - Means all space between a floor and ceiling that
has 33% or more of the surface area of its perimeter bounded by
opened or closed walls, windows, or doorways. A wall includes any
physical barrier regardless of whether it is opened or closed, temporary
or permanent, or contains openings of any kind and includes
retractable dividers and garage doors.
(7) HEALTH CARE FACILITY - Means any office or institution providing
health care services or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental
or emotional, or other medical, physiological or psychological
conditions. Some examples of health care facilities include hospitals;
clinics; ambulatory surgery centers; outpatient care facilities; weight
control clinics; nursing homes; homes for the aging or chronically ill;
nursing, basic, long-term, or assisted living facilities; laboratories; and
offices of any medical professional licensed under N.D.C.C. Title 43,
including all specialties and subspecialties in those fields. This
definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms,
semiprivate rooms, wards within health care facilities, and any mobile
or temporary health care facilities.
§ 12-80.2 WILLISTON CODE § 12-80.2
AO:456
(8) HEALTH CARE SERVICES - Means services provided by any health care
facility. Some examples of health care services are medical, surgical,
dental, vision, chiropractic, psychological, and pharmaceutical
services.
(9) PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT - Means an area under the control of a public
or private employer, including work areas, auditoriums, classrooms,
conference rooms, elevators, employee cafeterias, employee lounges,
hallways, meeting rooms, private offices, restrooms, temporary offices,
vehicles, and stairs. A private residence is not a place of employment
unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care
facility.
(10) PUBLIC PLACE - Means an area which the public enters. Some
examples of pub places are publicly owned buildings, vehicles, or
offices; bars; bingo facilities; gambling and gaming facilities as defined
in N.D.C.C. § 12.1-28-01; child care and adult day care facilities subject
to licensure by the Department of Human Services, including those
operated in private homes; convention facilities; educational facilities,
both public and private; facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion
picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar
performance; financial institutions; health care facilities; hotels and
motels, including all rooms that are rented to guests; laundromats; any
common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, mobile home
parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit
residential facilities; private and semi-private nursing home rooms;
museums, libraries, galleries, and aquariums; polling places;
professional offices; public transportation facilities, including buses,
trains, airplanes, and similar aircraft, taxicabs and similar vehicles such
as town cars and limousines when used for public transportation, and
ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit facilities, including
bus and train stations and airports; reception areas; restaurants; retail
food production and marketing establishments; retail service
establishments; retail stores, including tobacco and hookah
establishments; rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly
including school buildings; shopping malls; sports arenas; theaters; and
waiting rooms.
(11) PUBLIC OWNED BUILDINGS, VEHICLE, OR OFFICE - Means a place
or vehicle owned, leased, or rented by any estate or political
subdivision, or by any agency supported by appropriate of, or by
contracts or grants from, funds derived from the collection of taxes.
(12) RESTAURANT - Includes every building or other structure, or any part
thereof, and all buildings in connection therewith that are kept, used,
maintained, advertised, or held out to the public as a place where food
is served. Some examples of restaurants include coffee shops,
cafeterias, sandwich stands, private and public school cafeterias,
kitchens, and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere, and a bar area within a restaurant.
§ 12-80.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-80.2
AO:457
§ 12-80.3. Smoking restrictions - exceptions - retaliation -
Application. [Ord. No. 975, 9-10-2013]
(13) SHOPPING MALL - Means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that
serves to connect retail or professional businesses.
(14)SMOKING - Means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted
or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated
tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, in any manner or in
any form. Smoking also includes the use of an e-cigarette which created
a vapor, in any manner or any form, or the use of any oral smoking
device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in
this section.
(15)SPORTS ARENA - Means an indoor or outdoor place where members of
the public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in
athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. Some examples
of sports arenas include sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health
spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, and bowling
centers.
(1) In order to protect the public health and welfare and to recognize the
need for individuals to breathe smoke-free air, smoking is prohibited in
all enclosed areas of:
(a) Public places; and
(b) Places of employment.
(2) Smoking is prohibited within 20 feet (6.10 meters) of entrances, exits,
operable windows, air intakes, and ventilation systems of enclosed
areas in which smoking is prohibited. Owners, operators, managers,
employers, or other persons who own or control a public place or place
of employment may seek to rebut the presumption that 20 feet (6.10
meters) is a reasonable minimum distance by making application to the
director of the local health department or district in which the public
place or place of employment is located. The presumption will be
rebutted if the applicant can show by clear and convincing evidence
that, given the unique circumstances presented by the location of
entrances, exits, windows that open, ventilation intakes, or other
factors, smoke will not infiltrate or reach the entrances, exits, open
windows, or ventilation intakes or enter into such public place or place
of employment and, therefore, the public health and safety will be
adequately protected by a lesser distance.
(3) The following areas are exempt from paragraphs (1) and (2):
(a) Private residences, except those residences used as a child care,
adult day care, or health care facility subject to licensure by the
Department of Human Services.
§ 12-80.2 WILLISTON CODE § 12-80.3
AO:458
§ 12-80.4. Complaints and enforcement. [Ord. No. 975, 9-10-2013]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the City Attorney who
may ask the North Dakota Attorney General to adopt administrative rules to
ensure compliance with this section.
§ 12-80.5. Responsibility of proprietors. [Ord. No. 975, 9-10-2013]
(b) Outdoor areas of places of employment, except those listed in
paragraph (2).
(c) Any area that is not commonly accessible to the public and which is
part of an owner-operated business having no employee other than
the owner-operator.
(4) Smoking as part of a traditional American Indian spiritual or cultural
ceremony is not prohibited.
(5) No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or other
person because that person asserts or exercises any rights afforded by
this section or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this
section. An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows
smoking does not waive or surrender any legal rights the employee may
have against the employer or any other party. Violations of this
subsection shall be a Class B misdemeanor.
(6) This section may not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
(7) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an owner, operator,
manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or
outdoor area may declare that an entire establishment, facility, or
outdoor area as a non-smoking place.
(a) The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public
place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
section shall:
(1) Clearly and conspicuously post no smoking signs or the
international no smoking symbol in that place.
(2) Clearly and conspicuously post at entry entrance to that place a
sign stating that smoking is prohibited.
(3) Clearly and conspicuously post on every vehicle that constitutes a
place of employment under this section at least one sign, visible
from the vehicle's exterior, stating that smoking is prohibited.
(4) Remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited,
except for ashtrays displayed for sale and not for use on the
premises.
§ 12-80.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-80.5
AO:459
§ 12-80.6. Penalty. [Ord. No. 975, 9-10-2013]
Chapter 13
PAWNBROKERS
(5) By December 6, 2012, communicate to all existing employees and
to all prospective employees upon their application for employment
that smoking is prohibited in that place.
(6) For places under his or her control, direct a person who is smoking
in violation of this section to extinguish the product being smoked.
If the person does not stop smoking, the owner, operator, manager,
or employee shall refuse service and shall immediately ask the
person to leave the premises. If the person in violation refuses to
leave the premises, the owner, operator, manager, or employee
shall immediately report the violation to an enforcement agency
identified in this section. The refusal of the person to stop smoking
or leave the premises in response to requests made under this
section by an owner, operator, manager, or employee shall not
constitute a violation of the section by the owner, operator,
manager or employee.
(1) An individual who smokes in an area in which smoking is prohibited
under N.D.C.C. § 23-12-10 is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine
not exceeding $50.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection 5 of N.D.C.C. § 23-12-10, an
owner or other person with general supervisory responsibility over a
public place or place of employment who fails to comply with N.D.C.C.
§ 23-12-10 is guilty of an infraction, subject to a fine not to exceed $100
for the first violation, to a fine not to exceed $200 for a second violation
within one year, and a fine not to exceed $500 for each additional
violation within one year of the preceding violation.
(3) In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this
section by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise
controls a public place or place of employment may result in the
suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person
for the premises on which the violation occurred.
(4) Violations of this section are declared to be a public nuisance that may
be abated by restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or
other means provided by law.
(5) Each day on which a violation of this section occurs shall be considered
a separate and distinct violation.
§ 12-80.5 WILLISTON CODE § 13-1
AO:460
§ 13-1. Purpose and definitions. [Ord. No. 631, 5-22-1984; Ord. No.
1013, 1-27-2015]
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate pawnbrokers in order to deter
attempts to dispose of stolen property, to aid in the apprehension of thieves
or receivers of stolen property, and to protect the general public.
Additionally, in achieving this purpose of helping the Williston Police
Department to better regulate current and future pawn businesses and
other dealers, and to improve identification of criminal activities through
the timely collection and sharing of transaction information, this chapter
also implements and establishes the required use of a computerized
reporting system or program as designated by the Williston Chief of Police.
For the purpose of this chapter, a pawnbroker is any person who loans
money on deposit or pledge of personal property or who deals in the
purchase of tangible personal property, on condition of selling the property
back again at a stipulated price or who loans money secured by tangible
personal property, by taking possession of the property or any part thereof
so mortgaged or, who in combination with the above practice, buys used
property for the purpose of sale.
§ 13-2. License required. [Ord. No. 631, 5-22-1984]
No person shall carry on or engage in the business of a pawnbroker in the
city without first having obtained a license from the city to do so.
§ 13-3. License fees. [Ord. No. 631, 5-22-1984]
Every pawnbroker, before commencing business, shall pay into the city
treasury the required license fee which shall be established by resolution of
the board of city commissioners.
§ 13-4. Bonds. [Ord. No. 631, 5-22-1984; Ord. No. 665, 3-25-1986]
Before the issuance of a license by the city auditor to any person as a
pawnbroker, the person applying for said license shall execute a bond to the
city in the amount of $10,000 with sufficient sureties, condition that said
applicant will, in every way, conform with the requirements set forth by the
city.
§ 13-5. Suspension or revocation of licenses. [Ord. No. 631,
5-22-1984]
(a) Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked, cancelled or
suspended at any time by the board of city commissioners for any cause
deemed by the board to be sufficient cause and justified by reason of
public health and public morals. Such termination shall be subject only
to review by the courts of the state. When any license is revoked or the
licensee voluntarily ceases his business, no portion of the license fee
§ 13-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-5
AO:461
§ 13-6. Accurate records required. [Ord. No. 631, 5-22-1984; Ord.
No. 1013, 1-27-2015]
At the time of any reportable transaction other than renewals, extensions,
or redemptions, every licensee must immediately record in English the
following information by using ink or other indelible medium on forms or
in a computerized record approved by the chief of police. Such record shall
specifically include:
previously paid shall be returned to the licensee or to anyone claiming
under or through him.
(b) Any person having information that a pawnbroker has violated any
provisions of this chapter may file with the city attorney an affidavit
specifically setting forth such violation. Upon receipt of such affidavit,
the city attorney shall cause the matter to be set for hearing not later
than the next regular meeting of the board of city commissioners. A
copy of the affidavit and notice of hearing shall be mailed to the licensee
by registered or certified mail not less than five days before such
hearing, and in the event the date of receipt of such affidavit does not
permit said required five days' notice, then such hearing before the
board of city commissioners will be held at its next following regular
meeting or a special meeting called by the board.
(a) A complete and accurate description of each item including, but not
limited to, any trademark, identification number, serial number, model
number, brand name, or other identifying mark on such an item;
(b) A digital photograph of any item which is pawned or purchased as well
as digital photograph of the person pawning the item to the attached to
the transaction record submitted to the computerized reporting system
or program designated by the Williston Chief of Police;
(c) The purchase price, amount of money loaned upon, or pledged;
(d) The maturity date of the transaction and the amount due, including
monthly and annual interest rates and all pawn fees and charges;
(e) The date, time, and place the item of property was received by the
licensee, and the unique alpha and/or numeric transaction identifier
that distinguishes it from all other transactions in the licensee's
records;
(f) Full name, current residential address, and phone number, date of birth
and accurate description of the person from whom the item of the
property was received including sex, height, weight, race, color of eyes,
and color of hair;
(g) The identification number and state of issue of a current government
photo driver's license or state photo identification card.
(h) The signature of the person identified in the transaction.
§ 13-5 WILLISTON CODE § 13-6
AO:462
§ 13-7. Daily reports to the Williston Police Department. [Ord. No.
631, 5-22-1984; Ord. No. 1013, 1-27-2015]
Licensees must submit every reportable transaction to the Williston Police
Department daily in the following manner:
§ 13-7.1. Pawn tickets; pawned property to be held for specified
periods. [Ord. No. 1013, 1-27-2015]
(i) Renewals, extensions, and redemptions. For renewals, extensions, and
redemption, the licensee shall provide the original alpha and/or
numeric transaction identifier, the date of the current transaction, and
the type of transaction.
(j) Inspection of records. Transaction records must at all reasonable times
be open to inspection by the Williston Police Department during the
licensee's business hours. Data entries shall be retained for at least
three years from the transaction date.
(a) Licensees must provide to the Williston Police Department all
information required in Section 13-6(a)-(j), and any other required
information, by transferring the data from the licensee's computer to
the computerized reporting system or program designated by the
Williston Chief of Police.
(b) All required records must be transmitted accurately and completely
each day in accordance with the standards and procedures established
by the computerized reporting system or program designated by the
Williston Chief of Police.
(c) If a licensee is unable to successfully transfer the required information
to the computerized reporting system or program designated by the
Williston Chief of Police, the licensee must provide the Williston Police
Department printed copies of all reportable transactions, by 12:00 p.m.
the next business day. The licensee must make all reasonable efforts to
correct the problem as soon as possible.
(d) Regardless of the cause or origin of any technical problems that
prevented the licensee from uploading their reportable transactions to
the computerized reporting system or program designated by the
Williston Chief of Police, upon correction of the problem(s), the licensee
shall upload every reportable transaction from every business day since
the technical problem(s) existed.
(e) No person shall knowingly make or enter any false or unintelligible
entry or record, or make any entry or record which he or she has reason
to believe is untrue, in the entries or records required to be kept by this
Chapter.
(a) At the time of receiving a pledge and upon the subsequent renewal of a
loan, a pawnbroker shall deliver to the pledge or the pledge's agent a
§ 13-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-7.1
AO:463
§ 13-8. Minors. [Ord. No. 631, 5-22-1984]
No person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker shall purchase or
receive any articles or thing of value from, or transact any business with a
minor, without the written consent of such minors parent or guardian.
pawn ticket, which pawn ticket shall be serially numbered, and which
shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the pawnbroker;
(2) A generic description of the pledge, with such particular details of
description noted whenever possible in order to distinguish the
items from others;
(3) The date and time of transaction; and
(4) The amount, duration, and terms of the loan.
(b) The pawnbroker may insert on the pawn ticket other terms, conditions,
or items of information that are not inconsistent with the provisions of
this division.
(c) The pawnbroker may not allow an item to be redeemed until the
passage of three working days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays, following the date when the reporting required by Section
13-7 is accomplished, except on a written release from the Williston
Chief of Police. For example, barring a release from the chief of police,
an item pledged on a Thursday and reported to the Williston Police
Department on the following Friday may not be redeemed until the next
Thursday.
(d) Every item of any kind or description which is taken by a pawnbroker as
a pledge and not redeemed shall be held by the pawnbroker for a
minimum period of 30 days before the pledge is foreclosed or enforced
and the item offered for sale.
(e) Any licensee who shall acquire any goods, other than as a pledge, shall
keep the goods in his possession until the passage of five working days,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays, following the day when the
reporting required by Section 13-7 is accomplished, except on written
release from the chief of police or his designee. Although the licensee is
required to keep possession of the property for a specified period of
time hereunder, he is free to sell the goods and to transfer whatever
title he might have to the goods to the purchaser, provided that he does
not surrender up possession of the goods during the required holding
period. Goods refer to one item or a group or set of related items
collectively, such as a set of silverware.
§ 13-7.1 WILLISTON CODE § 13-9
AO:464
§ 13-9. Penalty. [Ord. No. 631, 5-22-1984]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine or penalty as stated in Section 1-11 of this Code. The court shall
have the power to suspend said sentence and to revoke suspension thereof.
Each day any violation shall exist, shall constitute a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 13-10. Authority of the Williston Police Department. [Ord. No.
1013, 1-27-2015]
Chapter 14
PERSONNEL
(a) The Williston Chief of Police may order an:
(1) Investigative hold. Whenever a law enforcement official from any
agency notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be
sold or removed from the premises. The investigative hold shall be
confirmed in writing by the originating agency within 72 hours and
will remain in effect for 15 days from the date of initial notification,
or until the investigative order is canceled, or until an order to
hold/confiscate is issued whichever comes first.
(2) Order to hold. Whenever the chief of police, or the chief's designee,
notifies a licensee not to sell an item, the item must not be sold or
removed from the licensed premises until authorized to be removed
by the chief of police, or the chief's designee. The order to hold
shall expire 90 days from the date it is placed unless the chief of
police, or the chief's designee, determines the hold is still
necessary and notifies the licensee in writing.
(3) Order to confiscate. If an item is identified as stolen or as evidence
in a criminal case, the chief of police, or the chief's designee, may:
a. Physically confiscate and remove it from the shop, pursuant to
a written order from the chief of police or the chief's designee,
or
b. Place the item on hold or extend the hold as provided in
Subsection (b) of this section, and leave it in the premises.
(b) When an item is confiscated, the person doing so shall provide
identification upon request of the licensee, and shall provide to licensee
the name and phone number of the confiscating agency and
investigating officer, and the case number related to the confiscation.
When an order to hold/confiscate is no longer necessary, the chief of
police, or the chief's designee, shall so notify the licensee.
§ 13-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1
AO:465
§ 14-1. Rules and regulations. [Code 1957, § 16A.1; Ord. No. 489,
11-20-1973; Ord. No. 668, 4-10-1986]
The board of city commissioners shall have the sole authority to pass and
adopt rules and regulations concerning the organization, management, and
operation of all the departments of the city and the other agencies created
by it for the administration of the city's affairs.
§ 14-2. Employment procedure. [Code 1957, § 16A.2; Ord. No. 668,
4-10-1986]
The board of city commissioners shall, by resolution, adopt the personnel
policies and procedures for the employees of the city. The policies and
procedures shall control the conduct of all employees and may be modified
or amended from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners.
Chapter 15
PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
§ 14-1 WILLISTON CODE § 14-2
AO:466
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 15-1. through § 15-15. (Reserved)
§ 15-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-1
AO:467

ARTICLE II
Planning Commission
§ 15-16. Created. [Code 1957, § 2.9]
Pursuant to N.D.C.C. § 40-48-01 et seq., there is hereby created a body to
be known as the "Planning Commission of the City of Williston," referred to
in this article as the "planning commission."
§ 15-17. Composition — Generally. [Code 1957, § 2.10; Ord. No. 515,
§ 3, 1-13-1976]
The planning commission shall consist of 12 members: 10 from the city and
two appointed by the county commissioners of the county.
§ 15-18. Same — Members from county. [Ord. No. 515, § 3,
1-13-1976]
The two members of the planning commission appointed by the county
commissioners shall hold office, one for five years and the other for three
years, and thereafter such members shall hold office for a term of five years.
§ 15-19. Same — Members from city. [Code 1957, §§ 2.10, 2.11; Ord.
No. 515, 1-13-1976]
§ 15-20. Confirmation or rejection of appointees. [Code 1957,
§ 2.12]
(a) The president of the board of city commissioners shall appoint seven
members of the planning commission to be approved by such board,
who shall be residents of the city. There shall be appointed at the
expiration of the term of each member as aforesaid a member for a term
of five years.
(b) Three of the members, the executive officer (president of the board of
city commissioners), the city engineer and the city attorney, shall be ex
officio members and shall serve during and for their respective terms
for which they are elected or appointed.
(a) The president of the board of city commissioners shall submit to the
board of city commissioners, at the next meeting after making
appointments to the planning commission, the names of the persons
appointed and the length of their terms. The board of city
commissioners shall, by a majority vote, confirm or reject such
appointments.
(b) If such appointments or any of them are rejected, the president of the
board of city commissioners shall make other appointments for such
appointees as may be rejected, which appointments shall be approved
or rejected in like manner.
§ 15-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-21
AO:469
§ 15-21. Organization; meetings. [Code 1957, § 2.13]
The members of the planning commission appointed as provided in this
article shall take office immediately upon confirmation of their appointment
and qualifying, and shall organize and hold regular meetings in the City
Hall.
§ 15-22. Duties generally; compensation. [Code 1957, § 2.14]
The planning commission shall have such powers and perform such duties
as may now or hereafter be provided for by law. All members of the planning
commission shall serve as such without compensation and, when duly
authorized by the commission, may be allowed reasonable traveling
expenses incidental to attending planning conferences or meetings of
planning institutes or hearings upon pending planning legislation.
§ 15-23. Ex officio zoning commission. [Code 1957, § 2.15; Ord. No.
515, § 1, 1-13-1976]
The planning commission appointed under this article shall act ex officio as
a body to be known as the zoning commission of the city, to recommend
the boundaries of the various original zoning districts and appropriate
regulations to be enforced therein and make a preliminary report and hold
public hearings thereon before submitting its final report.
§ 15-24. Jurisdiction subject to board. [Ord. No. 515, § 4,
1-13-1976]
The planning commission shall exercise jurisdiction over the planning and
zoning of the entire city and the territory added by this article, subject only
to final action taken by the board of city commissioners.
§ 15-25. Extraterritorial jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 515, § 2, 1-13-1976]
The jurisdiction of the planning commission shall be extended up to one
mile in any direction from the present city limits as shown on the map
attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and made a
part thereof by reference, none of which is incorporated territory.
§ 15-26. through § 15-35. (Reserved)
§ 15-21 WILLISTON CODE § 15-26
AO:470
ARTICLE III
Interim Zoning District
§ 15-36. Preamble. [Ord. No. 564; Preamble, 1-27-1981; Ord. No.
1017, 5-26-2015]
The City of Williston's jurisdiction extends to all persons, places and
property within its boundaries and such extraterritorial jurisdiction as is
granted to it under the provisions of the law of the state, and it was
the decision of the Board of Commissioners for the City of Williston to
avail itself of the authority granted municipalities by Section 40-47-01.1,
N.D.C.C., and
In the year 2010 the City of Williston had a population of 14,716 according
to the last federal census, and
The City of Williston has a Planning and Zoning Commission also
empowered to act as and to be known as a Zoning Commission, and
The boundaries of the City of Williston have recently been expanded due to
property annexed into the City, and
The City of Williston duly notified the zoning board or boards of all political
subdivisions losing their partial zoning authority 14 days prior to the City's
adoption of this ordinance (Ordinance No. 1017) in accordance with
Subsection five of Section 40-47-01.1, N.D.C.C., in which a zoning transition
meeting was held and addressed and reviewed the existing zoning rules,
regulations and restrictions currently in place for the territory to be
extraterritorially zoned and to plan for an orderly transition, and
The Zoning Commission has submitted its recommendations to the Board
of City Commissioners in the form of a preliminary and final report after
holding public meetings thereon recommending the expansion of the City's
extraterritorial jurisdiction for exclusive jurisdiction as provided in
Subsection 1(a)(2) of Section 40-47-01.1, N.D.C.C., and
The land to be zoned and controlled by the City of Williston is a large area
where extensive planning is required so development within the area will
be done to maximum potential, and planning of this magnitude necessitates
intensive study of long duration before final zoning regulations can be
imposed, and
It is the intent of the City Commission that this interim zone classification
be in all respects a zone classification no less than the other classifications
heretofore enacted by this body within the Ordinance No. 613, also known
as Planning and Zoning Ordinance, with all amendments thereto.
§ 15-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-37
AO:471
§ 15-37. Extend the area covered by the zoning regulations. [Ord.
No. 564, § 1, 1-27-1981; Ord. No. 1017, 5-26-2015]
The City of Williston hereby extends the application of its zoning regulations
to include all of the following described in Williams County, North Dakota,
more particularly described in the attached Exhibit A.26
§ 15-38. Territorial limit of interim zoning established. [Ord. No.
564, § 2, 1-27-1981]
The regulations set forth in this article or set forth elsewhere in the zoning
ordinances when referred to in this article, are the regulations in the
interim zone district within the territory embraced by a one mile extension
of the boundaries to the city.
§ 15-39. Use regulations. [Ord. No. 564, § 3, 1-27-1981]
§ 15-40. Effect of other ordinances. [Ord. No. 564, § 4, 1-27-1981]
All of the ordinances pertaining to the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy,
equipment, use, height area and maintenance of buildings or structures
within the city shall apply to the interim zone district and shall be enforced
within the interim zone district in the same manner as it is enforced in the
city.
(a) A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes:
(1) Agricultural buildings including farm dwellings, but not including
any business that would add to the value of the agricultural product
by any processing or feeding operation, other than that which is a
necessary accessory use, providing that the accessory use remain
secondary to normal agricultural activities.
(2) Parks, playgrounds, recreation areas and facilities, community
centers.
(3) Public school, elementary or high or a private school having a
curriculum the same as ordinarily given in a public school.
(4) Country club or golf courses, except miniature courses or practice
driving tees operated for commercial purposes.
(5) Churches, or other places of worship or Sunday School.
(6) Sale of nursery and greenhouse products.
(7) Riding academies and public stables, providing that storage of
manure shall not be permitted nearer than 150 feet to any lot line.
26.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the City offices.
§ 15-37 WILLISTON CODE § 15-41
AO:472
§ 15-41. Administration. [Ord. No. 564, § 5, 1-27-1981]
The building inspector shall administer and enforce this article, including
the receiving of applications, the inspection of premises and the issuing of
all permits. No permit shall be issued by him except where the provisions of
this article have been complied with.
§ 15-41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-41
AO:473

ARTICLE IV
Emergency Temporary Homeless Shelter
§ 15-42. Purpose - permit - inspections - Information requested.
[Ord. No. 985-A, 1-14-2014]
(a) Purpose. The Board of City Commissioners of the City of Williston
recognizes and finds that it is in the best interests of the public health,
safety, and general welfare to provide for emergency temporary
homeless shelter for transient or homeless individuals within the
community under the terms provided by this article.
(b) Permit required. No person or entity shall operate an emergency
temporary shelter within the Williston City limits without a permit as
provided for under this article.
Any person or group or persons or entity may apply to the City for
an emergency temporary homeless shelter permit under the terms
provided in this article.
Such permit shall entitle the grantee to certain uses of its property that
would otherwise not conform to the City's zoning code requirements.
The Board of City Commissioners shall issue such permit by Resolution,
following a public hearing as required by North Dakota law, and may
attach to the emergency temporary homeless shelter permit such
reasonable conditions as they may deem necessary and appropriate, in
order to ensure the protection of the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(c) Permit application. Unless otherwise determined by the Board of City
Commissioners, the applicant shall, as part of the application process,
provide the City with at least the following information:
(1) The physical structure in which the emergency temporary
homeless shelter will be operated.
(2) A copy of the dimensioned floor plans of the physical structure in
which the emergency temporary homeless shelter will be operated,
with the location of the room or rooms to be used during the
emergency temporary homeless shelter's operation clearly marked.
(3) Proof of fire and liability insurance for the physical structure in
which the emergency temporary homeless shelter well be
operated.
(4) Identity of at least one emergency temporary homeless shelter site
coordinator for each physical structure in which the emergency
temporary homeless shelter will be operated.
(5) Identity of an overall project coordinator, to act as a primary
contact, for applications with multiple proposed physical locations
§ 15-42 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-42
AO:475
in which the emergency temporary homeless shelter will be
operated.
(6) A manual of rules and regulations, acceptable to the City Planner or
his designee, for operation of the emergency temporary homeless
shelter at each physical structure in which the emergency
temporary homeless shelter will be operated. Each manual should
contain the following information, including, but not limited to:
a. Site coordinator manual:
1. Site layout plan: Items to be addressed here include
Check-in area, hospitality area, sleeping area, emergency
supplies, and volunteer space;
2. Security of the site: How this will operate;
3. Fire safety: A safety plan addressed in this section;
4. Sanitation: Facility hygiene plan;
5. Personal belongings: Policy;
6. Transition between the emergency temporary homeless
shelter locations: Description of process here;
7. Staffing volunteers: Description of the volunteer shifts will
be conducted (shift volunteers, shift times, recruiting and
training volunteers etc.);
8. General policies: Alcohol/drugs, smoking, media, special
concerns, site supplies, physical plant, monitor/reports.
b. Volunteer manual.
1. Individual site coordinators;
2. Location volunteers: Description of shift actions and
activities;
3. Security of site: Description of policy and procedures for
site security;
4. Fire safety: Description of policy and procedure;
5. Nourishment: Description of policy;
6. Sleeping area: Procedures for preparing the sleeping area;
7. Personal belongings: Policy;
8. Medical problems: Policy and procedures;
9. Emergencies: Policies and procedures;
10. Injuries: Policy and procedures;
§ 15-42 WILLISTON CODE § 15-42
AO:476
11. Alcohol/drugs/smoking: Policy and procedures;
12. Weapons: Policy and procedures.
Any procedural amendments would need to be made in
writing at the time of permit application to be considered
by the City Commission at the public hearing.
(d) Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application materials, the City
shall set the matter for a public hearing before the Williston Board of
City Commissioners.
(e) Notification and hearing. At least 10 days prior to the requested public
hearing, the emergency temporary homeless shelter project
coordinator identified in the application materials shall notify, in
writing, all property owners within 300 feet of the proposed location of
the emergency temporary homeless shelter and provide verification to
the City of the required notification.
(1) The required notification must include, at a minimum:
a. The location of the proposed emergency temporary homeless
shelter;
b. The date, time, and place of the public hearing; and
c. At the public hearing, the Board of City Commissioners will
take public comment from any interested person(s).
(2) Following the public hearing, the Williston Board of City
Commissioners may grant the emergency temporary homeless
shelter permit if it finds that:
a. The applicant has met all requirements of the Williston City
Code regarding operation of an emergency temporary
homeless shelter;
b. The applicant appears to be a responsible and appropriate
operator of an emergency temporary homeless shelter; and
c. Granting such emergency temporary homeless shelter permit
is in the best interests of the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the Williston community.
(f) Permit length. Any emergency temporary homeless shelter permit
issued to an applicant by the Williston Board of Commissioners shall be
valid from November 1 to April 1. A two week extension may be
requested upon writing to the Planning Department based on the
occurrence of persisting extreme dangerous cold weather in a given
year.
Applicants must reapply for a new emergency temporary homeless
shelter permit each year. Reapplication in subsequent years shall be
made to the Planning Department and shall be reviewed and approved
§ 15-42 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-42
AO:477
upon finding of good standing with ordinance requirements and other
agency policies.
(g) Inspections. Prior to beginning operations as an emergency temporary
homeless shelter, each proposed emergency temporary homeless
shelter location or facility shall be inspected by the City's Building
Department and Fire Department. The inspectors shall verify whether
the facility is in compliance with Williston City Code.
Any Code violations must be corrected prior to beginning operations as
an emergency temporary homeless shelter. In the event an inspection
returns Code violations, prior to the beginning of the facility's
operations as an emergency temporary homeless shelter, an inspector
from the Building Department and/or Fire Department must inspect
and sign off on verification of Code compliance for the violating facility.
If, at any time, an emergency temporary homeless shelter facility is
determined to be not in compliance with the City Code, or with any
other conditions of approval attached by the Board of City
Commissioners, the City shall be entitled to:
(1) Require immediate compliance with Williston City Code or other
conditions of approval; or
(2) Revoke the emergency temporary homeless shelter permit.
(h) Requested information. The emergency temporary homeless shelter
coordinator shall provide a summary of the activities of the emergency
temporary homeless shelter at such times as may be requested or
required by the City.
§ 15-42 WILLISTON CODE § 15-42
AO:478
Chapter 16
POLICE
§ 15-42 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-42
AO:479

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 16-1. through § 16-15. (Reserved)
§ 16-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1
AO:481

ARTICLE II
Traffic Division
§ 16-16. Created. [Ord. No. 521, § 2-1, 7-27-1976]
There is hereby established in the police department of this city a traffic
division to be under the control of an officer of police appointed by and
directly responsible to the chief of police.
§ 16-17. Obedience generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 3-2, 7-27-1976]
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform
any act required by the provisions of this article.
§ 16-18. Duty generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 2-2, 7-27-1976]
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered
by other members of the police department, to enforce the street traffic
regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws, to make arrests for
traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the traffic
engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic
laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to
carry out those duties specially imposed upon said division by this chapter
and the traffic ordinances of this city.
§ 16-19. Annual report. [Ord. No. 521, § 2-8, 7-27-1976]
§ 16-20. Records — Generally. [Ord. No. 521, § 2-7, 7-27-1976]
(a) The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report, which shall
be filed with the mayor. Such report shall contain information on traffic
matters in this city as follows:
(1) The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons billed, the
number of persons injured and other pertinent traffic accident
data;
(2) The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the police;
(3) The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic
safety activities.
(a) The police department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a
suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions
and complaints reported for each driver which shall be filed
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.
(b) Said division shall study the cases of all such drivers charged with
frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent
traffic accidents or any serious accident, and report such information to
the state highway department or other appropriate state agencies.
§ 16-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-20
AO:483
§ 16-21. Same — Traffic violations. [Ord. No. 521, § 2-3, 7-27-1976]
§ 16-22. Accidents — Investigation. [Ord. No. 521, § 2-4, 7-27-1976]
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of
the department and to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist
in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing
or contributing to such accidents.
§ 16-23. Same — Reports. [Ord. No. 521, § 2-6, 7-27-1976]
The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident
reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and
information of the traffic engineer.
§ 16-24. Same — Studies. [Ord. No. 521, § 2-5, 7-27-1976]
Whenever traffic accidents at any particular location become numerous,
the traffic division shall cooperate with the traffic engineer in conducting
studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures.
§ 16-25. Key lock box system. [Ord. No. 1097, 1-9-2019]
(c) Such records shall accumulate during at least a five-year period and
from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least
the most recent: five-year period.
(a) The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record
of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state
vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a
record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record
shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of
each. Said record shall accumulate during at least a five-year period
and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at
least the most recent five-year period.
(b) All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be
serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be
kept available to the public showing the disposal of such forms.
(1) The City of Williston Police Department and any other emergency
services personnel are herein entitled to utilize the key lock system
required through the International Fire Code as adopted by the City of
Williston in situations involving emergency and public safety
considerations.
(2) The City of Williston Police Department will follow the rules and
regulations for the requirements, placement and maintenance of the
Key Lock Box units put in place by the International Fire Code and will
adopt their own policy for use of the Key Lock Box system.
§ 16-20 WILLISTON CODE § 16-25
AO:484
Chapter 17
SEWERS
§ 16-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-25
AO:485

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 17-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 595, A I, §§ 1 — 28, 5-11-1982]
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms
used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm or surface water.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
FLOATABLE OIL — Is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
HEARING BOARD — That board appointed according to the provisions of
Article VIII.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes, trade,
or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
MAY — Is permissive (see "shall," below).
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of
surface or groundwater.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
PH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogenion concentration.
The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of
solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion
concentration of 10-7.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
§ 17-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1
AO:487
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency
or public utility.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that
are not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE — Is the spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater," as defined below.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL — Is mandatory (see "may," above).
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER — A drain or sewer for conveying water,
groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from every source.
SUPERINTENDENT — The superintendent of wastewater facilities and/or
of wastewater treatment works and/or of water pollution control of the city
or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of, or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids, and
that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as
nonfilterable residue.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Is water of quality equal to or better than the
effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving
water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the
sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.
§ 17-1 WILLISTON CODE § 17-1
AO:488
Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or
"wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant."
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 17-2. through § 17-5. (Reserved)
§ 17-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-2
AO:489

ARTICLE II
Use of Public Sewers Required
§ 17-6. Depositing garbage or waste in unsanitary manner
prohibited. [Ord. No. 595, A II, § 1, 5-11-1982]
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
City of Williston, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human
or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
§ 17-7. Discharging polluted waters into natural outlet prohibited.
[Ord. No. 595, A II, § 2, 5-11-1982]
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of
Williston or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage or
other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
§ 17-8. Construction or maintenance of privies, cesspools, etc.
prohibited. [Ord. No. 595, A II, § 3, 5-11-1982]
Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain
any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of wastewater.
§ 17-9. Connections required. [Ord. No. 595, A II, § 4, 5-11-1982]
The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city,
is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 60 days after date
of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet
(61 meters) of the property line.
§ 17-10. through § 17-15. (Reserved)
§ 17-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-10
AO:491

ARTICLE III
Private Wastewater Disposal System
§ 17-16. When connections to private system lawful. [Ord. No. 595,
A III, § 1, 5-11-1982]
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of Section 17-9, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this
article.
§ 17-17. Permit required prior to construction of system;
application fee. [Ord. No. 595, A III, § 2, 5-11-1982]
Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city
commission. The application for such permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city
commission. A permit and inspection fee of $25 shall be paid to the city at
the time the application is filed.
§ 17-18. Inspection of system. [Ord. No. 595, A III, § 3, 5-11-1982]
A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become
effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city
commission. The city commission shall be allowed to inspect the work at any
stage of construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall
notify the city commission when the work is ready for final inspection, and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made
within 24 hours of the receipt of notice by the city commission.
§ 17-19. Construction requirements. [Ord. No. 595, A III, § 4,
5-11-1982]
The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations and/or regulations of the
North Dakota State Department of Health. No permit shall be issued for any
private wastewater disposal system not meeting these conditions. No septic
tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet or to
the ground surface.
§ 17-20. Connection to public sewer, when required. [Ord. No. 595,
A III, § 5, 5-11-1982]
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in Section 17-9, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in
compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with suitable material.
§ 17-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-21
AO:493
§ 17-21. Disposal of sludge or solids. [Ord. No. 595, A III, § 6,
5-11-1982]
The owner shall operate and maintain the private waste-water disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. All
sludge or solids to be disposed of from a septic tank, cesspool or other
individual method of disposal shall be disposed of by a licensed septic tank
pumper in accordance with the North Dakota State Health Department
Regulations 23-19-01.
§ 17-22. Additional requirements of the health officer. [Ord. No.
595, A III, § 7, 5-11-1982]
No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the local health officer.
§ 17-23. through § 17-28. (Reserved)
§ 17-21 WILLISTON CODE § 17-23
AO:494
ARTICLE IV
Sanitary Sewers, Building Sewers and Connections
§ 17-29. Permit required. [Ord. No. 595, A IV, § 1, 5-11-1982]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the city commission.
§ 17-30. Building sewer permits; application fee. [Ord. No. 595, A
IV, § 2, 5-11-1982]
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential
and commercial service and (b) for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the city commission. A permit and
inspection fee of $12 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit
and $12 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at
the time the application is filed.
§ 17-31. Connection costs to be paid by owner; owner to indemnify
the city. [Ord. No. 595, A IV, § 3, 5-11-1982]
All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 17-32. Separate building sewer required for each building;
exceptions. [Ord. No. 595, A IV, § 4, 5-11-1982]
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and
will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or
resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
§ 17-33. Use of old building sewers. [Ord. No. 595, A IV, § 5,
5-11-1982]
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings, only
when they are found, on examination and test by the city commission, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 17-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-34
AO:495
§ 17-34. Provisions of buildings and plumbing code to apply. [Ord.
No. 595, A IV, § 6, 5-11-1982]
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers
including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating,
placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of suitable code
provisions set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F.
Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 17-35. Elevation of building sewer. [Ord. No. 595, A IV, § 7,
5-11-1982]
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 17-36. Connection of roof downspouts and other runoff or
groundwater sources to building sewers. [Ord. No. 595, A IV, § 8,
5-11-1982]
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer, or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by
the Superintendent and the North Dakota State Department of Health.
§ 17-37. Requirements for connection of building sewer into the
public sewer. [Ord. No. 595, A IV, § 9, 5-11-1982]
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual on Practice No. 9.
All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by
proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials
must be approved by the city commission before installation.
§ 17-38. Inspection and testing upon notification by applicant. [Ord.
No. 595, A IV, § 10, 5-11-1982]
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city commission
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of
the city commission or its representative.
§ 17-34 WILLISTON CODE § 17-39
AO:496
§ 17-39. Excavations-Barricades and lights required; restoration
required. [Ord. No. 595, A IV, § 11, 5-11-1982]
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city.
§ 17-40. Illegal connections; prohibited discharges. [Ord. No. 937,
§§ 1 — 6, 8-23-2011]
(a) Discharge prohibited. Except as otherwise expressly authorized in this
section, no ponds, water foundations, water from any roof, surface,
groundwater sump pump, swimming pool, or other natural
precipitation shall be discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
Dwellings and other buildings and structures which require, because of
infiltration of water into basements, crawl spaces, and the like, a sump
pump discharge system shall have a permanently installed discharge
line which shall not at any time discharge water into a sanitary sewer
system. A permanent installation shall be one which provides for year
round discharge capability to either the outside of the dwelling,
building, or structure, or is connected to a storm sewer or discharge
through the curb and gutter to the street. Within the home or business,
the sump pump discharge pipe shall consist of a rigid discharge line,
without valves or quick connections, that would alter the path of
discharge. However, if the line is directly connected to a storm sewer
line or catch basin a check valve and an air gap are required. Property
owners are allowed to discharge directly into the sanitary sewer
between October 1 and March 31 when reduced flows are present in
the sanitary sewer collection system, if necessary.
(b) Inspections. Property owners shall allow an employee of the city or a
designated representative of the city to inspect the buildings to confirm
that there is no sump pump or other prohibited discharge into the
sanitary sewer system. The city may periodically reinspect any building
or premises to determine compliance with the requirements of this
section, as to installation of all sump pumps.
(c) Removal of connections. Any property owner who previously made any
connection or installation in violation of this section shall immediately
remove such connection or correct such an installation. If not removed
or corrected within 30 days after notice of the violation has been
delivered personally or by certified mail to the owner, the city may
impose a surcharge in the amount provided in Subsection (e) of this
section. Such a surcharge may also be imposed upon any property
owner, after a thirty-calendar day notice has been delivered, and if the
owner refuses to allow their property to be inspected. The owner of a
building or premises found to be not in conformance with this section
during periodic reinspections may be subjected to a surcharge as
provided in Subsection (e) of this section.
§ 17-39 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-40
AO:497
§ 17-41. through § 17-45. (Reserved)
(d) Foundation drain tile.
(1) Future homes and businesses. Groundwater from foundation drain
tile for future homes and businesses shall not discharge to the
sanitary sewer system. The groundwater shall flow through the tile
and drain to a sump basket and shall then be pumped and
discharged to the exterior of the structure with the use of a sump
pump.
(2) Existing homes and businesses. Some existing homes and
businesses may have been constructed with groundwater from
foundation drain tile discharging to the sanitary sewer. If the
connection of the foundation drain tile to the sanitary sewer pipe is
on the exterior of the home, the connection will be considered
grandfathered and disconnection will not be required. If the
connection of the foundation drain tile to the sanitary sewer pipe
system is on the interior of the home or business, the connection is
considered "not in compliance" and the owner is required to
correct the improper connection. Any connection considered "not
in compliance" shall abide by the subsections contained in this
section.
(e) Surcharge. A surcharge of $100 per month is hereby imposed on every
sewer bill to property owners for the following conditions:
(1) Not in compliance with this section.
(2) Refusal of property inspection.
(f) Nonpayment of surcharge. If the surcharge is not received by the City
of Williston, the city reserves the right to assess the property owner the
unpaid balance.
§ 17-40 WILLISTON CODE § 17-41
AO:498
ARTICLE V
Use of the Public Sewers
§ 17-46. Approval of city commission and state department of
health required. [Ord. No. 595, A V, § 1, 5-11-1982]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters
such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, or cooling water to any building drain or sewer which in turn
is connected directly or indirectly to the sanitary sewer unless such
connection is approved by the city commission and the North Dakota State
Department of Health.
§ 17-47. Stormwater. [Ord. No. 595, A V, § 2, 5-11-1982]
Stormwater other than that exempted under Section 17-46 and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically
designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the city commission and the North Dakota State Department of
Health.
§ 17-48. Prohibited discharges. [Ord. No. 595, AV, § 3, 5-11-1982]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described water or wastes to any public sewers:
(a) Any gasoline, benzene, naptha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
(b) Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to
contaminate the sludge of any municipal system, to injure or interfere
with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to human or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or have an
adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharges from the
treatment works.
(c) Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the wastewaterworks.
(d) Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but not limited
to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk
containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
§ 17-46 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-49
AO:499
§ 17-49. Limitations and restrictions on discharges to the sanitary
sewer. [Ord. No. 595, A V, § 4, 5-11-1982]
The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be
limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities
which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or
equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or
will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. The city commission may set limitations lower than the limitations
established in the regulations below if in its opinion such more severe
limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming its
opinion as to the acceptability, the city commission will give consideration
to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and
velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the
wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater
treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater
treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions
on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the
sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city
commission are as follows:
(a) Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.).
(b) Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum
oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin.
(c) Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat, or
grease.
(d) Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see Section 17-1,
"Properly shredded garbage"). Garbage grinders may be connected to
sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals,
catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates
from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption
on the premises or when served by caterers.
(e) Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such
material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater
treatment works exceeds the limits established by the city commission
for such materials.
(f) Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding
limits which may be established by the city commission.
(g) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as
may exceed limits established by the city commission in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
(h) Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as
defined herein.
§ 17-49 WILLISTON CODE § 17-49
AO:500
§ 17-50. Additional requirements for certain discharges. [Ord. No.
595, A V, § 5, 5-11-1982]
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged
to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the
characteristics enumerated in Section 17-49, and which in the judgment
of the city commission may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater
facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city commission
may:
§ 17-51. Interceptors. [Ord. No. 595, A V, § 6, 5-11-1982]
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the city commission, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified
in Section 17-49 (c), or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private
living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the North Dakota Plumbing Code and shall be located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the
maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the
proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captivated
material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal
(i) Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the
wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving
waters.
(j) Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in
the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended
solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
(a) Reject the wastes;
(b) Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the
public sewers;
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
(d) Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by sewer charges under the provisions of Section
17-47 of this article.
If the city commission permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment
shall be subject to the review and approval of the city commission and
the North Dakota State Department of Health.
§ 17-49 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-51
AO:501
which are subject to review by the city commission. Any removal and
having of the collected materials not performed by owner personnel must
be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms.
§ 17-52. Pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities. [Ord. No. 595, A
V, § 7, 5-11-1982]
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required by
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 17-53. Additional requirements for industrial wastes. [Ord. No.
595, A V, § 8, 5-11-1982]
When required by the city commission, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of
the wastes. Such structures, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the city commission. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his
expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at
all times.
§ 17-54. Information required from user. [Ord. No. 595, A V, § 9,
5-11-1982]
The city commission may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These
requirements may include:
(a) Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
(b) Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
(c) Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
(d) Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
(e) A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
(f) Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
(g) Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
§ 17-51 WILLISTON CODE § 17-55
AO:502
§ 17-55. Reference for measurements, tests and analyses. [Ord. No.
595, A V, § 10, 5-11-1982]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public
Health Association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and
frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis by the city
commission.
§ 17-56. City may enter into special agreement with industrial
concerns. [Ord. No. 595, A V, § 11, 5-11-1982]
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may
be accepted by the city for treatment.
§ 17-57. through § 17-61. (Reserved)
§ 17-55 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-57
AO:503

ARTICLE VI
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
§ 17-62. Authority to enter premises for inspections. [Ord. No. 595,
A VI, § 1, 5-11-1982]
The city commission and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter
all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 17-63. Authority to request information. [Ord. No. 595, A VI, § 2,
5-11-1982]
The city commission or other duly authorized employees are authorized
to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection
system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information
in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
§ 17-64. Company liability limited when city employee on premises.
[Ord. No. 595, A VI, § 3, 5-11-1982]
While performing the necessary work in private properties referred to in
Section 17-62 above, the city commission or duly authorized employees of
the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established
by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death
to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against
loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims
and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the
company growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except such
as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe
conditions as required in Section 17-53.
§ 17-65. Authority to enter easement areas. [Ord. No. 595, A VI, § 4,
5-11-1982]
The city commission and other duly authorized employees of the city
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent
work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full accordance with the
terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property
involved.
§ 17-66. through § 17-71. (Reserved)
§ 17-62 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-66
AO:505

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 17-72. Damaging or tampering with wastewater facilities; penalty.
[Ord. No. 595, A VII, § 1, 5-11-1982]
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment
which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
§ 17-73. through § 17-77. (Reserved)
§ 17-72 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-73
AO:507

ARTICLE VIII
Hearing Board
§ 17-78. Hearing board established. [Ord. No. 595, A VIII, § 1,
5-11-1982]
A hearing board, consisting of three members, shall be selected as needed
for arbitration of differences between the city commission and sewer users
on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this
chapter by the city commission.
§ 17-79. Membership; representation. [Ord. No. 595, A VIII, § 2,
5-11-1982]
One member of the board shall be selected to represent the city, one
member shall be selected to represent the sewer user involved in the
arbitration and the third member shall be acceptable to both parties and
shall serve as the chairman in the arbitration.
§ 17-80. through § 17-85. (Reserved)
§ 17-78 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-80
AO:509

ARTICLE IX
Violations
§ 17-86. Written notice of violations; time limit to abate. [Ord. No.
595, A IX, § 1, 5-11-1982]
Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except Article
VII, shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations.
§ 17-87. Penalty for continued violations. [Ord. No. 595, A IX, § 2,
5-11-1982]
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in Section 17-86 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction
thereof shall be fined as stated in Section 1-11 of this Code.
§ 17-88. Violators liable for city expenses created by violation. [Ord.
No. 595, A IX, § 3, 5-11-1982]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by
reason of such violation.
§ 17-89. through § 17-92. (Reserved)
§ 17-86 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-89
AO:511

ARTICLE X
Fees
§ 17-93. Subsequent fee for changes. [Ord. No. 595, A XII, § 1,
5-11-1982]
The board of city commissioners shall be authorized to subsequently amend
the amounts charged in this chapter for fees, by a resolution duly adopted,
referring to this chapter, should the need arise.
§ 17-94. Sewer availability charge. [Ord. No. 872, § 1, 1-13-2004]
Any party owning property that is assessable property as defined by Section
17-97 herein desiring to connect to the City of Williston, North Dakota,
Municipal Sanitary Sewer System shall be subject to a sewer availability
charge based on water service line size.
§ 17-95. Connection fee. [Ord. No. 872, § 2, 1-13-2004]
For the purpose of this section, the following sewer availability fees apply
based on the size of the water line that services the property from the public
water main. These fees may be changed by resolution approved by the city
commission.
Service Water Line Size Connection Fee
1" and less $200
2" $800
3" $1,800
4" $3,200
6" and up $7,000
§ 17-96. Administration. [Ord. No. 872, § 3, 1-13-2004]
A request for sewer availability charge determination shall be made prior to
the issuance of the building permit covering the subject property.
§ 17-97. Assessable property. [Ord. No. 872, § 4, 1-13-2004]
The sewer availability charge shall be assessed against all property that has
not previously been assessed for any trunk line sewer. See map attached
hereto and by this reference made a part hereof.27
27.Editor's Note: The map referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this chapter
as Exhibit A.
§ 17-93 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-97.1
AO:513
§ 17-97.1. Payment. [Ord. No. 872, § 5, 1-13-2004]
The sewer availability charge referred to herein shall be paid in full to the
City of Williston before the City of Williston plumbing permit or water meter
is issued.
§ 17-97.2. Funds. [Ord. No. 872, § 6, 1-13-2004]
All funds received in payment of such sewer availability charges shall be
deposited in the City of Williston Municipal Sewer Account for the purposes
and disbursed only in the manner provided by the laws of the State of North
Dakota pertaining to municipal utilities.
§ 17-97.3. Additional or replacement lines. [Ord. No. 872, § 7,
1-13-2004]
In the event a property seeks an additional or larger replacement water line,
the property shall be assessed a connection fee according to the size of the
additional or replacement line with a credit given for the fee previously paid
up to the amount of the connection fee of the additional or replacement line.
§ 17-97.4. Definitions and penalties. [Ord. No. 947, 4-10-2007]
The term "expansion sewer hookup" as used in this article is defined to
mean all sewer service lines or sewer laterals that benefit or will benefit
from west and north sewer lines installed at city expense from 2011 and
2012 install and generally shown on attached map exhibit. The map referred
to herein may be found on file in the city offices.
§ 17-97.5. Fee allowed. [Ord. No. 947, 4-10-2007]
The City of Williston shall be allowed to charge a fee for an expansion sewer
hookup as defined above. This fee shall be $140 per 10,000 square feet of
expansion area and shall be in addition to the City of Williston Ordinance
Number 872. (See Section 17-95).
§ 17-97.1 WILLISTON CODE § 17-97.5
AO:514
ARTICLE XI
Determination of Equitable Service Charges28
§ 17-98. Purpose. [Ord. No. 594, § 1, 5-11-1982]
The purpose of this article shall be to generate sufficient revenue to pay
all costs for the operation and maintenance of the complete wastewater
system. The costs shall be distributed to all users of the wastewater system
in proportion to each user's contribution to the total loading of the
treatment works. Factors such as strength (BOD and SS), volume and
delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included as the
basis for the user's contribution to ensure a proportional distribution of
operation and maintenance costs to each user (or user class).
§ 17-99. Determining the total annual costs of operation and
maintenance. [Ord. No. 594, § 2, 5-11-1982]
The city or its city engineer shall determine the total annual costs of
operation and maintenance of the wastewater system which are necessary
to maintain the capacity and performance, during the service life of the
treatment works, for which such works were designed and constructed.
The total annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include but need
not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance,
necessary modifications, power, sampling, laboratory tests and a reasonable
contingency fund.
§ 17-100. Determining each user's wastewater contribution
percentage. [Ord. No. 594, § 3, 5-11-1982]
The city or its city engineer shall determine each user's average daily
volume of wastewater which has been discharged to the wastewater system,
which shall then be divided by the average daily volume of all wastewater
discharged to the wastewater system, to determine each user's volume
contribution percentage. The amount used as the total average daily volume
of wastewater shall exclude infiltration and inflow. The city or its city
engineer shall determine each user's average daily poundage of five-day 20°
C. bio-chemical oxygen demand (DOB) which has been discharged by the
average daily poundage of all five-day BOD discharged to the wastewater
system to determine each user's BOD contribution percentage.
The city or its city engineer shall determine each user's average suspended
solids (SS) poundage which has been discharged to the wastewater system
which shall then be divided by the average daily poundage of all suspended
solids discharged to the wastewater system, to determine the user's
suspended solids contribution percentage. Each user volume contribution
percentage, BOD contribution percentage and suspended solids
contribution percentage shall be multiplied by the annual operation and
28.Editor's Note: Copies of Appendix A, B, and C referred to herein can be found on file in the
office of the city auditor.
§ 17-98 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-100
AO:515
maintenance costs for wastewater treatment of the total volume flow, of the
total five-day 20° C. BOD and of the suspended solids, respectively.
§ 17-101. Determining a surcharge system for users with excess
BOD and SS. [Ord. No. 594, § 4, 5-11-1982]
The City or its city engineer will determine the average suspended solids
(SS) and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) daily loadings for the average
residential user. The city or its city engineer will assess a surcharge rate
for all nonresidential users discharging wastes with BOD and SS strengths
greater than the average residential user. Such users will be assessed a
surcharge sufficient to cover the costs of treating such users' above-normal
strength wastes. Normal strength wastes are considered to be 200 p.p.m.
BOD and 250 p.p.m. SS. The surcharge rate structure for such abovenormal
strength waste dischargers is attached. (Appendix A, adopted herein
by reference.)
§ 17-102. Determining each user's wastewater service charge. [Ord.
No. 594, § 5, 5-11-1982]
Each nonresidential user's wastewater treatment cost contribution as
determined in sections 17-100 and 17-101 shall be added together to
determine such user's annual wastewater service charge. Residential users
may be considered to be one class of user and an equitable service charge
may be determined for each user based upon an estimate of the total
wastewater contribution of this class of user. The governing body may
classify industrial, commercial and other nonresidential establishments as
a residential user, provided that the wastes from these establishments are
equivalent to the wastes from the average residential user with respect to
volume, suspended solids and BOD. Each user's wastewater treatment cost
contribution will be assessed in accordance with the attached rate schedule.
(Appendix B, adopted herein by reference.)
§ 17-103. Payment of the user's wastewater service charge and
penalties. [Ord. No. 594, § 6, 5-11-1982]
The city shall submit an annual statement to the user for the user's annual
wastewater service charge or 1/12 of the user's annual wastewater service
charge may be included with the monthly water and/or wastewater utility
billing. The city shall add a penalty of 1 1/2% per month if the payment is
not received by the city within 15 days. Should any user fail to pay the user
wastewater service charge and penalty within three months of the due date,
the city may stop the wastewater service to the property.
§ 17-104. Review of each user's wastewater service charge. [Ord.
No. 594, § 7, 5-11-1982]
The city shall review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance, as
well as each user's wastewater contribution percentage not less often than
every two years and will revise the system as necessary to assure equity of
§ 17-100 WILLISTON CODE § 17-104
AO:516
the service charge system established herein and to assure that sufficient
funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater
treatment works. If a significant user, such as an industry, has completed
in-plant modifications which would change that user's wastewater
contribution percentage, the user can present at a regularly scheduled
meeting of the governing body, such factual information and the city shall
then determine if the user's wastewater contribution percentage is to be
changed. The city shall notify the user of its findings as soon as possible.
§ 17-105. Notification. [Ord. No. 594, § 8, 5-11-1982]
Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges which are attributable
to wastewater treatment services.
§ 17-106. Wastes prohibited from being discharged to the
wastewater treatment system. [Ord. No. 594, § 9, 5-11-1982]
The discharge of any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to contaminate the sludge of any municipal system or to injure
or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in or
have an adverse effect on the waters receiving any discharge from the
treatment is hereby prohibited. Article V of this chapter contains additional
requirements covering the use of the city's public sewers.
§ 17-107. Prohibition of clear water connections. [Ord. No. 594,
§ 10, 5-11-1982]
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater
to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 17-108. Proper design and construction of new sewers and
connections. [Ord. No. 594, § 11, 5-11-1982]
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers
and sewer connections, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing
of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable
rules and regulations to the city and the state. In the absence of code
provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set
forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of
Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 17-104 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-108
AO:517

ARTICLE XII
Article IV of this chapter contains additional requirements covering
the proper design and construction of the city's sanitary sewers,
building sewers and connections.
§ 17-109. Wastewater facilities replacement fund. [Ord. No. 594,
§ 12, 5-11-1982]
A reserve fund called the Wastewater Facilities Replacement Fund is hereby
established within the wastewater utility fund for the purpose of providing
sufficient funds to be expended for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories and appurtenances during the useful life (20 years) of the
wastewater treatment facilities necessary to maintain the capacity and
performance for which such facilities are designed and constructed.
(Appendix C, adopted herein by reference.)
§ 17-110. Subsequent rate changes. [Ord. No. 594, § 13, 5-11-1982]
The board of city commissioners shall be authorized to subsequently amend
by resolution the Surcharge Rate Structure for Above-Normal Strength
Wastes, the Rate Schedule, and the Wastewater Facilities Replacement
Fund Schedule, shown in Appendix A, B and C, respectively, of this chapter,
should the need arise.
§ 17-109 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-110
AO:519
Chapter 17.5
SHADE TREES
§ 17.5-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 567, § 1, 3-10-1981]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
ARBORIST — Is any person, firm or company which engages in tree
planting, pruning, fertilization, spraying, removal or other tree maintenance
activities for payment or other remuneration.
PARK — Includes all public parks.
PUBLIC PLACES — Includes all property owned by the city.
PUBLIC TREES — Are all shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter
growing on any street or in any public place or park.
TREE — Is any woody, perennial plant having a well-defined main stem with
a minimum diameter of one inch at 4 1/2 feet above ground level.
§ 17.5-2. Administration — Shade tree committee. [Ord. No. 567,
§ 2, 3-10-1981]
§ 17.5-3. Same — City forester. [Ord. No. 567, § 2, 3-10-1981]
(a) A shade tree committee shall be established. Its membership shall be
composed of:
(1) The street and sanitation commissioner,
(2) The city forester, and
(3) Six citizens of the city appointed by the board of city
commissioners.
Appointments made by the president of the board of city
commissioners shall be subject to confirmation by the majority of
the members of the city commission.
(b) The shade tree committee shall:
(1) Study the problems and determine the needs of the city in relation
to the planting, maintenance, and removal of public trees.
(2) Act as an advisory board to the city forester and other city officials.
(3) Aid in the dissemination of news and information regarding the
selection, planting, and maintenance of trees within the city.
(a) The position of city forester is created to be filled by appointment of the
city commission.
§ 17-110 WILLISTON CODE § 17.5-3
AO:520
§ 17.5-4. Same — Review and appeals. [Ord. No. 567, § 2,
3-10-1981]
The city commission shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the shade tree committee and the city forester. Any person
may appeal from any ruling or order of the shade tree committee or city
forester to the city commission who may hear the matter and make the final
decision.
§ 17.5-5. Protection of public trees. [Ord. No. 567, § 3, 3-10-1981]
§ 17.5-6. Licensing of arborists. [Ord. No. 567, § 4, 3-10-1981; Ord.
No. 949, 5-8-2012]
(b) The city forester shall:
(1) Regulate the planting, maintenance, and removal of public trees to
insure safety or to preserve the aesthetics of public places.
(2) Develop and amend as necessary the rules and regulations of the
arboricultural specifications and standards of practice of the city.
(3) Enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(a) No person shall intentionally damage, cut, or carve any public tree;
attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance to
any public tree; allow any gaseous liquid, or solid substance which is
harmful to such trees to come in contact with them; or set fire to or
permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat from the fire will
injure any portion of the tree.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or company to top any public
tree. Topping is the severe cutting back of limbs to large stubs within
the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the normal crown,
destroy the natural branching pattern, and disfigure the tree.
(c) No person shall remove any public tree without written permission
from the city forester.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with
the shade tree committee, city forester or any of their agents while
engaging in the planting, cultivation, mulching, pruning, spraying or
removing of any public trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized
in this chapter.
(a) Any person or firm in the business or occupation of planting, pruning,
treating or removing trees within the city must procure a license.
Before any license shall be issued, proof of liability insurance in the
amount of $1,000,000 shall be filed.
(b) A license fee of $100 shall be paid annually in advance; provided,
however, that no license shall be required of any public service
§ 17.5-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17.5-6
AO:521
§ 17.5-7. Penalty. [Ord. No. 567, § 4, 3-10-1981]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of Section
17.5-5 and 17.5-6 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100 or
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both such fine and
imprisonment.
§ 17.5-8. Public safety and protection of property. [Ord. No. 567,
§ 5, 3-10-1981]
company or city employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public
service endeavors.
(c) All work performed on public trees must comply with the arboricultural
specifications and standards of practice of the city.
(a) All trees and shrubs within the city shall be pruned or removed when
such trees or shrubs constitute a hazard to life or property. All trees and
shrubs within the city shall be pruned, removed, or appropriately
treated when such trees or shrubs harbor insects or disease which
constitute a threat to other trees and shrubs within the city. Such
hazards include:
(1) Any tree, shrub, or hedge, or any part of such, which is diseased or
overaged and is clearly deteriorating;
(2) Any living or standing elm tree (Ulmus spp.), or any part of any
tree, infected to any degree with the Dutch Elm Disease fungus
(Ceratocystis ulmi), or which harbors any of the elm bark beetles
capable of transmitting this fungus (Scolytus multistriatus or
Hylurgopinus rufipes);
(3) Any dead elm tree or part of any tree, including logs, branches,
stumps, firewood or other elm material from which the bark has not
been removed and properly disposed of;
(4) Any tree, shrub, or hedge, or any part of such which is obstructing
or shading street lights, obstructing the passage of pedestrians on
sidewalks, obstructing the vision of traffic signs, or obstructing the
view of any street or alley intersection.
(b) The city shall have the power and authority to prune, remove or treat or
order to prune, remove, or treat any such trees or shrubs on private
property. The city forester shall notify in writing, by registered mail, the
owners of such trees or shrubs. Pruning, removal or treatment shall be
done by the owners at their own expense within 30 days after
notification.
(c) Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner so notified to prune,
remove or treat the specified trees and shrubs, the city forester shall
have the authority to prune, remove or treat the specified trees or
shrubs.
§ 17.5-6 WILLISTON CODE § 17.5-8
AO:522
Chapter 18
MERCHANTS, VENDORS AND SOLICITORS
(d) When the city forester has effected the pruning, removal or treatment
of such hazardous trees or shrubs, or has paid for their pruning,
removal, or treatment the actual cost thereof, if not paid by the owner
of the specified trees and shrubs, shall be charged and assessed against
the property upon which the hazardous trees and shrubs were growing.
§ 17.5-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17.5-8
AO:523

ARTICLE I
In General
§ 18-1. through § 18-15. (Reserved)
§ 18-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-1
AO:525

ARTICLE II
Farmers Market, Flea Market, Fair, Carnival, Circus, or any Other
Similar Activities
§ 18-16. License required. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any merchant or vendor to engage in such business
for a farmers market, flea market, fair, carnival, circus, or any other similar
activity within the City without first obtaining a license therefore in
compliance with the provisions of this article.29
§ 18-17. Definition. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
§ 18-18. Application. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Applicants for license under this article, whether a person, firm or
corporation, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant,
if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a
corporation, with the City Auditor showing:
(a) FARMERS MARKET - Means an indoor or outdoor event for merchants
or vendors who sell local agricultural products or crafts directly from
the farmer to the consumer.
(b) FLEA MARKET OR SWAP MEET - Means an indoor or outdoor event for
a group of merchants or vendors organized and managed by the owner
of the property or flea market association, who conducts the display,
trade, and sale of used products or merchandise.
(c) MERCHANT OR VENDOR - Means a person, firm, or corporation,
whether as owner agent, consignee or employee who is registered to
conduct business in the State of North Dakota.
(a) The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is proposed
that it will be carried on in the City; the local address or addresses of
such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent
address or addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which
such person or persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or
otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for
whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a
corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated;
(b) The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business or in lieu thereof, at least three
letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the County
of Williams, State of North Dakota, certifying as to the applicant's good
character and business responsibility, or other evidence which
establishes to the satisfaction of the president of the Board of City
29.Editor's Note: Chapter 18 was readopted in entirety by Ordinance No. 988. Prior ordinance
history includes Ordinance Nos. 512, 597, 605, 608, 627, 775 and 776.
§ 18-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-18
AO:527
§ 18-19. Investigation and issuance. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Upon receipt of such application, the City Auditor shall cause such
investigation of such person's or persons' business responsibility or moral
character to be made as he deems necessary to the protection of the public
good. During the application process the City Auditor may request the
Williston Police Department conduct a records check on the applicant or any
potential employees of the applicant. If, as a result of such investigation,
the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be
Commissioners the good character and business responsibility of such
person or persons;
(c) The place or places in the City where it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed
that said business shall be conducted;
(d) The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant where applicant within the six months next preceding the
date of said application conducted a transient business, stating the
nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any
building or office in which such business was conducted;
(e) A statement of the nature, character and quality of the goods, wares or
merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by applicant in the City, the
invoice value and quality of such goods, wares and merchandise,
whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession or
from stock in possession and by sample; at auction, by direct sale or by
direct sale and by taking orders for future delivery; where the goods or
property proposed to be sold are manufactured or produced and where
such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed.
(f) A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or
proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by
the City Auditor, copies of all said advertising whether by handbills,
circular, newspaper advertising, or otherwise, shall be attached to said
application as exhibits thereto;
(g) Whether or not the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of
such offense and the punishment assessed therefor;
(h) Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative; and
(i) Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the
person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's
business or the method or plan of doing such business as the City
Auditor may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the
protection of the public good.
§ 18-18 WILLISTON CODE § 18-19
AO:528
unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. If, as a result of the
investigation, the character and business reputation appear to be
satisfactory, the City Auditor shall so certify in writing, and a license shall
be issued by the City Auditor. The City Auditor shall keep a full record in
his office of all licenses issued. Such license shall contain the number of the
license, the date the same is issued, the nature of the business authorized to
be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of said
license, the place where said business may be carried on under said license,
and the name or names of the person or persons authorized to carry on the
same.
§ 18-20. Bond. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Before any license, as provided by this article, shall be issued for engaging
as a merchant or vendor for a farmers market, flea market, fair, carnival,
circus, or any other similar activity, as defined in Section 18-17 of this
article in the City, such applicant shall file with the City Auditor a bond
running to the City of Williston in the sum established by resolution and
adopted by the city commission, executed by the applicant, as principal, and
two sureties upon which service of process may be made in the State of
North Dakota; said bond to be approved by the City Attorney, conditioned
that the said applicant shall comply fully with all of the provisions of
the ordinances of the City of Williston and the statutes of the State of
North Dakota, regulating and concerning the sale of goods, wares and
merchandise, and will pay all judgments rendered against said applicant for
any violation of said ordinances or statutes, or any of them, together with
all judgments and costs that may be recovered against him by any person
or persons for damage growing out of any misrepresentation or deception
practiced on any person transacting such business with such applicant,
whether said misrepresentations or deceptions were made or practiced by
the owners or by their servants, agents, or employees, either at the time of
making the sale or through any advertisement of any character whatsoever,
printed or circulated with reference to the goods, wares and merchandise
sold or any part thereof. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of
the City to the use of the aggrieved person. Such bond must be approved by
the City Attorney, both as to form, and as to the responsibility of the sureties
thereon.
A single bond covering multiple merchants or vendors, all representing the
same person, event, firm or corporation shall be acceptable.
§ 18-21. Service of process. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Before any license as herein provided shall be issued for engaging in
business as an itinerant merchant, as herein defined, in the City such
applicant shall file with the City Auditor an instrument nominating and
appointing the City Auditor, or the person performing the duties of such
position, his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to
acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of said applicant
in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business
§ 18-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-21
AO:529
transacted under said license and the bond given as required by Section
18-20 of this article, or for the performance of the conditions of said bond
or for any breach thereof, which said instrument shall also contain recitals
to the effect that said applicant for said license consents and agrees that
service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent, and when
so made shall be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served
upon the person or persons applying for the said license under this article,
according to the law of this or any other state, and waiving all claim or
right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner
of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the City Auditor, as
herein provided, the City Auditor shall send to the licensee at his last known
address, by registered mail, a copy of said process.
§ 18-22. Exhibition of license. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
The license issued under this article shall be posted conspicuously in the
place of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons
applying for said license shall desire to do business in more than one place
within the city, separate licenses may be issued for each place of business,
and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business.
§ 18-23. Fees. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
The fee for a license under this article shall be set by resolution and adopted
by the City Commission.
§ 18-24. Transfer. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
No license shall be transferred without written consent from the president
of the Board of City Commissioners as evidenced by an endorsement on
the face of the license by the City Auditor showing to whom the license is
transferred and the date of the transfer.
§ 18-25. Loud noise and speaking devices. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
No licensee under this article nor anyone in his behalf shall shout, make an
outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any other sound device including any
loud speaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys,
parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in
the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom
capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys or parks
or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods,
wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell.
§ 18-26. Duty of police to enforce. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
It shall be the duty of the Police Officers of the City to examine all places of
business and persons in their respective territories subject to the provisions
of this article, to determine if this article has been complied with and
to enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be
violating the same.
§ 18-21 WILLISTON CODE § 18-27
AO:530
§ 18-27. Records. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
The City Auditor shall deposit the record of fingerprints of licensee,
together with a license number, with the Chief of Police; the Chief of Police
shall report to the City Auditor any complaints against any person licensed
under the provisions of this article and any conviction for violation of this
article; the City Auditor shall keep a record of all such licenses and of such
complaints and violations.
§ 18-28. Revocation of license. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
§ 18-29. Appeal. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Auditor in regard to
the denial of application for license as provided for in Section 18-19 of
this article or in connection with the revocation of a license as provided
for in Section 18-28 of this article, shall have the right to appeal to the
Board of City Commissioners. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the
Board of City Commissioners within 14 days after notice of the decision
by the City Auditor has been mailed to such person's last known address,
a written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. The Board
of City Commissioners shall set the time and place for a hearing on such
appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to such person in the same
manner as provided in Section 18-28 of this article for notice of hearing on
revocation. The order of the Board of City Commissioners on such appeal
shall be final.
(a) The permits and licenses issued pursuant to this article may be revoked
by the President of the Board of City Commissioners of the City, after
notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license;
(2) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in
connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise;
(3) Any violation of this article;
(4) Conviction of the licensee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude; or
(5) Conducting the business licensed under this article in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
(b) Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to
the licensee, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the
date set for the hearing.
§ 18-27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-30
AO:531
§ 18-30. Expiration of license. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
The date or dates allowing the merchant or vendor to conduct activities
within the City, shall be clearly shown on the license issued by the City
Auditor. Licenses shall be valid for the date or dates so authorized and shall
not exceed 42 days within a calendar year.
§ 18-31. Penalty. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine as provided by Section
1-11 of this Code.
§ 18-31.1. Home rummage sales and garage sales exempt. [Ord. No.
988, 9-9-2014]
This article shall not cover "rummage sales" and "garage sales" held in the
home of the vendor.
§ 18-31.2. (Reserved)
§ 18-31.3. Certain merchants or vendors exempt. [Ord. No. 988,
9-9-2014]
(a) A merchant or vendor selling merchandise only in a farmers market,
flea markets, fairs, carnivals, circuses, or similar activities regulated by
City or County governments, fair associations, convention bureaus, or
other political subdivisions, is exempt from the requirements of
sections 18-16, 18-18, and 18-20.
(b) Sellers of agricultural products who are bona fide residents of Williams
County, North Dakota.
§ 18-30 WILLISTON CODE § 18-31.3
AO:532
ARTICLE III
Solicitors
§ 18-32. Permit — Required. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
In any event, every person who for himself or as an agent or employee
proposes to engage in soliciting within the City, whether canvassing from
house to house or in business places or who engages in such solicitation by
telephone or other manner wherein a payment or deposit, either in whole or
in part, is necessary to and required to be paid prior to the actual delivery
of the item or service solicited for, shall make application to the Chief of
Police for a permit and it shall be unlawful for any such person to so solicit
or canvass without having first made application and obtained a permit
therefore, as provided in this article.
§ 18-33. Permit — Application. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
(a) An application for the permit required by this article shall be made in
writing in duplicate upon such blank forms as shall be prescribed
therefore by the City Auditor and approved by the City Commission and
shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, residence, business address, age and occupation of the
applicant.
(2) The name and business address of the person by whom employed
or to be employed.
(3) The length of service of such applicant with such employer.
(4) The place of residence and the nature of the employment of the
applicant during the preceding year.
(5) The nature, character or description of items or services to be
solicited or supplied.
(6) A personal description of the applicant.
(7) The length of time for which the permit is desired, not to exceed
one year.
(8) The fingerprints of the applicant.
(9) Such other information as may be reasonably required by the Chief
of Police.
(10) An affidavit of the applicant as to the truth of the matters set forth
in the application.
(b) Such application shall be accompanied by such credentials or other
evidence of good and moral character and identity of the applicant as
may be required by the Chief of Police.
§ 18-32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-33
AO:533
§ 18-34. Permit — Age of applicant. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
No application for a permit required by this article shall be received of a
person under the age of 18 years.
§ 18-35. Permit — Bond. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
In addition to the requirements of Section 18-33 of this article, each
applicant for the permit required by this article shall furnish and file with
the City Auditor a surety bond in the penal sum established by resolution
and adopted by the City Commission issued by a surety company licensed
to do business in the state and to be approved by the City Auditor. Such
bond shall run to the City and shall be conditioned on indemnifying and
saving harmless the City and any citizen thereof from any and all damage or
fraud occasioned by such solicitation. Such bond shall remain in force not to
exceed one year and shall expire in 90 days after the holder of such permit
notifies the City Auditor, in writing, that such holder has ceased to solicit
or canvass as aforesaid, and surrenders such permit to the City Auditor.
Nothing in this section shall make it necessary for persons selling or taking
subscriptions for religious books, magazines or literature and the agents or
employees of any person having a permanent place of business in the City
to post such bond in the discretion of the City Auditor.
§ 18-36. Permit — Issuance; fee. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Upon approval of the bona and approval of the application for a permit
under this article, the City Auditor shall issue the permit required herein
and collect a fee established by resolution and adopted by the City
Commission for each day solicitations are made within the City.
§ 18-37. Permit — Possession and exhibition. [Ord. No. 988,
9-9-2014]
The permit required by this article shall be carried at all times by the
applicant to whom issued when soliciting or canvassing and shall be
exhibited by such applicant when requested to do so by any Police Officer
or any person solicited or canvassed.
§ 18-38. Permit — Revocation. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
The permit required by this article may be revoked by the Chief of Police
for a violation by the holder thereof of any ordinance of the City or of any
State or Federal law or for any misrepresentation made in the application
or whenever the holder of such permit shall be guilty in the judgment of
the Chief of Police of fraud, misrepresentation or deceit or shall cease to
possess the character and qualities required for the issuance of the permit.
(c) If the Chief of Police shall determine, after reasonable investigation,
that the applicant is of good moral character and proposes to engage in
a lawful and legal enterprise, he shall approve the application, retain
one copy thereof and forward one copy to the City Auditor.
§ 18-33 WILLISTON CODE § 18-39
AO:534
§ 18-39. Soliciting, etc., without permit. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Any person who shall solicit or canvass within the city without having first
obtained a permit and posted a bond as required by this article, with the
exception noted, or who otherwise violates the provisions of this article
shall upon conviction be punished as provided by Section 1-11 of this Code
and also the court may, in addition thereto, revoke the permit of such
violator.
§ 18-40. Conduct. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a solicitor as provided in
this article to solicit or canvass by using any loud or boisterous language
or by making any unnecessary noise, advances or threats or by touching
or interfering with the person or freedom of prospective customers or by
forcing entry into the residence or place of business of such customers
against their expressed desire or in any way otherwise than in a quiet,
orderly and proper manner.
§ 18-41. Soliciting without invitation. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
The practice of going in and upon private residences or privately-owned
property in the City by solicitors, not having been requested or invited so to
do by the owner or occupant of the private residences or property, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
§ 18-42. through § 18-46. (Reserved)
§ 18-39 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-42
AO:535

ARTICLE IV
Solicitations for Charitable, Religious and Other Purposes
§ 18-47. Definitions. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Whenever used in this article unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context:
§ 18-48. Solicitations permit required — Exemptions. [Ord. No. 988,
9-9-2014]
No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable or religious purpose
within the City without a permit from the City Auditor authorizing such
solicitation. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(a) SOLICIT AND SOLICITATION - Means the request directly or indirectly
of money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value
on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property,
financial assistance, or other thing of value will be used for a charitable
or religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this article. These
words shall also include the sale of or offer or attempt to sell any item
where the home of any charitable or religious person is used or referred
to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such
sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement
is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale
will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purposes.
A "solicitation" as defined herein shall be deemed completed when
made, whether or not the person making the same receives any
contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section.
(b) CHARITABLE - Means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic,
social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal,
either actual or purported.
(c) RELIGIOUS AND RELIGION AS USED HEREIN - Shall not mean and
include the word "charitable" as herein defined, but shall be given their
commonly accepted definitions.
(d) CONTRIBUTIONS - Means and includes the words alms, food, clothing,
money, subscription, property or donations under the guise of a loan of
money or property.
(e) PERSON - Means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation,
company, association, or joint stock association, church, religious sect,
religious denomination, society, organization or league, and includes
any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other similar representative
thereof.
(f) PROMOTER - Means any person who promotes, manages, supervises,
organizes or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a
campaign of solicitations.
§ 18-47 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-48
AO:537
§ 18-49. Application for solicitations permit. [Ord. No. 988,
9-9-2014]
An application for a permit to solicit as provided by Section 18-48 of this
article shall be made to the City Auditor upon forms provided by the City.
Such application shall be sworn to and filed with the City Auditor at least 15
days prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective.
§ 18-50. Investigation by city auditor of solicitation permit
applications. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
The City Auditor shall examine all applications filed under Section 18-49 of
this article and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation
of the application and the applicant as the City Auditor shall deem
necessary in order for him to perform his duties under this article. Upon
request by the City Auditor, the application shall make available for
inspection by the City Auditor, or any person designated in writing by the
City Auditor as his representative for such purpose, all of the applicant's
books, records and papers at any reasonable time before the application is
granted, during the time a permit is in effect, or after a permit has expired.
§ 18-51. Standards for city auditor's action in granting or denying
applications for solicitation permits. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
The City Auditor shall issue the permit provided for in Section 18-47 hereof
whenever he shall find the following facts to exist:
(a) Any established person organized and operated exclusively for religious
or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any
person if the solicitations by such established person are conducted
among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof,
voluntarily and without remuneration for making such solicitations, or
if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the
regular assemblies or services of any such established person.
(b) Those activities regulated by the charitable gambling laws of the State
of North Dakota so long as a valid permit to conduct the activity has
been secured from the City.
(c) Any persons who have a permanent residence or permanent place of
business in Williams County, North Dakota.
(a) That all of the statements made in the application are true;
(b) That the applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and
integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual person, that every
member, managing officer or agent of the applicant has a good
character or reputation for honesty and integrity;
(c) That the control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons;
§ 18-48 WILLISTON CODE § 18-51
AO:538
§ 18-52. Fee for solicitations permit. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Before a permit is issued there shall be paid to the City Auditor a permit fee
established by resolution and adopted by the City Commission for each day
solicitations will be made within the City.
§ 18-53. Bond required. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Each applicant for the permit required by this article shall furnish and
file with the City Auditor a surety bond in the penal sum established by
resolution and adopted by the city commission, issued by a surety company
licensed to do business in the State and to be approved by the City Auditor.
Such bond shall run to the City and shall be conditioned on indemnifying
and saving harmless the City and any citizen thereof from any and all
damage or fraud occasioned by such solicitation. Such bond shall remain in
force not to exceed one year and shall expire in 90 days after the holder of
such permit notifies the City Auditor, in writing, that such holder has ceased
to solicit as aforesaid, and surrenders such permit to the City Auditor.
§ 18-54. Charitable solicitations permit — form of permit —
granting of permit is not endorsement by city — Time limit on
permit. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Permits issued under this article shall bear the name and address of the
individuals by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the
permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may
solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement
by the City of Williston or by any of its departments, officers or employees
of the purpose or of the person conducting the solicitation. All permits must
be signed by the City Auditor. Up to three individuals may solicit for each
permit which is issued; provided, however, that only those individuals who
are named on the application for the permit may engage in solicitation. The
permit may grant the right to solicit longer than 10 days from its date, but
the City Auditor may extend any permit for not more than 10 additional days
upon a showing that unnecessary hardship would be created by a failure to
extend the original ten-day period for such additional days.
(d) That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or
enterprise;
(e) That the solicitation will not be a fraud on the public;
(f) That the solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the
charitable cause described in the application, and will not be conducted
primarily for private profit.
The City Auditor shall file in his office for public inspection, and shall
serve upon the applicant by registered mail, a written statement of
his finding of facts and his decision upon each application if such
application is denied.
§ 18-51 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-55
AO:539
§ 18-55. Permit nontransferable. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Any permit issued under this article shall be nontransferable.
§ 18-56. Hearing after denial of application for permit. [Ord. No.
988, 9-9-2014]
Within five days after receiving notification that his application for a
solicitation permit has been denied, an applicant may file a written request
for a public hearing on the application before the Board of City
Commissioners. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence in
support of his application. Any interested persons shall be allowed to
participate in the hearing. The Board of City Commissioners shall either
grant or deny the request for a solicitation permit.
§ 18-57. Revocation of permits. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Whenever it shall be shown, that any person to whom a permit has been
issued under this article has violated any of the provisions of this article, or
that any promoter, agent or solicitor or a permit holder has misrepresented
the purpose of this solicitation, the Solicitations Board may revoke the
permit. Notice of revocation must be sent to the permit holder by certified
mail addressed to the permit holder at the address set forth on the
application. The Chief of Police shall be notified of the revocation of any
permit. The permit holder may appeal his revocation to the board of city
commissioners in the same manner as in the case of a denial of a permit.
§ 18-58. Use of fictitious name — Fraudulent misrepresentation and
misstatements prohibited. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose
by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social
condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other
misstatement, deception, or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any
contribution for any purpose in the City, or in any application or report filed
under this article.
§ 18-59. Penalties. [Ord. No. 988, 9-9-2014]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or filing, or causing
to be filed, an application for a permit or certificate under this article
containing false or fraudulent misstatements, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by
Section 1-11 of this Code.
§ 18-55 WILLISTON CODE § 18-59
AO:540
ARTICLE V
Frozen Dessert Vending
§ 18-60. Ice cream truck exemption. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
Use of an ice cream truck to conduct frozen dessert vending, as defined
within Sec 18-62 of Article V, is expressly exempted and excepted from City
of Williston Ordinance No. 958 which prohibits Mobile Food Vendors and
Portable Carry-Out Food Kiosks and City of Williston Ordinance No. 982
which prohibits Mobile Businesses.
§ 18-61. License required. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any merchant or vendor to engage in such business
for ice cream vending within the city without first obtaining a license
therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article.
§ 18-62. Definition. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
§ 18-63. License — Application. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
Applicants for license under this article, whether a person, firm or
corporation, shall file a written sworn application signed by the applicant,
if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a
corporation, with the city auditor showing:
(a) ICE CREAM TRUCK - Means a motor vehicle in which prepackaged or
pre-wrapped ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, frozen or soft
serve dairy products, or similar frozen dessert products are carried for
purpose of retail sale on public streets within the City.
(b) VEND OR VENDING - Means offering pre-packaged or prewrapped ice
cream, frozen yogurt, frozen custard, frozen or soft serve dairy
products, or similar frozen dessert products for sale from an ice cream
truck on public streets within the City.
(c) MERCHANT OR VENDOR - Means a person, firm, or corporation,
whether as owner agent, consignee or employee who is registered to
conduct business in the State of North Dakota.
(d) FROZEN DESSERT VENDING SEASON - Means is determined to be
from May 1 to October 31 of each year.
(a) The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business during the time that it is proposed
that it will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of
such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent
address or addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which
such person or persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or
otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for
whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a
corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated;
§ 18-60 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-63
AO:541
(b) The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business or in lieu thereof, at least three
letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the County
of Williams, State of North Dakota, certifying as to the applicant's good
character and business responsibility, or other evidence which
establishes to the satisfaction of the president of the board of city
commissioners the good character and business responsibility of such
person or persons;
(c) The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed
that said business shall be conducted;
(d) The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the
applicant where applicant within the six months next preceding the
date of said application conducted a similar frozen dessert business,
stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address
of any building or office in which such business was conducted;
(e) A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or
proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and, if required by
the city auditor, copies of all said advertising whether by handbills,
circular, newspaper advertising, or otherwise, shall be attached to said
application as exhibits thereto;
(f) Whether or not the person or persons having the management or
supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of
such offense and the punishment assessed therefor;
(g) Credentials from the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant
proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as such
representative; and
(h) Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the
person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant's
business or the method or plan of doing such business as the city
auditor may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this article in the
protection of the public good.
(i) Copies of valid North Dakota driver's license for any persons applying
to be a frozen dessert vendor.
(j) Copies of ice cream truck state registration and proof of insurance the
ice cream truck is insured as well as any and all operators are covered
by the insurance policy.
(k) Health department certification that the proposed vehicle to be used as
an ice cream truck is suitable for the purpose of frozen dessert vending.
(l) Copies of a criminal record check for owner and all employees of the
frozen dessert vendor.
§ 18-63 WILLISTON CODE § 18-64
AO:542
§ 18-64. Investigation and issuance. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
Upon receipt of such application, the city auditor shall cause such
investigation of such person's or persons' business responsibility or moral
character to be made as he deems necessary to the protection of the
public good. During the application process the city auditor may request the
Williston Police Department conduct a records check on the applicant or any
potential employees of the applicant. If, as a result of such investigation,
the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be
unsatisfactory, the application shall be denied. If, as a result of the
investigation, the character and business reputation appears to be
satisfactory, the city auditor shall so certify in writing, and a license shall
be issued by the city auditor. The city auditor shall keep a full record in his
office of all licenses issued. Such license shall contain the number of the
license, the date the same is issued, the nature of the business authorized to
be carried on, the amount of the license fee paid, the expiration date of said
license, the place where said business may be carried on under said license,
and the name or names of the person or persons authorized to carry on the
same.
Each frozen dessert vending season, a maximum of three ice cream vending
licenses may be issued by the city auditor beginning on April 1. These
licenses expire on October 31. Vendors who operated under a frozen dessert
vending license the previous year will be eligible to turn in a frozen dessert
vending application on March 1. Licenses will be issued to qualified
applicants in the order in which applications were received by the city
auditor. Licenses are required to be able to vend.
§ 18-65. Operation regulations. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015; Ord. No.
1087, 9-11-2018]
(a) Ice Cream Trucks must be registered in North Dakota.
(b) Ice cream trucks must be a dedicated truck for this purpose and must
be approved by the health department.
(c) Ice cream trucks may only operate between May 1 and October 31.
(d) All vending must take place between 11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(e) Advertising decals are limited to the name of the permitted vendor, the
types of frozen dessert for sale, and the price lists of those items.
(f) Vendors must obey all applicable traffic and vehicle safety laws,
regulations and restrictions.
(g) Frozen Dessert Vendors may only operate Ice Cream Trucks and may
only sell: pre-packaged or pre-wrapped ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen
custard, frozen or soft serve dairy products, or similar frozen desert
products.
§ 18-64 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-65
AO:543
§ 18-66. Bond. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
In addition to the requirements of Section 18-63 of this article, each
applicant for the permit required by this article shall furnish and file with
the city auditor a surety bond in the amount established by resolution and
adopted by the City Commission issued by a surety company licensed to do
business in the state and to be approved by the city auditor. Such bond shall
list the city as the obligee and shall be conditioned on applicant faithfully
complying with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to
frozen dessert vending license and specifically indemnifies and holds the
city harmless and any citizen thereof from any and all loss, damage or fraud
occasioned by such frozen dessert vending. Such bond shall remain in force
not to exceed one year and shall expire in 90 days after the holder of such
permit notifies the city auditor, in writing, that such holder has ceased to
vend as aforesaid, and surrenders such permit to the city auditor.
(h) Frozen Dessert Vendors may only operate (stop to sell wares) in
residential areas, on local or collector streets.
(i) Frozen Dessert Vendors may not operate:
a. Within 40 feet of any intersection.
b. Within 40 feet of any stop sign, flashing beacon, yield sign, or other
traffic control signal located on the side of the roadway.
c. On any street where the speed limit exceeds 25 miles per hour;
d. In any manner that impedes the flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic on any public street or sidewalk.
(j) No vendor may vend at the same location more than once a day or
longer than 15 continuous minutes without moving the vehicle at least
1,000 feet away.
(k) Vending may only take place in a safe manner with respect to the
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(l) Vendors must pull as far as practical to the side of the street when
stopping to make sales.
(m) Emergency flashers must be operating at all times when vendor is
stationary.
(n) No horns may be used when the truck is stationary or at any time other
than authorized times of operation. Music systems may be used.
(o) Ice cream trucks must be equipped with and utilize a "Watch for
Children" sign and a backup alarm.
(p) Ice cream trucks must be equipped with a trash container accessible to
the public from the outside of the truck. Any litter associated with the
truck must be removed from the area before the truck leaves the spot.
§ 18-65 WILLISTON CODE § 18-67
AO:544
§ 18-67. License — Issuance; fee. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
Upon approval of the bona and approval of the application for a license
under this article, the city auditor shall issue the permit required herein and
collect a fee established by resolution and adopted by the City Commission.
See Resolution #15-132 for Ice Cream Truck Fees for Initial and Annual
Issuance.
§ 18-68. Possession and exhibition. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
The license required by this article shall be carried at all times by the
applicant to whom issued when vending and shall be exhibited by such
applicant when requested to do so by any police officer or any customer.
§ 18-69. License — Revocation. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
The license required by this article may be revoked by the chief of police
for a violation by the holder thereof of any ordinance of the city or of any
state or federal law or for any misrepresentation made in the application or
whenever the holder of such license shall be guilty in the judgment of the
chief of police of fraud, misrepresentation or deceit or shall cease to possess
the character and qualities required for the issuance of the license.
§ 18-70. Soliciting, etc., without permit. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
Any person who shall vend within the city without having first obtained a
license and posted a bond as required by this article, with the exception
noted, or who otherwise violates the provisions of this article shall upon
conviction be punished as provided by Section 1-11 of this Code and also
the court may, in addition thereto, revoke the license of such violator.
§ 18-71. Conduct. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed as a frozen dessert vendor
as provided in this article to solicit or canvass or vend by using any loud
or boisterous language or by making any unnecessary noise, advances
or threats or by touching or interfering with the person or freedom of
prospective customers or by forcing entry into the residence or place of
business of such customers against their expressed desire or in any way
otherwise than in a quiet, orderly and proper manner.
§ 18-72. Vending without invitation. [Ord. No. 1019, 6-9-2015]
The practice of going in and upon private residences or privately-owned
property in the city by vendors, not having been requested or invited so to
do by the owner or occupant of the private residences or property, is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
§ 18-67 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 18-73
AO:545
§ 18-73. Provisions of Article III applicable. [Ord. No. 1019,
6-9-2015]
Unless otherwise amended by Article V, the provisions in Article III are
hereby applicable.
§ 18-73 WILLISTON CODE § 18-73
AO:546
Chapter 19
SOLID WASTE
§ 19-1. Short title. [Ord. No. 543, § 1, 8-22-1978; Ord. No. 831,
5-23-2000]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Refuse Ordinance
of the City of Williston, North Dakota." The purpose of this chapter is to
provide for the collection of refuse for all city residents at a reasonable cost.
In order to do so, the city must make provisions to supply services through
an exclusive monopoly to a contractor or to reserve such monopoly for itself.
Therefore, collection, hauling and disposal of refuse is reserved to the city,
except as herein otherwise provided.
§ 19-2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 543, § 3, 8-22-1978]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section:
ASHES — Are the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible materials.
COLLECTOR — Is the person holding the contract issued or granted by the
city authorizing such person to operate, conduct and maintain a municipal
garbage and refuse collection and disposal system upon, on or over streets,
alleys and public ways of the city.
DIRECTOR — The director of the department of public works or his duly
authorized agent.
FILTH — Manure, excrement or similar substance.
GARBAGE — Is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods. It is composed
of organic matters and their natural moisture content. Garbage originates
primarily in kitchens, restaurants, hotels and other places where food is
cooked or consumed.
OWNER AND OCCUPANT — A person, as defined in this section, in
possession, charge custody and control of any premises where garbage,
refuse and rubbish are collected or accumulated.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, institution or
other entity acting as principal, agent, officer, servant or employee for
himself or itself, or for any other individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
institution or other entity that owns, leases, rents or occupies any real
property within the city limits.
PREMISES — Land and all buildings and structures thereon including, but
not limited to by enumeration, single or multi-family dwellings, rooming
houses or apartment houses, hospitals, convalescent and nursing homes,
hotels, motels, restaurants, drive-in establishments, schools or any other
§ 18-73 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-2
AO:547
place of habitation, office, shop or establishment or place of conducting a
business, trade or occupation.
REFUSE — Is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, wrapped small
dead animals, abandoned automobiles, solid market and industrial wastes
and all other wastes.
RUBBISH — Is nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes), consisting of
both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin
cans, bottles, glass, rags, old clothing, paper containers, old rubber, pieces
of wood, boxes, barrels, crates, feathers, weeds, grass, lawn clippings, tree
limbs and similar accumulations produced or accumulated from residences,
homes, apartments, rooming houses and boarding houses.
SANITARY CONTAINERS — Any of the following:
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal of a vicious species or an animal of a
domesticated species, including but not limited to cats and dogs, which
without provocation is prone to attack persons.
§ 19-3. Unlawful acts. [Ord. No. 5.43, § 15, 8-22-1978, Ord. No. 692,
4-28-1987; Ord. No. 831, 5-23-2000]
(1) Ninety gallon or 300 gallon round plastic containers; or
Such other containers as shall be approved by the city commission and
which containers are compatible with the refuse disposal system and
the refuse to be removed.
(2)
(a) Unlawful acts.
(1) Place or cause to be placed any refuse upon any public or private
property not owned by him or under his control;
(2) Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped putrescible waste in
any refuse container, unless all liquid shall have been drained
therefrom;
(3) Place or cause to be placed more than a limited amount of filth in a
refuse container, the limits to be set by the director or his agent;
(4) Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped filth in any refuse
container, unless the container is used only for that purpose;
(5) Place or cause to be placed any unwrapped, small dead animal in a
refuse container;
(6) Fail to restrain any vicious animal or prevent interference with
collection employees acting in the course of their employment;
(7) Close or obstruct any right-of-way, impeding the normal operations
of the department of public works, the fire department or the police
department, unless a special permit has been granted by the
§ 19-2 WILLISTON CODE § 19-3
AO:548
§ 19-4. Violations. [Ord. No. 543, § 16, 8-22-1978]
The imposition of a fine or a sentence of imprisonment or both shall not
prevent the city from any other judicial action for the abatement of a
violation of this chapter.
§ 19-5. Garbage and refuse collection. [Ord. No. 543, § 2,
8-22-1978; Ord. No. 831, 5-23-2000]
The municipal refuse collection and disposal service of the city shall, by
such means as the city commission deems appropriate, collect and dispose
of all garbage, rubbish, refuse, paper, glass, tin cans, ashes, and other
debris, and shall operate this service pursuant to the regulations provided
by this chapter. All garbage and refuse accumulated in the city shall be
collected, conveyed and disposed of by the city or its duly authorized
contractor. No persons shall, for a fee, collect, convey, haul over any of the
streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of any refuse accumulated in the city,
director, the fire chief or the chief of police at least three days prior
to the closing of the right-of-way;
(8) Close or obstruct an alley for more than 24 consecutive hours,
unless such closing is for the purpose of making sewer, gas or
water utility installation;
(9) Remove, haul or cause to be removed any refuse, on or along any
city right-of-way, street or alley, unless the same is contained in
containers so constructed as to prevent any such refuse from
falling, leaking or spilling therefrom.
(10) Place the garbage, rubbish or refuse from a resident or business
located out of the City of Williston in a refuse container unless such
container is clearly marked as being available for the use of the
general public.
(11)No commercial account to which a refuse container or containers
are assigned shall place any refuse in another commercial
account's container without that account's permission, nor in any
residential refuse container. In addition to the penalties under
Subsection (b) of this section, an additional collection fee
established under a fee resolution may be assessed against such
commercial account for violation of this subsection.
(b) Penalties. Every person convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of
not more than $500 or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a
separate offense and shall be punishable as hereunder provided.
Provisions hereof shall not prevent the city from any other judicial
action for the abatement of a violation of this section.
§ 19-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-5
AO:549
except by the terms of this chapter. This chapter shall not prohibit the actual
producers of refuse, lawn service entities hauling only grass and leaves
which it has picked up, or the owners and occupants of premises upon
which refuse has accumulated, from personally collecting, conveying and
disposing of such refuse, providing such producers, owners, or occupants
comply with the provisions of this chapter. This chapter shall not prohibit
collectors of refuse from outside of the city from hauling such refuse over
city streets, provided such outside collectors comply with the provisions of
this chapter and with any other governing law or ordinances.
§ 19-6. Collection from entire city. [Ord. No. 543, § 4, 8-22-1978]
All garbage, refuse, rubbish and ashes from the entire residential,
commercial and industrial sections properly placed for collection as
provided for in this chapter and the regulations thereunder shall be
collected by the city or its duly authorized contractor as is necessary to
maintain and preserve the sanitation of the city. Temporary failure to make
such collection due to circumstances beyond the control of the city shall
not relieve the occupant or the owner of the premises from the payment of
sanitary service fees prescribed in this chapter.
§ 19-7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 543, § 20, 8-22-1978]
It shall be the duty of the director of the department of public works or his
authorized representative to enforce the terms of this chapter. Interference
with the director in carrying out the terms and intent of this chapter is
hereby prohibited.
§ 19-8. Municipal garbage and refuse collection and disposal
service compulsory, exemption. [Ord. No. 543, § 6, 8-22-1978; Ord.
No. 831, 5-23-2000]
No person shall be permitted to refuse to accept the refuse collection and
disposal service herein provided for, and the failure of any person to receive
such service shall not exempt such person from the payment of charges
herein specified save and except any of those persons residing in areas
in which no collection service is provided for the entire area, and in such
areas where no service is rendered by the city or its contractor, no charge
will be made. Boundaries within the city exempted from such charges shall
be established by the director with the consent and approval of the city
commission. The director shall assess a minimum of the residential rate to
any person or business located in an area served by the city which hauls its
own refuse.
§ 19-9. Fees. [Ord. No. 543, § 19, 8-22-1978]
(a) Fees for sanitary service shall be as follows:
(1) Periodically the city commission shall, by resolution, duly passed
and published, establish appropriate rates for the various
categories of refuse collection service.
§ 19-5 WILLISTON CODE § 19-9
AO:550
§ 19-10. Delinquent accounts. [Ord. No. 543, § 21, 8-22-1978]
The monthly charges set forth under this chapter or by resolution shall
be added to and collected as part of the water bill of the user or users
and collected by the water department, but shall be separately stated in
the bill. If such charges are not paid when due, the water service to such
premises shall be shut off by the water department in the same manner as
is now provided for in the case of delinquency in payment of water bills
and such service shall not be restored without the payment of the penalties
now provided for. If the garbage, rubbish and refuse charge so established
is not paid when due, such sum may be recovered by the city, in an action
at law against the owner or occupant, or both, of the property so served
and may be assessed against the premises served in the same manner as is
provided by Chapter 40-23 of the North Dakota Century Code, becoming an
assessment against the premises and property.
§ 19-11. Supervision of collection, etc.; employees. [Ord. No. 543,
§ 5, 8-22-1978]
The collection, removal and disposal of all garbage, refuse, rubbish and
ashes under the provisions of this chapter shall be under the supervision,
direction and control of the commissioner of streets and improvements with
the assistance of the director. The commissioner, subject to the approval of
the board of city commissioners, shall appoint such employees as shall be
necessary to carry out the purposes of this section. Such commissioner, with
the assistance of the director, shall be responsible for scheduling collection
days within the city.
(2) The rates charged for collection service shall be uniform for the
various classes of users; discrimination as to rates within a
particular class of users is hereby prohibited.
(3) All charges for the collection and disposal of rubbish, garbage and
refuse shall become due and payable at such time as shall be
established by resolution of the city commission, and if such
charges are not paid when due and payable, a penalty of 10% shall
be added thereto. Every charge or collection fee provided by such
resolution or under this chapter shall become, from and after the
time it is due and payable, a personal debt of the person, whether a
commercial user or a residential user, receiving collection service,
and may be collected by civil suit instituted in the name of the city,
by its city attorney, upon the request of the director at any time
after 20 days from the date of billing. Notwithstanding any other
provisions to the contrary, the remedy provided by this section shall
cumulate and supplement other remedies provided for under this
chapter.
§ 19-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-12
AO:551
§ 19-12. Regulations prepared. [Ord. No. 543, § 8, 8-22-1978]
The director is hereby empowered to prepare and publish such rules and
regulations, approved by the city commission, as may be necessary in
connection with the municipal refuse collection and garbage collection
and disposal service subject to the approval of the city commission and
may direct that the city garbage and waste disposal crew or authorized
contractor will not collect garbage and other waste from any premises
where such rules and regulations are not complied with, and the failure to
collect the same by such direction shall not relieve the owner or occupant
from the payment of fees or penalties provided for in this chapter.
§ 19-13. Containers. [Ord. No. 543, § 10, 8-22-1978]
§ 19-14. Storing of refuse. [Ord. No. 543, § 11, 8-22-1978]
No persons shall place any garbage, rubbish or refuse in any street, alley
or other public place, or upon any private property, whether owned by
such person or not, within the city unless it is in the proper container at
ground level, for collection under express approval granted by the director.
Any unauthorized accumulation of such refuse, garbage or rubbish on any
premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure
to remove any existing accumulation of refuse, garbage or rubbish within
48 hours after notice from the director shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. Further, no person shall cast, place, sweep or deposit anywhere
within the city any refuse, garbage or rubbish in such a manner that it may
be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley
(a) Sanitary containers, or containers authorized under this chapter, shall
be provided by the city. All containers shall be maintained in good
condition and at ground level. The director shall have the authority to
refuse collection service for failure to comply with this section. It shall
be the duty of the user or users to maintain the same in a reasonably
sanitary condition in keeping with reasonable health standards. The
director shall have the responsibility of inspecting containers and to
notify the user or users for the failure to maintain the same in a
reasonably sanitary condition.
(b) All garbage, rubbish and refuse shall be placed in sanitary containers as
defined in this chapter.
(c) City-owned containers shall be distributed and positioned as scheduled
by the director. Containers serving more than one residence or
premises shall be positioned along rear or side alleys, wherever
possible and practicable, not more than 100 feet from the property line
of any residence or other premises so serviced. If there are no alleys,
individual portable containers may be supplied by the city.
(d) The ninety gallon or 300 gallon round plastic containers provided for by
this chapter shall be waterproof and equipped with tight-fitting covers
resistant to disturbance by animals and insects.
§ 19-12 WILLISTON CODE § 19-14
AO:552
or other public place or in or on any occupied premises within the city.
The director may prepare and publish rules and regulations providing for
special collection of items not suitable for placement in sanitary containers,
subject to the approval of the city commission.
§ 19-15. Refuse from private property. [Ord. No. 543, § 9,
8-22-1978]
The garbage, refuse and rubbish in and about any premises shall be placed
in sanitary containers which shall be positioned along rear or side alleys
wherever possible. If no alley exists or if there is no access to the alley
from the dwelling or other building then such sanitary containers shall be
placed at or near the street line so as to be easily seen. Refuse-generating
property not abutting public streets or alleys shall permit ground level
access to the city or its authorized contractor for the collection and disposal
of such garbage, refuse and rubbish placed thereon in approved sanitary
containers.
§ 19-16. Construction debris. [Ord. No. 543, § 13, 8-22-1978; Ord.
No. 831, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 834, 6-13-2000]
Any debris resulting from the construction, demolition, reconstruction or
repairs of premises shall not be placed with other refuse for collection but
shall be disposed of directly by the person or persons owning, occupying or
leasing the premises, or by the person generating the debris. The owner,
occupier or lessee of the premises, or the person generating the debris, may
use any equipment or storage containers it chooses to store and remove any
construction debris. The owner, occupier or lessee of the premises, or the
person generating the debris, may contract with or hire anyone they choose
to have any construction debris removed, whether for a fee or not.
§ 19-17. Use of streets and alleys from outside the city. [Ord. No.
543, § 7, 8-22-1978; Ord. No. 831, 5-23-2000]
Collectors of refuse from outside of the city shall not be permitted to
transport garbage, refuse, rubbish and ashes over the streets and alleys of
the city in anything other than vehicles closed on all sides and top and which
are water tight if hauling any liquid or semi-liquid refuse. The director
may adopt regulations concerning such outside transportation as may be
necessary to prevent deposit on the streets of any trash, rubbish, garbage,
liquid or other deleterious substance.
§ 19-18. Street litter cans. [Ord. No. 543, § 12, 8-22-1978]
Litter and waste disposal containers are not to be used by merchants and
store employees for store and sidewalk sweeping, trash, paper or cartons.
Such containers are placed there by the city for pedestrians to use in the
depositing of waste material to prevent the same from littering upon the
city sidewalks and street gutters.
§ 19-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-19
AO:553
§ 19-19. Burning. [Ord. No. 543, § 14, 8-22-1978]
Burning of substances of any kind within the city is hereby prohibited.
Chapter 20
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Code
1957 §§ 23.2, 23.5-23.9, 23.22-23.37 and Ordinance Nos. 487, 514,
521, 534, 557, 558, 566, 606, 624, 626, 641, 674, 678 and 740.
§ 19-19 WILLISTON CODE § 19-19
AO:554
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 20-1. Sidewalk sales prohibited in general. [Code 1957, § 23.2;
Ord. No. 557, 6-24-1980; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 1043,
6-24-2016]
§ 20-2. Permitted uses of streets, sidewalks, alleys or public
grounds. [Ord. No. 1043, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 1083, 7-10-2018; Ord.
No. 1086, 9-11-2018]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, transient,
merchant, church, club, charitable institution, hawker or peddler to
vend, sell, dispose, or offer to vend, sell, dispose or display any goods,
wares, merchandise, produce or vegetables, on any public walk, street,
alley, sidewalk or similar area within the city, except as expressly
allowed for within this Section, Section 20-2, or other sections of the
municipal code of ordinances, by Section 20-1, items b through d, and
as allowed by Section 20-2.
(b) Notwithstanding the hereinbefore provided prohibition against
sidewalk sales, such sales shall be allowable in the event of a city-wide
promotion sponsored by the Williston Chamber of Commerce, such as
"Crazy Days" or "Moonlight Madness," in which the Williston Chamber
of Commerce sponsors a special promotion and advertising for a oneday
period of time to promote special sales of merchandise, provided
that the central business district merchants, in general participate in
such promotional sales. The Williston Chamber of Commerce shall first
submit a written application for permission on behalf of the businesses
to conduct such special sales, and no such sales shall be permitted prior
to the approval of the same by the board of city commissioners.
(c) In the event of the allowance of a special promotional sale, no street or
alley in the city shall be blocked by any merchandise offered for sale
hereunder unless authorized by the city commission and proper traffic
control devices are provided. A five-foot passageway for pedestrians
shall be left open, and merchandise shall be securely and adequately
placed so that it will not endanger passersby or fall or extrude into any
street or alley. Such sales shall not be operated in any manner which
would cause a nuisance, or create a fire hazard.
(d) The chief of police and the chief of the fire department, or their
authorized agents, shall make or cause to be made sufficient
inspections to insure the compliance with the provisions of this section
and other applicable provisions of the city ordinances by the personnel
conducting such sales.
(a) Outdoor sidewalk cafes.
a. No person may own, set up or operate an outdoor sidewalk cafe
without first obtaining a permit and meet the requirements and
§ 20-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2
AO:555
conditions laid out in Section 20-2. The Planning Director is
authorized to issue a permit for an outdoor sidewalk cafe, with
approval from the Building Official, City Engineer, and local North
Dakota Department of Transportation office, if requested area is
on an NDDOT right of way, and the City Alcohol Committee, if
the outdoor sidewalk cafe will include alcohol. Food and beverages
may be sold in outdoor sidewalk cafes on public sidewalks only
pursuant to a permit issued by the Planning Director. An outdoor
patio area may only be located directly adjacent to the business
that has received the permit to operate the outdoor patio area.
b. Permits are issued annually and are only valid for a twelve-month
period. All permits shall expire on November 1 of each year
regardless of when a person obtains a permit.
c. Outdoor sidewalk cafe permits which wish to sell alcohol may only
be issued to businesses with liquor licenses as provided for in
Section 3-37(b)(19) of Chapter 3 of the Municipal Code of
Ordinances. Permits may only be issued to restaurants which have
indoor seating; outdoor sidewalk cafes are meant to be an
extension of an indoor business.
d. Any violations of this ordinance will be subject to the removal of the
outdoor sidewalk cafe permit for the remainder of the permit
issuance period, as follows:
i. Any person having information that the outdoor sidewalk cafe
permit holder has violated any provisions of this ordinance may
submit a complaint to the Planning Director setting forth such
violation and upon receipt of such complaint the matter shall
be set for hearing in a reasonable period of time at the regular
meeting of the Board of City Commissioners. A copy pf the
complaint and notice of the hearing will be mailed to the
sidewalk cafe permit holder by registered or certified mail not
less than 10 days before such hearing.
ii. Upon the board of City Commissioners making a written
finding that a violation of this ordinance occurred, it shall
immediately revoke the outdoor sidewalk cafe permit.
e. Permit holders for outdoor sidewalk cafes and their employees
shall meet the following:
i. Sidewalk Cafe General Regulations:
1. The permit holder shall set up the outdoor sidewalk cafe,
including, but not limited to, the furniture, canopies,
fencing and/or other accessories used for the outdoor
sidewalk cafe, only in the area designated by the city on
the permit, specifically excluding roadways. The outdoor
sidewalk cafe shall not impede, endanger or interfere with
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
§ 20-2 WILLISTON CODE § 20-2
AO:556
2. Tables, chairs, ropes, fences and any other structure or
item placed on the sidewalk must be removed from the
sidewalk by November 1 each year and may not be set out
until April 1 each year.
3. Permanent structures are not permitted, nor is drilling or
otherwise altering public sidewalks without the
permission of the City Engineer.
4. The permit holder shall comply with all city health and
other applicable regulatory agency requirements,
including, but not limited to, the requirements for food
service. The permit holder shall display in a conspicuous
location all such required permits and/or licenses and shall
provide copies of those permits and/or licenses to the city
prior to issuance of a permit for an outdoor sidewalk cafe
by the city. The permit holder shall continuously maintain
the required approvals, permits and/or licenses and
provide evidence to the city of the continuous maintenance
of them.
5. Smoking shall not be allowed within the outdoor sidewalk
cafe.
6. Cooking, food preparation or self-service food shall not be
allowed in such outdoor sidewalk cafes.
ii. Sidewalk Cafe Clearance Regulations.
1. Furniture, canopies, fencing and/or other accessories used
for the outdoor sidewalk cafe shall be located so that a
minimum clearance required by the Williston Building
Code or the Americans with Disabilities Act, whichever is
more restrictive, shall be provided at all times.
2. No outdoor patio area equipment, fencing or furniture may
be placed in such a manner as to obstruct a building exit.
iii. Sidewalk Cafe Maintenance Regulations.
1. The permit holder shall provide proper containers or some
other means for the collection of waste and trash within
the outdoor sidewalk cafe permitted. The permit holder
shall keep the immediate area around the outdoor
sidewalk cafe and the outdoor sidewalk cafe clean of
garbage, trash, paper, cups, cans or litter associated with
the operation of the outdoor sidewalk cafe. All waste and
trash shall be properly disposed of by the permit holder.
2. The permit holder shall be responsible for the
maintenance, upkeep and security of the fencing, furniture
§ 20-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2
AO:557
and accessories of the outdoor sidewalk cafe and the city
shall not be responsible for the same.
iv. Sidewalk Cafe Alcohol Regulations.
1. For any outdoor sidewalk cafe where alcoholic beverages
are served, the permit holder shall comply with all state
and local regulations for the sale, possession and/or
consumption of alcoholic beverages and shall provide the
city with a copy of any and all required permits or licenses
for the sale, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic
beverages and the diagram and/or plans showing the
location of the outdoor sidewalk cafe which were
submitted for the permit or license.
2. Employees of the permit holder for the outdoor sidewalk
cafe shall not consume alcoholic beverages while working
in the outdoor sidewalk cafe.
v. Sidewalk Cafe Design Regulations.
1. If a cafe serves alcohol, the area of the outdoor sidewalk
cafe must be effectively partitioned by rope, temporary
fence, barrier, planters, or other device designed and
intended to separate the outdoor sidewalk cafe from
passersby. These partitions must be constructed to provide
cane detection for pedestrians who are blind or have visual
impediments, and must have a detectable barrier run
continuously along the pedestrian side of the partition at a
height of 27 inches or less.
2. If the cafe does not serve alcohol, decorative planters and
other living material should be included with the cafe
design.
3. Design of the fencing, barriers, furniture and accessories
for an outdoor sidewalk cafe must be approved during the
permit process prior to a permit being issued for their use.
The applicant must provide a photograph, drawing or
sketch of the design of the fencing, barriers, furniture and
accessories to be used for the outdoor sidewalk cafe as
part of the application for a permit. The design of the area
and furniture should reflect the goals of the Downtown
Plan, and should include quality materials. Fencing or
barriers should consist of quality materials. Living
materials are encouraged.
vi. Sidewalk Cafe Noise Regulations.
1. The permit holder shall comply with all noise regulations
set forth in the Williston City Code of Ordinances.
§ 20-2 WILLISTON CODE § 20-2
AO:558
§ 20-3. through § 20-17. (Reserved)
2. The permit holder shall not have on the premises any bell,
siren, horn, loudspeaker or any similar device to attract
the attention of possible customers nor shall the permit
holder use any such device to attract attention.
(b) Merchant display area.
(1) In cases where the sidewalk in front of a business in commercial
zones is part of the City right of way, businesses may utilize three
feet of sidewalk area, measured from the property line toward the
street, in order to place planters, benches, and other decor. In all
cases, a five-foot area of the sidewalk must remain free of
obstruction in order to remain in compliance with ADA
requirements.
§ 20-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3
AO:559

ARTICLE II
Boulevards
§ 20-18. Boulevard regulations — Purpose. [Ord. No. 678, § 1,
8-26-1986; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
The purpose of this section is to regulate boulevards which are reserved for
utilities, sidewalks, and future street widening.
§ 20-19. Same — Definitions. [Ord. No. 678, § 2, 8-26-1986; Ord. No.
740, 3-26-1991; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
BOULEVARD — An area between the curb and property line.
CURB — The lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked
by curbing construction, or not so marked.
§ 20-20. Same — Boulevards in residential and commercial
districts. [Ord. No. 678, § 3, 8-26-1986; Ord. No. 740, 3-26-1991;
Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
(a) Boulevards in residential districts and neighborhood commercial
districts shall be maintained with grass, trees, decorative rock,
concrete, driveways and sidewalks and shall be available and used for
needed public utilities, sprinkler systems, mailboxes, general delivery
boxes or receptacles for the delivery of periodicals, fliers or other
circulars limited to one post per lot. No excavation, concrete or
decorative rock work shall take place within any boulevard without first
obtaining a permit from the city engineer.
(b) In general commercial districts, restricted commercial districts and any
industrial districts, boulevards may also be maintained with poured-in
concrete, with or without exposed aggregate, in addition to grass and
trees which are provided for in other districts. No excavation, concrete,
or decorative rock work shall take place within any boulevard without
first obtaining a permit from the city engineer.
(c) Before any person may plant a tree in any boulevard, he shall obtain
authorization from the City of Williston Department of Public Works.
The types of trees that can be planted and the location for the trees
shall be determined by the City of Williston in accordance with
standards established by the city commission and by the City of
Williston Code of Ordinances.
(d) Any repair, replacement, new construction, or relocation of any of the
allowable items mentioned in this section shall be at the expense of the
property owner. The city is not responsible for any costs associated with
improvements put into boulevards by other public or private agencies
or parties.
§ 20-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-21
AO:561
§ 20-21. Same — Placement of mailboxes, general delivery boxes or
receptacles for the delivery of periodicals, fliers or other circulars.
[Ord. No. 678, § 4, 8-26-1986; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
§ 20-22. Same — Fees for permits. [Ord. No. 678, § 5, 8-26-1986;
Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
All fees are to be established by resolution by the board of city
commissioners of the City of Williston.
§ 20-23. Same — Penalties. [Ord. No. 678, § 6, 8-26-1986; Ord. No.
845, 4-10-2001; Ord. No. 847, 5-8-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions
of either Section 20-20 or 20-21 shall upon conviction be punished by a
fine not to exceed $500, the court to have the power to suspend said
sentence and to revoke the suspension thereof. Each day any person, firm,
association or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of this article
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 20-24. through § 20-28. (Reserved)
(a) No mailboxes, general delivery boxes or receptacles for the delivery of
periodicals, fliers or other circulars shall hereafter be placed at a
distance of less than 12 inches or more than 24 inches behind the face
of the curb. A mailbox, general delivery box or receptacle shall only be
supported by one post and shall not take more boulevard space than is
necessary to provide proper support for the receptacle. Boxes and
receptacles shall not protrude into a required five-foot sidewalk. In the
case of a street or alley improved without a curb and gutter section, the
box or receptacle location shall be measured from the pavement edge.
(b) No mailbox shall be placed so as to interfere with or hinder operations
around a fire hydrant. A minimum distance of six feet on either side of
the hydrant shall be maintained free of obstacles to facilitate operation
of the hydrant.
§ 20-21 WILLISTON CODE § 20-24
AO:562
ARTICLE III
Curbs, Gutters, Sidewalks and Driveways
§ 20-29. Definition. [Ord. No. 514, § 2, 2-24-1976; Ord. No. 845,
4-10-2001]
A.S.T.M. where notated, shall refer to the latest edition of the American
Society of Testing and Materials.
§ 20-30. Permit. [Ord. No. 514, § 1, 2-24-1976; Ord. No. 558, § 12,
7-22-1980; Ord. No. 556, § 1, 2-24-1981; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Each contractor or owner must obtain a permit from the city engineer
before commencement of construction of any curb and gutter; sidewalk or
driveway in the public right-of-ways. Concrete work completed in the public
right-of-way shall be constructed by a contractor licensed by the State of
North Dakota.
All permit fees are to be established by Resolution by the board of city
commissioners of the City of Williston.30
§ 20-31. Construction requirements. [Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Concrete curb and gutter, driveways and sidewalks shall be installed in
accordance with standards issued by the city engineer.
§ 20-32. through § 20-43. (Reserved)
§ 20-44. Distance of curbs from streets. [Code 1957, § 23.9; Ord.
No. 845, 4-10-2001]
The location line and grade of all curbing and curb and gutter shall be
approved by the city engineer.
§ 20-45. Trees. [Code 1957, § 23.30; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
(a) Trees shall be planted on the centerline between the curb line and front
edge of the sidewalk. Where sidewalks do not exist, a five-foot
allowance will be made along the property line to accommodate future
sidewalk construction. In no case shall a tree be planted within three
feet of the curb line.
(b) All trees hereafter planted on the boulevards of the city shall be planted
by and at the expense of the owner of the abutting lands thereon. Such
trees shall be planted as provided for under Chapter 17.5 of the City
Code.
30.Refer to current resolution adopted by the board of city commissioners of the City of
Williston for fee schedule.
§ 20-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-46
AO:563
§ 20-46. Sidewalks generally — Place and cost. [Code 1957, § 23.23;
Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
§ 20-47. Same — Specifications generally. [Code 1957, § 23.25; Ord.
No. 845, 4-10-2001]
All sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be constructed of concrete and
shall be constructed in accordance with standards issued by the city
engineer.
§ 20-48. Same — Grade and lines. [Code 1957, § 23.26; Ord. No.
845, 4-10-2001]
§ 20-49. Same — Width; thickness; slope. [Code 1957, § 23.24; Ord.
No. 514, § 16, 2-24-1976; Ord. No. 534, Art. III, 8-23-1977; Ord. No.
624, § 1, 9-27-1983; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
§ 20-50. through § 20-52. (Reserved)
§ 20-53. Expansion joints, etc. [Code 1957, § 23.28; Ord. No. 514,
§ 16, 2-24-1976; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
(a) All sidewalks hereafter constructed within the city shall be constructed
by and at the expense of the property owners respectively, whose
property abuts or adjoins such sidewalk, and all such sidewalks shall be
constructed along and next to the property line.
(b) Sidewalks shall be installed as part of all new residential and
commercial construction projects. The city engineer may waive the
required installation of sidewalks. The city engineer may require the
installation of sidewalks as part of new industrial construction projects.
(a) All sidewalks hereafter constructed in the city must be constructed on
the grade and lines approved by the city engineer. No person shall
construct any sidewalk within the city without first procuring from the
city engineer approval of the grade and lines for building the same as
aforesaid.
(b) All excavations and fillings necessary to make the sidewalk foundation
must be done by and at the expense of the property owner.
(a) Concrete sidewalk shall be four inches thick and a width as specified by
the city engineer so as to be compatible with the existing sidewalk in
the immediate area. Those sidewalks with a boulevard shall be a
minimum of five feet in width. All sidewalks abutting streets shall be a
minimum of six feet in width. All sidewalks abutting streets must be
constructed so that the grade declines at 1/4 inch per foot away from
the property line for proper drainage.
(a) Expansion joints at least 1/4 inch in thickness shall be provided in all
sidewalks, other walks and driveways. The joint material shall be the
§ 20-46 WILLISTON CODE § 20-53
AO:564
§ 20-54. (Reserved)
§ 20-55. Temporary sidewalks around construction sites. [Code
1957, § 23.8; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
§ 20-56. Driveways, alley aprons and valley gutters. [Ord. No. 514,
§ 17, 2-24-1976; Ord. No. 674, 6-24-1986; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
premolded type, of first class quality, manufactured for that purpose.
All sidewalks shall be cut into blocks and, when so constructed, the
top surface thereof shall coincide with the established grade, the top
surface of the sidewalk inclining slightly from the property line to the
curb line.
(b) One-half inch expansion joint material is to be located not more than 50
feet apart and between any sidewalk abutting curb, pavement,
driveway or other structure and shall entirely separate the sidewalk
from the abutting structure.
(c) Contraction joints shall be separated by a distance equal to the width of
the sidewalk but in no case exceed 10 feet and must be cut to 1/3 the
depth of the sidewalk. All curb stop boxes, valve boxes and other utility
appurtenances located within the sidewalk shall be adjusted to grade.
Any necessary repairs to these utility appurtenances shall be reported
to the city engineer.
(a) A sidewalk or passageway, at least three feet wide, shall be kept in front
of any building during the process of its construction, which temporary
sidewalk shall extend from the side of the permanent sidewalk in front
of each lot adjoining the sides of the lot on which such building is being
erected, and shall be laid around the space to be used for the materials
for building such buildings; but shall be laid wholly within that part of
the street which is so permitted to be used for such building material,
which temporary sidewalk shall at all times be kept clear for the
passage of persons over the same, and no person shall leave any
materials, tools, implements or machinery thereon. Such temporary
sidewalk shall be constructed of two inch planks, laid lengthwise on
good and sufficient sleepers three feet apart.
(b) The respective ends of the temporary sidewalk shall be laid even with
the sidewalk to which it is attached.
(c) No person shall occupy any street or the sidewalk for building purposes
without first having completed such sidewalk, and during the time of
such occupation of such street for such building operation, such person
shall maintain and keep in repair such temporary sidewalk.
(d) The gutter or waterway of any street, avenue or alley shall not at any
time be obstructed by any building material so as to prevent the free
passage of water in and along the same.
§ 20-53 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-56
AO:565
§ 20-57. through § 20-67. (Reserved)
(a) Driveways and alley aprons shall be a minimum of six inches in depth
and shall be constructed to the dimensions approved by the city
engineer. Valley gutters shall be a minimum of eight inches in depth and
a minimum width of 72 inches and constructed of reinforced concrete
as approved by the city engineer. The minimum distance back from the
point of curvature at a corner shall be 20 feet. The minimum distance a
driveway may be placed from the alleyway shall be three feet when the
driveway is parallel to the alleyway.
(b) Widths of driveways are as follows:
Type Minimum Maximum
Residential 12 feet 24 feet*
Commercial 12 feet 35 feet
*Residential property that has multiple garages may have a wider
driveway with prior approval from the city engineer.
§ 20-56 WILLISTON CODE § 20-57
AO:566
ARTICLE IV
House Numbering
§ 20-68. Failure of owners, etc. or buildings to affix numbers. [Code
1957, § 23.36; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
If the owner of any building, now erected or hereafter to be erected within
the limits of the city, or any person having the custody or control of such
building, shall refuse or neglect to cause to be placed and affixed thereon
the number thereof as provided in this article after notice so to do, the
board of city commissioners shall have the power and authority to cause the
number of such building to be exhibited thereon as provided herein and the
cost for so doing to be collected from the owner or person having control
thereof at the suit of the city.
§ 20-69. Manner. [Code 1957, § 23.32; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
The numbering of buildings shall commence to run from Front Street to
the north and south, and from Main Street, east and west, according to
the streets by hundreds. Each 25 feet within the original plat of the city
shall represent a number, and each 25 feet outside of the original plat shall
represent a number.
§ 20-70. Plat designating numbers. [Code 1957, § 23.37; Ord. No.
845, 4-10-2001]
It shall be the duty of the city building official to keep a plat on file in his
office upon which plat shall be exhibited and designated the number to be
affixed to each building within the city.
§ 20-71. Map and plans. [Code 1957, § 23.31; Ord. No. 845,
4-10-2001]
All buildings within the city shall be numbered in accordance with the map
and plans showing the system of numbering buildings now on file in the
office of the city building official.
§ 20-72. Method and cost of obtaining numbers. [Code 1957,
§ 23.35; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Upon application made to the city building official therefor, house numbers
in conformity with this article shall be the responsibility of the home owner
to obtain.
§ 20-73. Style and size. [Code 1957, § 23.33; Ord. No. 845,
4-10-2001]
The numbers to be affixed to buildings shall be of plain legible numerals of
uniform size and style and shall be of not less than 2 1/2 inches in height.
§ 20-68 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-74
AO:567
§ 20-74. Placement. [Code 1957, § 23.34; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
The numbers of all buildings within the city shall be exhibited in plain
sight on the street side thereof, and shall be so exhibited upon all buildings
thereafter erected within 10 days after the completion thereof.
§ 20-75. through § 20-85. (Reserved)
§ 20-74 WILLISTON CODE § 20-75
AO:568
ARTICLE V
(Reserved)31
§ 20-86. through § 20-98. (Reserved)
31.Editor's Note: Article V, Snow Removal as adopted by Ord. Nos. 845 and 847 was moved to
Chapter 5, §§ 5-288 and 5-289 and further amended by Ord. No. 1055.
§ 20-86 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-86
AO:569

ARTICLE VI
Excavations
§ 20-99. Permit-required. [Code 1957, § 23.5; Ord. No. 487, § 1,
5-28-1974; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
§ 20-100. Same — Application, review or denial. [Ord. No. 487, § 11,
5-28-1974; Ord. No. 606, § 1, 8-10-1982; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to open up or make any excavation in
or upon any of the streets, avenues, alleys or public right-of-way in the
city for the purpose of constructing or repairing any sewer, water or gas
pipe, telecommunications cable or conduit, electrical cable or conduit,
or other underground conduit, without first having obtained a permit to
do so as provided in this article.
(b) No person shall injure or tear up any sidewalk or crosswalk, drain or
sewer or any part thereof, or dig any hole, ditch or drain in any street or
sidewalk, or public grounds, or remove any gravel, sod or sand from any
street, without procuring a permit from the city engineer so to do.
(a) Whenever any person shall desire to open up or excavate any portion of
any street, avenue or alley for the purposes of connecting with or
making repairs to any sewer, water, gas pipe or main,
telecommunications cable or conduit and electrical cable in such street,
avenue or alley or constructing any other underground conduit, he shall
first make an application to the city engineer, setting forth in detail the
purpose for which said person desires such an opening or excavation,
kind of pavement, sidewalk, and curbing to be broken into any
description of property by lot, block and addition opposite which such
excavation or opening is to be made. The city engineer shall issue such
permit if the person making the application has performed satisfactorily
under the terms upon which prior permits have been issued. In the
event of any emergency that happens while the office of the city
engineer is closed, such openings may be made and the permit for the
same secured on the next day when such office is open.
(b) Any person aggrieved by the action of the city engineer in a denial of a
permit shall have the right of appeal to the board of city commissioners.
The appeal shall be taken by filing with the board of city commissioners,
within 14 days after denial of the permit, a written statement setting
forth the grounds for the appeal. The board of city commissioners shall
set a time and place for hearing on the appeal and notice of the hearing
shall be given to the appellant by mailing said notice, postage prepaid,
to the appellant's last known address at least five days prior to the date
set for the hearing. The decision and order of the board of city
commissioners on the appeal shall be final and conclusive.
§ 20-99 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-101
AO:571
§ 20-101. Same — Fees. [Ord. No. 487, § VIII, 5-28-1974; Ord. No.
588, § 12, 7-22-1980; Ord. No. 566, § 1, 2-24-1981; Ord. No. 845,
4-10-2001]
All permits shall include inspection fees. Refer to current resolution adopted
by the board of city commissioners of the City of Williston for fee schedule.
§ 20-102. Supervision. [Ord. No. 487, § III, 5-28-1974; Ord. No. 845,
4-10-2001]
All excavations made as provided in this article shall be made in accordance
with standards issued by the city engineer and done in a most careful and
workmanlike manner.
§ 20-103. General procedure. [Ord. No. 487, § IV, 5-28-1974; Ord.
No. 606, § 2, 8-10-1982; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
(a) When a street opening is made, the existing surfacing shall be removed
first. Where the surfacing is portland cement concrete, or asphalt, it
shall first be sawed with a concrete saw to a minimum depth of 1 1/2
inches. The surface material shall be removed from the site and shall
not be placed in the backfill. Where the surfacing is gravel, it shall be
carefully removed and stockpiled separately and replaced as surfacing
when the backfill has been completed.
(b) In placing the backfill material, compaction with an air or mechanical
tamper or other approved device shall be used and shall be placed in
not to exceed six inch layers and thoroughly compacted. This procedure
shall be repeated until the entire backfill operation has been completed.
(c) The foregoing shall apply to all street, avenue or alley excavations for
private water and sewer service lines and gas, television cable,
telephone and electrical cables. It shall include the area from the main
line utility to the place of installation. It shall not include main line
utilities installed by contract with the city where the contract is under
the supervision of the engineering department and the public works
department.
(d) No utility company, franchise company, private business or individual
that utilizes any city right-of-way shall allow cables, cords, lines and
other modes of utility or communication transmissions to remain onground
without first obtaining a permit from the city engineer's office.
Requirements for a permit shall include a completed application
specifying the owner of the line, the installation contractor, the location
of the unburied or unhung line, the nature of the services being
provided by the cable, a date that construction will be completed and
the utility transmissions permanently installed.
The city engineer, or authorized representative, after reviewing the
completed application, may issue the permit. The permit will allow
temporary services for no longer than 90 "construction season"
§ 20-101 WILLISTON CODE § 20-103
AO:572
§ 20-104. Safeguards around excavation, etc. [Code 1957, § 23.7;
Ord. No. 606, § 3, 8-10-1982; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Any person engaged in any building operation or making any excavation
upon or adjoining any public street or alley shall construct and maintain all
proper guards and hang out and maintain proper signal lights during the
hours of darkness to warn passersby of danger and to prevent accidents. All
signing shall be in accordance with the U.S. Department of Transportation
manual on uniform traffic control devices, part 6. Excavators shall
acknowledge with the receipt of the excavation permit that they have the
necessary signs and barricades.
§ 20-105. Replacing dirt and paving. [Ord. No. 487, § V, 5-28-1974;
Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
All dirt shall be compacted to within eight inches of the finished grade
of any asphalt surface and to within six inches of the finished grade of
any concrete surface according to Section 20-103. On concrete streets and
alleys the next six inches shall be placed with portland cement concrete.
Concrete shall have a minimum of six bags of cement per cubic yard or
a compressive strength of 3,500 pounds per period of 28 days. Finish and
grade of concrete shall match existing street and alley surface. Traffic shall
be kept off for 72 hours or as directed by the city engineer. On asphalt
streets and alleys the next six inches shall be placed with portland cement
concrete, as per specifications in this section. The city will place the last two
inches of the patch with asphalt and will bill back to the contractor the cost
established by the city. The contractor shall properly sign and barricade all
excavations and patches. The contractor is to notify the city engineer when
the excavation compaction is completed.
§ 20-106. Bond required. [Ord. No. 487, § VI, 5-28-1974; Ord. No.
606, § 4, 8-10-1982; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
calendar days. "Construction season" is defined from April 15th through
October 31st of any given year. Within 90 construction season days
after the permit is issued, the transmission lines, cables and cords must
be either removed or permanently installed (e.g. a temporary cable laid
October 1st must be permanently installed no later than June 14th of
the following year). Any service line deemed hazardous or dangerous
by the city engineer shall not be permitted to be temporarily installed.
(e) At his direction, the city engineer shall have the authority to require soil
compaction testing on any backfill operation which has been completed.
Said testing shall be conducted by an independent soil testing firm. All
excavations shall be backfilled to a minimum of 95% standard proctor
compaction. The costs for soil testing shall be included within the
permit fees for the excavation and shall be paid in full by the permittee.
§ 20-103 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-106
AO:573
§ 20-107. Restoration of street surface, etc. [Code 1957, § 23.6;
Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Whenever permission shall be granted by the city engineer to any person
to tear up any sidewalk or crosswalk, drain or sewer or dig any hole, ditch
or drain, as provided in Section 20-99, the same shall be done under the
supervision of the city engineer, and such sidewalk, crosswalk, drain, sewer
or street shall be restored to as good condition as it was before.
§ 20-108. Failure to restore and maintain in good condition. [Ord.
No. 487, § VII, 5-28-1974; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
In case any person who shall make any opening or excavation in any street,
avenue or alley of the city under the provisions of sections 20-99 and 20-106
shall fail to restore and maintain the same in good condition and safe
(a) Before a permit required by this article is issued, the applicant shall
deposit with the city auditor a bond in the amount of $10,000 payable to
the city. The required surety bond must be:
(1) With good and sufficient surety.
(2) By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state.
(3) Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance.
(b) The bond shall be conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with the
provisions of this article and shall hold the city and its officers harmless
against any and all claims, judgments or other causes arising from the
excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit or for
which the city, the board of city commissioners, or any city officer may
be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to persons or
property through the fault of the permittee either in improperly
guarding excavation or for any other injury resulting from the
negligence of the permittee. The bond shall be further conditioned to
fill up, restore and place surface of the land upon which any excavation
has been done in accordance with the construction provided for in the
permit and for the faithful performance by the permittee in accordance
with requirements of this article and within the time that the work is to
be completed by the permittee. The bond shall be in full force and effect
for two years after the work shall have been completed. Nothing
contained in this section shall be construed to limit the liability on such
undertakings, which undertakings shall be conditioned to save the city
harmless from all costs, loss and damages of every kind and nature by
reason of such opening or excavation and conditioned further that the
person making such opening or excavation shall keep the same in
proper repair for a period of two years after the work shall have been
completed. With this performance bond the permittee shall also provide
a certificate of public liability insurance with limits not less than
$25,000 for property damage, $500,000 for any injury and $1,000,000
for any one accident.
§ 20-106 WILLISTON CODE § 20-108
AO:574
condition for a period of two years, the city engineer may restore or repair
the same, and the city shall recover upon the undertaking provided in this
article, for all costs and expenses of such work from the person by whom
such opening or excavation was made or his sureties.
§ 20-109. Repairs. [Ord. No. 606, § 5, 8-10-1982; Ord. No. 845,
4-10-2001]
Upon noticing any excavation that requires repairs, the excavator doing
the original work shall be promptly notified by the city engineer. If, after
reasonable effort, the city is unable to notify the excavator or if repairs
are not commenced within four hours of notification, the city may make
the necessary repairs and bill the costs to the excavator. In the event of
an emergency, the city may make immediate repairs without notifying the
excavator and hold the excavator fully liable.
§ 20-110. Penalty. [Ord. No. 606, § 6, 8-10-1982; Ord. No. 845,
4-10-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the items or provisions of
this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided by Section 1-11 of
this Code.
§ 20-111. through § 20-119. (Reserved)
§ 20-108 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-111
AO:575

ARTICLE VII
Restrictions on Hauling and Depositing Refuse on City Streets
§ 20-120. Purpose and intent. [Ord. No. 626, § 1, 1-24-1984; Ord.
No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Section 40-34.01.1 of the North Dakota Century Code authorizes and
directs cities to maintain in sanitary conditions the road or highway leading
to the grounds maintained by cities for disposal of garbage collected in the
city. The statute creates an obligation of the city to keep the road free from
refuse and garbage resulting in the transportation of the same, by the city
maintaining said grounds. The City of Williston is also obligated to prohibit
the deposit of garbage, refuse and other waste materials on streets, alleys
or other public areas within the city, and to keep such streets, alleys or other
public areas free of the same.
§ 20-121. Restriction on hauling to and from city landfill. [Ord. No.
626, § 2, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Any garbage or refuse transported by any person to the city grounds
maintained for the disposal of garbage, more commonly known as the city
landfill, shall be transported in a covered vehicle or container. "A covered
vehicle or container" shall be construed as meaning that such vehicle or
container shall be covered with a canvas or tarpaulin, secured with tiedowns
or ropes, or otherwise secured in such a manner as to eliminate
any possibility of refuse, rubbish or garbage falling from such vehicle or
container in transit; it shall also be construed as meaning that such vehicle
or container may be entirely enclosed, or one equipped with an end gate
in a closed position and covered by a tarp or other similar means as to not
cause, allow, or permit any materials being transported to the city landfill to
seep, spill, leak, blow, drop off, fall or escape from the vehicle onto the road
leading to the city landfill, or onto any abutting property while in transit.
These restrictions shall apply regardless of whether the transporting is
within or without of the city limits of the City of Williston.
§ 20-122. Requirement of a covered vehicle or container. [Ord. No.
626, § 3, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or
cause or permit to be operated a vehicle which is not a covered vehicle or
container as described above, while transporting any garbage or refuse to
or from the city landfill where such garbage or refuse may or does seep,
spill, leak, blow off, drop off, fall or escape from such vehicle onto the
roadway or abutting property while in transit.
§ 20-120 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-123
AO:577
§ 20-123. Prohibition against the deposit of garbage or refuse on
streets, alleys or other public areas within the city limits. [Ord. No.
626, § 4, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause or permit to be
operated a vehicle from which garbage, refuse or waste materials such as
trash, glass, liquids, vegetation or other extraneous or deleterious matter
being hauled by such vehicle does or is likely to fall onto, or be blown by
the wind onto any street, alley or other public areas such as sidewalks,
drains, ditches or other public services while in transit, within the city
limits, provided, however, that this section shall not apply to vehicles being
used for applying abrasives or other material for ice control to streets or
sidewalks, or when such vehicle is being used for depositing construction
material on any street or sidewalk for repair at the point of such
construction, or to vehicles hauling agricultural products or crops.
§ 20-124. Garbage, glass, etc. [Ord. No. 521, § 9-28, 7-27-1976; Ord.
No. 845, 4-10-2001]
§ 20-125. Penalty. [Ord. No. 626, § 5, 1-24-1984; Ord. No. 845,
4-10-2001]
Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating this article shall, upon
first conviction, be given a warning. A second conviction under this article
shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not less than $25 nor more than
$100. A third conviction under this article shall be punishable by a fine of
up $500 and a jail sentence of up to 30 days, or both such fine and jail
sentence, and all subsequent violations of this article shall carry a similar
penalty; provided, however that each operation of a vehicle in violation of
this article shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 20-126. through § 20-129. (Reserved)
(a) No person shall throw or deposit upon any highway any glass bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any
person, animal or vehicle, or throw or deposit rubbish of any kind upon
the highway.
(b) Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove
the same or cause it to be removed.
(c) Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway
shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
§ 20-123 WILLISTON CODE § 20-126
AO:578
ARTICLE VIII
Abandoned or Unclaimed Personal Property
§ 20-130. City's authority to take, store and dispose of abandoned
property. [Ord. No. 641, § 1, 2-12-1985; Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Any personal property, except motor vehicles, left unclaimed upon the
streets, alleys or other public ways or property for a period of 10 days shall
be considered abandoned. The City of Williston, acting through its chief of
police or other designated agents, shall have the power to take, store and
dispose of the abandoned property in the following manner:
§ 20-131. Owner's reclamation rights. [Ord. No. 641, § 2, 2-12-1985;
Ord. No. 845, 4-10-2001]
Upon the sale of the property, the city shall convey to the purchaser a
merchantable title by a bill of sale. At any time within six months after the
sale, the owner of the property, upon written application, shall be entitled to
receive the proceeds from the sale from the city, less the necessary expense
of taking, storing, and selling the property. The owner of the property may
reclaim it at any time prior to the sale upon payment of the necessary
expense of taking and storing.
§ 20-132. through § 20-135. (Reserved)
(a) Upon determining that the personal property has been abandoned, the
City of Williston may take the property into its possession and store the
property for a period of not less than 60 days.
(b) During the period of time the property is stored, the city shall make a
reasonable effort to determine the owner of the property. If the owner is
determined, written notice of the proposed sale shall be given to the
owner.
(c) After holding such property for a period of not less than 60 days, the
property may be sold at a public sale. Notice of the sale shall be
published in a newspaper having general circulation within the city at
least one time, such publication to be made at least 10 days prior to the
sale.
§ 20-130 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-132
AO:579
Chapter 21
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 20-132 WILLISTON CODE § 20-132
AO:580
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 21-1. Disposition of articles left in vehicles. [Ord. No. 994,
6-10-2014]
Whenever any parcel, package or article of baggage or goods of any kind
shall be left in or on any vehicle licensed under this chapter for the
conveyance of passengers, goods or baggage, or when any such package or
articles or goods shall be left in the custody of the driver of any such vehicle,
such driver shall upon the discovery thereof forthwith deliver the same at
the police station of the City into the hands of the officers in charge of such
station unless such package, goods or articles shall be sooner delivered to
the owner thereof or to the order of the owner.
§ 21-2. Notice. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
Service of all notices under this chapter are sufficient if given personally or
by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, at the address
hereinafter set forth, or to such address as such party may provide in
writing from time to time.32
§ 21-3. through § 21-15. (Reserved)
32.Editor's Note: Chapter 21 was readopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 994. Prior
ordinance history includes Ord. Nos. 440, 643 and 944.
§ 21-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3
AO:581

ARTICLE II
Taxicabs
§ 21-16. Definitions and penalties. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014; Ord.
No. 1098, 1-22-2019]
The term "taxicab," as used in this article, is defined to mean and include
any vehicle engaged in carrying passengers for profit and not involved in
interstate travel with trips originating, ending or traversing City limits.
Any violation of this section shall be deemed a misdemeanor. Any person
operating a taxicab without a taxicab license issued by the City is guilty
of a Class B misdemeanor subject to the penalties of Section 1-11 and
possible revocation of their license for a period of time to be set by the
City commission. Additionally, a person or company who has three or more
violations within a two-year period for operating without a taxicab license
may no longer apply for a license.
§ 21-17. No franchise granted. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
This article is adopted under the general police powers as a regulatory
measure, and it is not intended hereby to grant or offer any franchise but as
denoted by the title of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it is
intended to regulate the operation of taxicabs within the City.
§ 21-18. License — Required. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
No person shall for remuneration transport passengers in a taxicab without
first having obtained a taxicab license from the City.
§ 21-19. License — Public convenience and necessity. [Ord. No. 994,
6-10-2014]
The Board of City Commissioners shall take into consideration, in the
granting or refusing to grant the license required by this article, the public
convenience and necessity and shall not grant additional licenses for
taxicabs when, in the opinion of the Board of City Commissioners, the public
convenience and necessity do not require that such additional taxicabs be
so licensed.
§ 21-20. License — Application. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
An applicant for a taxicab license shall file a sworn written application to
the Board of City Commissioners signed by the applicant, if an individual,
all partners if a partnership, or the president and secretary if a corporation
or limited liability company; which application shall state the name, age,
business and residential addresses of the applicant or applicants, make of
the vehicles or taxicabs for which the license is desired, the serial and
motor numbers, the year when such vehicles were made, seating capacity of
each taxicab sought to be so licensed and any other information requested
by said Board. Any partnership, corporation, limited liability company or
§ 21-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-20
AO:583
other business wishing to apply for a taxicab license must be properly
licensed and provide information verifying they are currently licensed to
do business in this State. Additionally any partnership, corporation, limited
liability company or other business wishing to apply for a taxicab license
must have a local agent with a physical address for the process of service
related to the sections of this chapter who shall remain available throughout
the term of any license granted.
§ 21-21. License — Investigation of applicant. [Ord. No. 994,
6-10-2014; amended 8-27-2019 by Ord. No. 1107]
Before granting any license required by this article, it shall be the duty of
the Police Department, or its agents, to investigate as to the applicant's
background, including, but not limited to, the applicant's driving record,
local criminal background check and fingerprinting. The applicant is to
provide the Police Department a certified copy of the applicant's driving
record.
§ 21-22. Vehicles for hire — Requirements. [Ord. No. 994,
6-10-2014; Ord. No. 1067, 8-22-2017]
(a) The applicant shall procure and file with the City Auditor an indemnity
insurance policy, conditioned in effect to pay any judgment for damages
to property or damages to or death of any passenger or other person
caused by the negligence, omission or want of care in operating or
handling the licensed taxicab, by the licensee, his agents or servants,
during the life of the license only. The policy of insurance required in
this chapter shall be approved by the City Attorney as to legal form and
the City Auditor as to sufficiency before it is filed. The indemnity policy
must be executed by a surety, casualty or indemnity company duly
authorized to do such business, and doing such business, in the State.
(b) Additionally, a license may not be issued under the provisions of this
chapter or continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect
liability insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of, and
shall insure the licensee against liability to the amount of, $500,000 for
the injury, property damage, or death of one person in any one accident;
and in the amount of $1,000,000 for the injury, property damage, or
death of more than one person in any accident.
(c) The policy of insurance shall contain a provision that the same may not
be cancelled before the expiration of its termination except upon 30
days' written notice to the City, and shall include a provision stating
that the coverage of said policy shall extend to and include all vehicles
temporarily substituted for those listed in said policy and shall
automatically include all new vehicles added by the licensee.
(d) The cancellation or other termination of any insurance policy issued in
compliance with this section shall automatically revoke and terminate
all licenses issued for the vehicles covered by such insurance policy,
unless any other policy shall have been filed and approved pursuant to
§ 21-20 WILLISTON CODE § 21-22
AO:584
§ 21-23. Vehicles for hire — Insurance; duration. [Ord. No. 994,
6-10-2014; Ord. No. 1067, 8-22-2017]
The Board of City Commissioners, having determined to issue the license
required by this article, and the applicant having first filed and deposited in
the office of the City Auditor an indemnity policy of insurance and liability
insurance in accordance with § 21-22 of this article, then a license, as
applied for, executed by the President of the Board of City Commissioners,
and countersigned by the City Auditor, shall be issued to the applicant
covering the particular taxicabs from the date of Board approval through
the end of that same calendar year. There shall be no prorating of taxi
license fees.
§ 21-24. Vehicles for hire — Fees. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
The license fees for each taxicab sought to be licensed by each applicant in
the City of Williston shall be set by resolution.
§ 21-25. Vehicles for hire — Transfer. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014; Ord.
No. 1067, 8-22-2017]
this section and shall be in effect at the time of such termination or
cancellation.
(e) The policy of insurance shall include worker's compensation policy as
provided by the North Dakota Workforce Safety & Insurance.
(f) Each licensee having a fleet of one or more vehicles must have in its
fleet, a vehicle that is handicap accessible pursuant to the Americans
with Disabilities Act.
(g) Following the investigation being made as stated in § 21-21 and upon
approval of the Board of City Commissioners, a determination will be
made regarding the application for a taxicab license. If the motion
passes and one or more taxicabs so licensed, the grant of such license is
conditioned on the procurement of the liability insurance policy in this
chapter.
(a) No taxicab license shall be transferable either from the vehicle
described in the original application to another vehicle, or from the
original licensee to another person, without the consent and approval of
the Board of City Commissioners, except that where a taxicab is out of
service for repairs, the license can be temporarily transferred to a
reserve cab. The temporary time allotted will be based on a written
quote provided by a qualified mechanic that states a date by which the
vehicle can be repaired, up to a maximum of 120 days. A taxicab or
taxicabs so used must be covered by insurance as provided in § 21-22 of
this article, and all regular and reserve cabs must be listed with the City
Auditor. In cases of emergency and where the City Auditor is satisfied
that there is a real emergency and need, he can issue an additional
§ 21-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-25
AO:585
§ 21-26. Vehicles for hire — Revocation or suspension. [Ord. No.
994, 6-10-2014]
§ 21-27. Vehicles for hire — Renewal. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014; Ord.
No. 1067, 8-22-2017]
Taxicab licenses may be renewed by the City Auditor upon the payment of
the fees, the filing of policies of insurance, and a certification the licensee is
in compliance with all of the rules and regulations required for licensure by
the City Auditor.
§ 21-28. Drivers; qualifications. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
taxicab license or licenses upon payment of the fee and securing
insurance as required in this article.
(b) If a taxicab license is transferred from a vehicle described in the
original application to another vehicle, the owner of the license must
certify to the Board of City Commissioners, and provide proof of such,
that the taxicab business possesses a cab in their fleet that is handicap
accessible pursuant to § 21-22.
(a) Any license issued under the provisions of this article shall be, and is,
issued with the distinct understanding that such license may be
suspended or revoked and terminated by the Board of City
Commissioners, at any time the Board may deem it necessary.
(b) Written notice of such suspension, revocation or refusal to renew shall
be given the licensee. Any person whose license shall have been
revoked, suspended or renewal refused by the City Commission may,
within 10 days thereafter appeal to the Board of City Commissioners for
a hearing thereon; and the Board of City Commissioners may, after the
hearing, affirm or reverse its first action. If no appeal is taken within 10
days, the action of the City Commission shall be final.
(a) The licensee may not employ any person as a driver:
(1) Who is under 21 years of age.
(2) Who does not possess a valid North Dakota driver's license.
(3) Who has been convicted of a felony, or who has been convicted of
driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
narcotics, unless one year has elapsed since the date of his
conviction or discharge from a penal institution, whichever is later.
(4) Who during any continuous one-year period has been convicted of
two or more violations of the traffic ordinances of any City or state.
(5) Who is unable to read, speak or understand English.
(6) Who is not of sound physique, who has distance visual acuity of at
least 20/40 (Snellen) in each eye without corrective lenses,
§ 21-25 WILLISTON CODE § 21-28
AO:586
§ 21-29. Approval or disapproval of driver — Grounds. [Ord. No.
994, 6-10-2014]
§ 21-30. Approval or disapproval of driver — Notice; appeal. [Ord.
No. 994, 6-10-2014]
Written notice of the approval or disapproval of a driver under this article
must be sent to the licensee. Any person who is disapproved by the Chief
of Police may, within 10 days thereafter, appeal to the Board of City
Commissioners for a hearing thereon; and the Board of City Commissioners
may, after the hearing, affirm or reverse the action of the Chief of Police. If
no appeal is taken within 10 days, the action of the Chief of Police shall be
final.
§ 21-31. Identification of vehicle. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
If shall be the duty of a licensee under this article, before operating any
taxicab on the streets of the City, to paint or stamp on the body of the
taxicab in reasonably large print, the words "Taxicab," his name and the
license number. Additionally, a picture identification of the driver shall be
displayed in every cab being operating. No licensee, his agents or servants,
shall allow or permit to be carried on or in the taxicab, as passengers or
otherwise, within the City, more persons than the regular seating capacity
distance binocular acuity of at least 20/40 (Snellen) in both eyes
with or without corrective lenses, field of vision of at least 70° in
the horizontal meridian of each eye, and the ability to recognize the
colors of traffic signals and devices showing standard red, green,
and amber; and that the applicant has good hearing and is not
subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or other infirmity of body
or mind, which might render him unfit for the safe operation of a
taxicab.
(7) Who is currently taking medication which might render him unfit
for the safe operation of a taxicab.
(8) Who has been disapproved by the Chief of Police or his agent under
the provisions of the following section.
(a) Any person desiring to drive a taxicab or be employed as a taxicab
driver must submit an application to the Chief of Police. The application
must include evidence of that they are qualified under § 21-28 of this
chapter. Additionally, the applicant must also submit to a background
check. The applicant must also submit proper picture identification to
be kept on file by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall
disapprove a taxicab driver if the driver:
(1) For any reason is disqualified under § 21-28 of this article.
(2) For the preservation of public safety, welfare, morals or good order
is found by the Chief of Police to be unfit to drive a taxicab.
§ 21-28 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-31
AO:587
thereof will reasonably accommodate and seat therein. Upon the expiration
of any such license, unless the same is renewed, it shall be the duty of the
licensee to erase or obliterate the words and figures aforesaid so painted
or stamped on the taxicab before using the taxicab for any purpose on the
streets or public highways of the City.
§ 21-32. Hours of operation. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to engage in taxicab operations
more than 12 hours out of every 24. It is also unlawful for any taxicab driver
to engage in taxicab operations more than 60 hours in any seven-day period
or 70 hours in an eight-day period. A driver shall be deemed to be operating
a taxicab within the terms of this section whenever he is in charge of a
taxicab and holding himself in readiness to convey passengers.
§ 21-33. Stands. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
Duly licensed taxicabs may be permitted to stand while waiting for
employment at such places within the City as may from time to time be
designated by the Chief of Police. A taxicab driver shall not stand or park
his taxicab upon any street within the fire limits of the City or at any place
other than a taxicab stand, except that this provision shall not prevent any
taxicab driver from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping
and parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actively
engaged in loading or unloading passengers.
§ 21-34. Duty to carry passengers. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
No taxicab driver shall refuse to carry passengers to or from any part of the
City with reasonable promptness.
§ 21-35. Limit on passengers. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
No taxicab driver shall at any time carry a larger number of passengers
than the number for which the taxicab was rated in the application for
the taxicab license. If space is available in the back seat or seats, the
passengers shall ride in the rear seat unless the passenger expresses a
desire to ride in the front seat.
§ 21-36. Individual service. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
Any patron who first engages service in a taxicab shall receive individual
service, unless he shall give consent to additional passengers being carried,
except that there shall be no right to individual service in taxicabs
transporting passengers to or from the Sloulin Field International Airport
or the Burlington Northern Depot.
§ 21-37. Delivery of alcoholic beverage. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to pick up or deliver any alcoholic
beverage.
§ 21-31 WILLISTON CODE § 21-38
AO:588
§ 21-38. Riders prohibited. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver to permit any person other than a
patron, licensee or his employees to ride in a taxicab.
§ 21-39. Direct route. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
Any driver employed to transport passengers to a definite point shall take
the most direct route possible over which the passenger can be carried to
his destination safely and expeditiously.
§ 21-40. Conduct of drivers. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any driver or person in charge of a taxicab to conduct
himself in other than a courteous manner while so occupied or while in
charge of such vehicle.
§ 21-41. Smoking. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
No taxicab driver shall smoke in a taxicab whether or not carrying
passengers.
§ 21-42. Subleasing and unauthorized use. [Ord. No. 994,
6-10-2014]
No taxicab license shall be granted to any person to operate taxicabs
and sublease or rent out such vehicles for the purpose of transporting
passengers for hire, or to permit the use of any vehicle not listed on
such licensee's application for the transportation of passengers for hire
under said license. Nor are taxicab licenses transferred upon a sale or
assignment of a partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or any
other business holding a taxicab license under this chapter.
§ 21-43. Condition of vehicles. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
It shall be the duty of the licensee under this article to keep each taxicab in
a clean and sanitary condition, in good repair, well-lighted and painted and
equipped and maintained as required by the North Dakota Century Code.
§ 21-44. Safety inspection. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
The brakes, horn, speedometer, lights, tires, steering gear and windshield
wiper of each taxicab licensed under this article shall be examined and
tested as to sufficiency prior to the granting of the original license, and at
least once every six months thereafter. The inspection shall be made by any
garage in the City, approved by the Chief of Police, and shall be evidenced
by a certificate of examination and sufficiency which shall be filed with the
Chief of Police.
§ 21-45. Rates of fare. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
§ 21-38 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-45
AO:589
§ 21-46. Change in schedule. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
Any schedule of fares filed with the City Auditor in accordance with §
21-45 shall be binding upon all licensees, operators and drivers of taxicabs
from the date such schedule is filed with the City Auditor and approved by
the Board of City Commissioners until such schedule is superseded by the
filing of a new schedule by the licensee, and such new schedule has been
approved by the Board of City Commissioners; provided, however, that no
such schedule shall be superseded or revoked within 30 days after the filing
of the same without approval of said Board of City Commissioners.
§ 21-47. Unlawful to charge fares in excess of schedule. [Ord. No.
994, 6-10-2014]
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a taxicab license, with respect to
which a schedule of fares or rates has been filed with the City Auditor in
accordance with § 21-45, to charge or to collect any fares for or with respect
to the transportation of passengers other than the fares provided for and set
out in such schedule. It shall be the licensee's responsibility to ensure that
only the most recent schedule of fares or rates filed with the City Auditor
are being charged by its taxicabs.
§ 21-48. Record of calls. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
The holder of a taxicab license shall keep for all taxicabs a written daily
record of all calls made and passengers transported, showing the time and
place when and where the passenger was secured and the place where the
passenger was taken, and the number of passengers, which record shall
be kept by the licensee at the place of business stated in such license for
two years, and shall be open to inspection by the Chief of Police or any
designated officer, at all times.
(a) The holder of any taxicab license issued pursuant to this article shall
forthwith file with the City Auditor a schedule showing the fare or fares
to be charged for transportation of each passenger from any one place
to another, plus charges made for additional passengers, waiting time
and other special charges. The fare or fares must be listed on a per mile
basis. Such schedule must include any specified group rates. Such
schedule of fares must be approved by the City Commission. The City
Commission may amend or change such schedule of fares.
(b) If the holder of any taxicab license shall desire to amend his schedule of
fares to be charged, such amendment must be filed with the City
Auditor and shall not be effective until approved by the City
Commission. A card containing the name of the licensee, taxicab license
number and rates of fare printed thereon shall be prominently posted
and displayed in a conspicuous place inside of such vehicle so as to be
visible to the passengers therein at all times.
§ 21-45 WILLISTON CODE § 21-49
AO:590
§ 21-49. Taxicabs - Meters. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
Every taxicab must be equipped with a taximeter of a make, construction
and operation satisfactory to the Chief of Police, and have a lighted dial in
plain view to passengers which registers the fare for each trip. Taximeters
must be factory sealed and certified by the manufacturer to be accurate.
Before being used for the charging of fares, taximeters must be certified as
to accuracy, and sealed before use. The Police Department may inspect and
test a taximeter at any time.
Any taximeter which is the subject of a complaint must be placed out of
service until it is re-certified by the manufacturer or a qualified service
provider. No person may tamper with or break the seal of a taximeter
for any purpose. No taxicab may be operated in the City if the seal of
the taximeter has been broken until the taximeter is reinspected by the
manufacturer or a qualified service provider and resealed. No person may
operate any taxicab without a sealed operating taximeter in compliance
with this chapter.
§ 21-50. Luggage. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
All luggage transported by taxicabs must be securely stowed within the
taxicab, or if the taxicab has designated storage, including but not limited
to roof racks and the like, then luggage may be securely stowed in such
storage.
§ 21-51. Penalty for violations. [Ord. No. 994, 6-10-2014]
Any person upon whom a duty is placed by the provisions of this chapter
who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to perform such duty, or violates any of
the provisions of this chapter except for a violation described in § 21-16,
shall be fined in any sum not to exceed $100. Each day that a violation
of this chapter continues is a separate and distinct offense and shall be
punishable as such. The penalty herein provided will be cumulative with
and in addition to the revocation or cancellation of any license or right
as elsewhere provided. The penalty for violations of this chapter shall be
deemed to be an infraction other than the penalties for § 21-16.
§ 21-52. Parking of taxicabs when not in operation. [Ord. No. 994,
6-10-2014; Ord. No. 1067, 8-22-2017]
When not in operation, a licensed party should have a designated area for
parking of taxicabs. A residence designated as a parking area may not have
more than two taxicabs parked there at any given time. Any newly licensed
cab company must provide proof of such designated off-street parking with
their application.
§ 21-49 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-52
AO:591

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)33
§ 21-60. through § 21-75. (Reserved)
33.Editor's Note: Former Article III, transportation of personal property, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1957 Code §§ 24.12 - 24.24, 24.26 - 24.28 was repealed
in its entirety by Ordinance No. 780, 7-11-1995.
§ 21-60 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-60
AO:593
Chapter 22
WATER
§ 21-60 WILLISTON CODE § 21-60
AO:594
ARTICLE I
In General
§ 22-1. Definitions. [Code 1957, §§ 25.1, 25.8-2]
For the purposes of this chapter:
PREMISES — Residential premises shall include all premises occupied as a
dwelling by not more than two families. All other premises shall be deemed
commercial.
SUPERINTENDENT — The superintendent of the water department of the
city.
SYSTEM — The water distribution system of the city.
§ 22-2. Waterworks system designated. [Code 1957, § 25.5]
The system of waterworks, together with the pump house, water mains,
hydrants and connections and the engines, dynamos, wires, lamps and
fixtures now constructed and erected, shall constitute the system of
waterworks, subject to such changes and conditions as the board of city
commissioners shall from time to time see fit to make.
§ 22-3. Superintendent of water department — Duties generally.
[Code 1957, § 25.2]
§ 22-4. Same — Full-time; bond. [Code 1957, § 25.4]
The superintendent of the water department shall devote his entire time
to the duties of his office. He shall give a bond in the sum of $500 for the
faithful performance of his duties.
(a) The superintendent of the water department shall have personal charge
of the pumping station and shall have control and supervision of all
water mains, hydrants, valves, tools, machinery and supplies used in
connection with the city waterworks.
(b) The superintendent of the water department shall supervise the making
of all connections with the water main system; shall follow the
instructions of the city auditor in turning on or turning off the water for
any consumer; and shall see that the provisions of this chapter are
strictly complied with.
(c) It shall be the duty of the superintendent to inspect the waterworks
system each month and ascertain the condition of the same and see that
the water is not wasted and that no person is deriving any benefit from
the waterworks system which is not paid for as provided by this chapter
or other action of the board of city commissioners.
§ 22-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-5
AO:595
§ 22-5. Same — Location of water connections, etc.; monthly report.
[Code 1957, § 25.3]
The superintendent of the water department shall keep an accurate account
showing when and where all connections are made with the city waterworks
and the location in the streets and alleys of all valves, cutoffs, connections
and other matter connected with the city waterworks system. He shall make
and file with the city auditor a full report in writing at the close of each
month of all of the work of his office.
§ 22-6. Rules governing water consumers generally. [Code 1957,
§ 25.7]
Every consumer of water from the city waterworks shall be governed by and
be subject to the rules and regulations provided in sections 22-7 — 22-21.
And it is hereby made the duty of the superintendent of the water
department to enforce the same.
§ 22-7. Violations. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
For violation of any of the rules in sections 22-8 — 22-21 and for the
nonpayment of rent the city reserves the right to turn off the water without
notice.
§ 22-8. Applications for service. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
Applications for water must be made to the city auditor upon blanks
provided by the city for that purpose with the written consent of the
property owner and must state fully all purposes for which the water is
required.
§ 22-9. Applicants subject to rules. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
Every applicant for water shall express in his application that the same
is taken subject to all rules and regulations then in force or that may
thereafter be in force and adopted for the government of the waterworks.
§ 22-10. Information provided by consumers. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
Consumers must answer without concealment all questions put to them
by the city auditor relating to water and in case of any fraudulent
representations on the part of the consumer the payment will be forfeited
and the water supply will be shut off.
§ 22-11. Requirements upon granting of application. [Code 1957,
§ 25.7]
In all cases where applications for water are granted, the city will furnish
corporation cock and tap the main pipe and pipe the water from the main to
the curb, the expense therefor to be paid by the applicant or consumer. All
pipes from main to curb shall forever be under the control of the city, the
§ 22-5 WILLISTON CODE § 22-11
AO:596
applicant waiving and releasing all claim thereto. The service pipe, stops
and other fixtures must be laid and attached, kept in repair and protected
from frost by the applicant or consumer, and in opening the street, the
paving of whatever nature and earth must be deposited in such a manner
as to occasion the least inconvenience to the public, and be replaced in as
good condition as previous to removal.
§ 22-12. Authority to make connection to system, etc. [Code 1957,
§ 25.7]
No person shall be permitted to tap or make any connections or renewals
with the distributing pipe of the waterworks, excepting such person as may
be authorized by the board of city commissioners. All such taps, renewals or
connections shall be made under the direction and subject to the approval
of the superintendent. No addition or alteration whatever of any tap, pipe,
water cup or fixture pertaining to the waterworks shall be made or caused
to be made by any person taking water except by a person duly authorized
to make such addition or alteration.
§ 22-13. Consumers subject to plumbing code. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
All persons taking water from the pipes of the city water-works shall be
governed by the provisions of the plumbing code adopted by Article IV of
Chapter 5 of this Code.
§ 22-14. Meter box. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
Each water consumer having no cellar, basement or other suitable place
for a water meter must provide a substantial box three feet square inside
measurement of not less than two-inch lumber or brick or stone curbing
with double cover so the meter will at all times be protected from frost and
be conveniently accessible to repair and read.
§ 22-15. Use of hot water. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
All consumers using hot water in connection with the city waterworks must
provide a suitable check or valve to be used in connection with the water
meter to prevent damage to same by back pressure against the meter and
such consumer shall in all cases where damage results to the meter by
reason of such back pressure be liable for such damage and for the cost of
repairing the same.
§ 22-16. Change of rates, etc. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
The city reserves the right to change the rate for the use of water from
time to time by resolution and at all times to make such other and further
restrictions and rules in the use of water as in the judgment of the board of
city commissioners may be necessary.
§ 22-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-17
AO:597
§ 22-17. Right of entry. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
Consumers of water shall, at all reasonable hours, permit the
superintendent, city auditor or other authorized city official to enter their
premises and examine the plumbing and the manner in which the water is
being used.
§ 22-18. Right of city to turn off water. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
In case of making any repairs or constructing new work, the city reserves
the right to shut off the water at once and to keep the water shut off as long
as may be necessary to accomplish such purpose; provided, that in case the
water is shut off, such notice as is reasonable and practicable shall be given
to consumers thereof who use steam boilers.
§ 22-19. Turning on water. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
When the superintendent has turned off the water from any consumer
it shall not be turned on or used unless by order of the board of city
commissioners or the written consent of the superintendent.
§ 22-20. Liability of city. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
It is hereby expressly provided that the city shall not be liable under any
circumstances for a deficiency or failure in the water supply, whether by
the shutting off of water to make repairs or connections, nor for any other
reason whatever.
§ 22-21. Hydrants. [Code 1957, § 25.7]
No person shall open or interfere with any hydrants of the city without
permission of the superintendent or the chief of the fire department.
§ 22-22. Equipment costs. [Ord. No. 477, § 2, 8-22-1972]
The meter and all service pipes, curb stops, corporation stops and fixtures
from the water main to and including the curb stop box must be layed,
attached or affixed at the expense of the applicant or consumer, but they
shall remain under the control of the water department, and said applicant
and consumer waives and releases all claims of ownership thereto, such
ownership to vest in total in the water department.
§ 22-23. Responsibility for meters. [Code 1957, § 25.9; Ord. No. 477,
§ 1, 8-22-1972]
All persons owning the water meter used by them may transfer the
ownership of such water meter to the water department on October first,
1972, or before July first, 1973. In consideration of this transfer of meter
ownership the water department will assume full responsibility for
servicing, repairing and replacing all such meters, where ownership is
transferred to it on or between the dates above stated. Such city-owned
§ 22-17 WILLISTON CODE § 22-23
AO:598
water meters shall be serviced by the water department at water
department expense when deemed necessary by the water department. On
all water meters remaining in private ownership, the owner shall pay a
service charge of $15 plus the actual cost of all repairs that may be needed
in connection with such service; provided further that such service may
only be done by the water department or its duly authorized agent. Said
payments shall be made to the water department at the time of repair or the
next billing following such meter service.
§ 22-24. Testing of meters. [Ord. No. 477, § 4, 8-22-1972]
All water meters shall be inspected, tested and repaired at such intervals
as are deemed necessary by the water department. The water department
shall have the authority to remove meters from the premises for the purpose
of repairing or testing same. It shall be unlawful for any person other than
authorized water department employees to remove, repair, service or install
any water meter.
§ 22-25. Repairs. [Ord. No. 477, § 3, 8-22-1972; Ord. No. 802,
9-9-1997]
If the consumer transfers the ownership of a water meter to the water
department under Section 22-23 of this chapter or if ownership is
transferred by operation of law under Section 22-22 of this chapter, the
water department will be responsible for the repair of the meter and all
service pipes, curb stops, corporation stops and other fixtures from the
water main to the property line including the curb stop box. Beginning at
the curb stop line, water user is responsible for damages to pipes, fixtures
and meters from freezing, regarding of fault, and any other damages that
could reasonably have been avoided by the exercise of ordinary care. If
ownership is not transferred to the water department as provided in Section
22-22 or 22-23 of this chapter the owner of the meter shall be responsible
for all repairs and further must keep said pipes and fixtures and meter in
repair and free from frost.
§ 22-26. Plumber's bond and license. [Code 1957, § 25.6]
All plumbers or other persons desiring to do work in connection with
the city waterworks shall post the bond and obtain the license required
by Article IV of Chapter 5 of this Code, which constitutes the plumbing
regulations.
§ 22-27. Tampering with water system. [Ord. No. 625, §§ 1, 2,
11-15-1983]
(a) No person shall, without authority from the city public works
department, turn on, damage, remove any meter seals, or otherwise
tamper with or alter any part of the water system of the city. The water
system of the city shall include but not be limited to all pipes, meters,
valves and wires.
§ 22-23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-27
AO:599
§ 22-28. Sale of city water for commercial purposes prohibited.
[Ord. No. 927, 5-11-2010]
§ 22-29. through § 22-37. (Reserved)
(b) Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine as
stated in Section 1-11 of this Code.
(a) No person shall, without the consent of the Williston City Commission,
sell city water for commercial purposes.
(b) Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine as stated in
Section 1-11 of this Code.
§ 22-27 WILLISTON CODE § 22-29
AO:600
ARTICLE II
Fees, Charges
§ 22-38. Water availability charge. [Ord. No. 541, § 1, 7-25-1978;
Ord. No. 548, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 873, § 1, 1-13-2004]
Any party owning property that is assessable property as defined by Section
22-41 herein desiring to connect to the City of Williston Municipal Water
System shall be subject to a water availability charge based on water
service line size.
§ 22-39. Connection fee. [Ord. No. 873, § 2, 1-13-2004]
For the purpose of this article, the following water availability fees apply
based on the size of the water line that services the property from the public
water main. These fees may be changed by resolution approved by the City
Commission.
Service Water Line Size Connection Fee
3/4 inch - 1 inch $200
1 1/2 inches $400
2 inches $800
3 inches $1,800
4 inches $3,200
6 inches and up $7,000
§ 22-40. Administration. [Ord. No. 541, § 5, 7-25-1978; Ord. No.
873, § 3, 1-13-2004]
Requests for water availability charge determinations shall be made prior
to the issuance of any building permit concerning property to be served.
§ 22-41. Assessable property.
The water availability charge referred to herein shall be assessed against all
property that has not previously been assessed for any transmission water
line. See map attached hereto and by this reference made a part hereof.34
§ 22-42. Payment. [Ord. No. 541, § 6, 7-25-1978; Ord. No. 873, § 5,
1-13-2004]
The water availability charge referred to herein shall be paid in full by the
party seeking connection herein before a plumbing permit or water meter
is issued by the City of Williston.
34.Editor's Note: The map referred to herein is included as an attachment to this chapter as
Exhibit A.
§ 22-38 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-43
AO:601
§ 22-43. Use of funds received. [Ord. No. 541, § 3, 7-25-1978; Ord.
No. 873, § 6, 1-13-2004]
All funds received in payment of such water availability charges shall be
deposited in the City of Williston Municipal Water Fund to be used for the
purposes and disbursed only in the manner provided by Chapter 40-33 of
the North Dakota Century Code.
§ 22-43.1. Additional or replacement lines. [Ord. No. 873, § 7,
1-13-2004]
In the event a property seeks an additional or larger replacement water line,
the property shall be assessed a connection fee according to the size of the
additional or replacement line with a credit given for the fee previously paid
up to the amount of the connection fee of the additional or replacement line.
§ 22-44. Rates for residential premises. [Code 1957, § 25.8-1; Ord.
No. 460, 12-22-1970; Ord. No. 497, 1-28-1975; Ord. No. 523,
§ 25.8-1, 9-21-1976; Ord. No. 547, § 25.8-1, 3-27-1979; Ord. No. 604,
§ 25.8-1, 6-29-1982]
The owner or occupant of each residential premise connected with the
system shall pay for water consumed thereon and for the availability of
water service during each period of one month, commencing October 1,
1976. A monthly service charge based upon meter size as follows:
Meter Size Service Charge
5/8 inch and 3/4 inch $3.05
1 inch $4.30
1 1/2 inch $7.85
2 inch $11.10
3 inch $25.55
4 inch $41.65
A special lawn rate will be given for those residential premises with lawns
for the months of June, July and August which will be as follows: $0.50
per 100 cubic feet of water used over and above the average used during
the months of January, February, and March of the same calendar year. In
addition to the monthly service charge, a commodity charge, based upon
consumption, would be required as follows:
0 — 3,000 cubic feet: $1.25 per 100 cubic feet
Over 3000 cubic feet: $0.90 per 100 cubic feet
A credit shall be given for senior citizens or disabled persons based upon
the percentage of credit equivalent to the percentage of property tax credit
set forth in the office of state tax commissioner brochure "Property Tax
Credit for Senior Citizens or Disabled Persons." This credit shall apply only
§ 22-43 WILLISTON CODE § 22-44
AO:602
to the commodity charge. No credit shall be given for the monthly service
charge.
§ 22-45. Rates for commercial premises. [Code 1957, § 25.8; Ord.
No. 460, 12-22-1970; Ord. No. 497, 1-28-1975; Ord. No. 523, § 25.8,
9-21-1976; Ord. No. 547, § 25.8, 3-27-1979; Ord. No. 604, § 25.8,
6-29-1982]
The owner or occupant of each commercial premise connected with the
system shall pay for water consumed thereon and for the availability of
water service during each period of one month, commencing on October 1,
1976. A monthly service charge based upon meter size as follows:
Meter Size Service Charge
5/8 inch and 3/4 inch $3.05
1 inch $4.30
1 1/2 inch $7.85
2 inch $11.10
3 inch $22.55
4 inch $41.65
A special lawn rate will be given for the commercial properties using water
for law purposes which will be in effect during the months of June, July, and
August, which will be as follows: $0.50 per 100 cubic feet of water used over
and above the average amount of water used during the months of January,
February, and March of the same calendar year. In addition to the monthly
service charge, a commodity charge, based upon consumption, would be
required as follows:
0 — 3,000 cubic feet — $1.25 per 100 cubic feet
Over 3000 cubic feet — $0.90 per 100 cubic feet
§ 22-46. Reading of meters; statements of charges; when charges
payable. [Code 1957, § 25.8-3; Ord. No. 649, 7-9-1985]
Meters shall be read as nearly as practicable to the end of each of the
monthly periods prescribed in sections 22-44 and 22-45, and where access
cannot be obtained to any meter during any such period the consumption
of water on such premise for such period shall be estimated. Duplicate
statements of water charges for each customer shall be prepared, and one
shall be filed with the city auditor and the other shall be mailed or delivered
to the customer. The amount shown upon each such statement shall be
immediately due and payable to the city auditor, and if not paid within 30
days from such date a penalty not to exceed 1.75% per month shall be
added. If the statement of charges for water service to any premise is not
paid within 30 days from the due date the supply of water to such premise
shall be discontinued and shall not be resumed until all charges are paid.35
§ 22-44 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-47
AO:603
§ 22-47. Billing. [Code 1957, § 25.10; Ord. No. 497, 1-28-1975; Ord.
No. 523, § 25.10, 9-21-1976; Ord. No. 547, 3-27-1979; Ord. No. 604,
§ 25.10, 6-29-1982]
The city auditor shall bill each customer once a month for water used
as evidenced by either a meter reading or an estimate of water used
as determined by the city; such bill must be paid within 10 days of its
mailing date. If such bills are not paid within such period of time, the
superintendent is hereby authorized to order the water to the premises
involved shut off and it shall not be turned on again until all water and
service charges then due are paid, together with an additional charge of
$25 to cover or apply on the cost of turning on the water.
§ 22-48. Right of city to increase or decrease rates and charges.
[Code 1957, § 25.8-4]
The city reserves the right and power to increase or decrease the rates and
charges specified in this chapter as the need or propriety thereof arises;
provided, that as so amended, the gross revenues derived from such utility
shall be at all times sufficient to pay all costs of operation and maintenance
thereof and to produce net revenues at least sufficient for the payment
when due of the principal of and interest on all bonds, warrants and other
obligations of the city now or hereafter payable from the net revenues, and
to create and maintain all reserves securing such payments as required by
the resolutions authorizing such obligations.
§ 22-49. Charge for turning off water. [Ord. No. 596, § I, 5-11-1982;
Ord. No. 760, § I, 5-11-1993]
A charge of $25 may, at the option of the city, be made against any consumer
whenever water is turned off at the request of such water consumer. Such
sum must be paid by the consumer before the water will be turned on again.
Any water consumer who has received a final shut off notice for nonpayment
of water rates or meter rent, or for noncompliance with any of the rules and
regulations contained in this chapter and who has not made arrangements
for payment and compliance shall as of 8:00 a.m. of the seventh day
following the mailing of the notice be charged $10 for preparation of a final
warning notice.
A charge of $25 shall also be made against each consumer for turning off
water for nonpayment of water rates or meter rent, or for noncompliance
with any of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter. The
cumulative sum of $35 must be paid by the consumer before the water will
be turned on again.
35.Editor's Note: An amendment to Section 25.8-3 of the 1957 City Code, found in Ordinance
Number 497, was apparently intended to apply to Section 25.8-1 and has therefore been
referred to in the history note to that section.
§ 22-47 WILLISTON CODE § 22-50
AO:604
§ 22-50. Deposit fee for water connections. [Ord. No. 596, § II,
5-11-1982; Ord. No. 760, § II, 5-11-1993]
Any tenant of real property requesting the city to make a connection with
the water supply system of this city, or to make a connection already
made to remain open upon a change of tenancy of real property leased or
occupied by him shall, as a condition precedent to granting such request, be
required to deposit with the city auditor the sum of $50 for each residence
and business property connection. Such deposit shall be repaid by the city
auditor upon demand to the person making the same when such tenancy
ceases; provided, that there are not arrears in such person's water bills for
such connection. The city shall immediately apply so much of such deposit
as may be necessary to the payment of any such sum that may be due and in
default as to such connection. In case the deposit is reduced or consumed by
such application, and the deposit is not immediately reestablished, the city
may shut off the water in such connection. After the water has been shut
off in any such connection under the foregoing provisions of this section,
the same shall not again be turned on until the deposit herein required
is reestablished, all past due amounts are paid, and the charge of $35, if
assessed, is paid as provided by Section 22-49.
§ 22-51. Section 22-50 not to affect owner's liability for payment of
charges. [Ord. No. 596, § III, 5-11-1982; Ord. No. 760, § III,
5-11-1993]
The preceding section shall not be construed to relieve the owner of any
premises affected thereby from liability for any sums due the city for water
furnished such premises under the provisions of this ordinance. If the city is
unable to collect sums due from tenants or other non-owner occupants, the
owner shall be liable for such sums due for water and water-related services
furnished.
§ 22-52. Director of public works authorized to prepare forms. [Ord.
No. 596, § IV, 5-11-1982; Ord. No. 760, § IV, 5-11-1993]
The director of public works is hereby authorized to prepare requisite forms
to carry out the provisions of sections 22-49 and 22-50, including but not
limited to an agreement and request for utility services for owner and for
non-owner, and any required notices for shut off of water service.
§ 22-53. Duty of user to allow city to read water meter. [Ord. No.
596, § V, 5-11-1983; Ord. No. 630, 5-8-1984; Ord. No. 760, § V,
5-11-1993]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of each user of city water service to
allow the city or its authorized employees or agents to read the water meter.
If such meter is located within the residence of the user, the user shall, upon
reasonable request made during normal business hours, allow the city to
enter the residence for the purpose of reading such meter.
§ 22-50 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-54
AO:605
§ 22-54. Water turn on and shut off by city employees only. [Ord.
No. 596, § VI, 5-11-1982; Ord. No. 760, § VI, 5-11-1993]
City employees or agents only shall be authorized to turn on water or
shut off water connections. Such work shall not be performed by private
contractors or plumbers.
§ 22-55. Penalty. [Ord. No. 596, § VII, 5-11-1982; Ord. No. 760,
§ VII, 5-11-1993]
The general penalty provision, Section 1-11 of the City Code of Ordinances,
shall apply for all violations of this ordinance. Monthly water and sewer
utility bills shall be due and payable within 10 days of mailing and accounts
not paid within that time shall be delinquent, the city shall add a penalty of
1 1/2% per month on the unpaid balance of the account.
§ 22-56. through § 22-59. (Reserved)
§ 22-54 WILLISTON CODE § 22-56
AO:606
ARTICLE III
Water Emergency
§ 22-60. Statement of legislative policy. [Ord. No. 554, § 2,
6-10-1980]
During past years and continuing to the present time, the city has
experienced an inadequate supply of raw water for its municipal water
system, particularly during the summer months and in periods of
inadequate rainfall and from time to time emergencies exist because of the
lack of an adequate water supply.
The Missouri River, the reservoir supplying raw water to the city at times
becomes dangerously low and it occasionally becomes necessary to restrict
the use of water or prohibit entirely its use for certain purposes.
The city water treatment plant has a limited capacity and at such times
cannot meet the demands placed upon it and the treated water storage and
distribution system further has a limited capacity and such treatment plant
and treated water storage and distribution system are subject to mechanical
or electrical breakdowns, or similar malfunctions which from time to time
may create an emergency.
The board of city commissioners finds and determines that it is imperative
to the public well-being that certain uses of water not essential to the
health, welfare, and safety of the citizens of the city be restricted at times
or certain uses be prohibited entirely.
The board of city commissioners of the city finds and determines that
it is necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the
city to enact this article which shall be in addition to existing ordinances
previously enacted by the city.
§ 22-61. Application of article. [Ord. No. 554, § 3, 6-10-1980]
The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons using water in or
outside of the city from the Williston municipal water supply system.
§ 22-62. Determination of emergency and notice thereof. [Ord. No.
554, § 4, 6-10-1980]
(a) A determination that an emergency exists which requires the
imposition of certain restrictions on use of water or the prohibition of
use of water for certain purposes shall be made in the following
manner:
(1) If such emergency shall be caused by a dangerously low level of
water in the Missouri River or an inadequate supply of raw water,
the determination of emergency shall be made by the board of city
commissioners at any regular meeting or special meeting which
may be called for that purpose and the board of city commissioners,
after declaration of such emergency, may impose any one or more
§ 22-60 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-62
AO:607
§ 22-63. Restrictions and prohibited uses. [Ord. No. 554, § 5,
6-10-1980; Ord. No. 996]
of all of the restrictions and prohibited uses of water provided in
Section 22-63.
(2) If such emergency shall be caused by the lack of capacity of the
water treatment plant or the lack of capacity of the treated water
storage and distribution system, or by a mechanical or electrical
breakdown or similar malfunction in any part of the municipal
water system, such determination of emergency shall be made by
the director of the department of public works of the city who is
hereby authorized and directed in such circumstances to declare
an emergency and impose any one or more or all of the restrictions
or prohibited uses provided in Section 22-63.
(3) After an emergency shall be determined pursuant to either
paragraph (1) or (2) above, and determination that certain
restrictions or prohibited uses shall be imposed, notice thereof may
be published in any reasonable manner in the official newspaper of
the city or broadcast on radio or television stations serving the city
in any reasonable manner and after publication of such notice, it
shall be unlawful for any person to use or withdraw water from the
municipal water system in any manner contrary to such restrictions
or prohibited uses.
(a) Upon declaration of an emergency pursuant to either paragraph (1) or
(2) of Section 22-62, the board of city commissioners or the director of
the department of public works, as the case may be, may impose
restrictions on use of water or prohibit the use of water from the
municipal water system in any one or more or all of the following
manners, either for temporary periods of time or for an extended and
indefinite period of time until the emergency shall pass, as may be
deemed necessary:
(1) Restrict or prohibit the use of municipal water for watering,
sprinkling or irrigating yards, lawns, gardens, trees, shrubbery,
grass or any other vegetation; restrict or prohibit the use of water
for washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, trailer houses or any
other mobile equipment; restrict or prohibit the use of water for
washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches, or
other outdoor facilities or services; restrict or prohibit the use of
water for operation of any ornamental fountain or other exterior
structure making use of water or the addition of water to any
swimming or wading pool, whether public or private.
(2) In order to minimize peak demands on the City's water treatment
and distribution system, the use of municipal water for the
purposes of sprinkling or irrigating yards, lawns, gardens, trees,
shrubbery, grass or any other vegetation shall be done in
accordance with the following schedule:
§ 22-62 WILLISTON CODE § 22-63
AO:608
§ 22-64. through § 22-70. (Reserved)
a. Persons living in dwelling structures which have a street
address number assigned ending in an even digit may use
water outside such structure only on Mondays, Wednesdays,
Fridays and Sundays.
b. Persons living in dwelling structures which have a street
address number assigned ending in an odd digit may use water
outside such structure only on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays
and Saturdays.
For the purposes of this paragraph (2), any street address
number ending in a fraction shall be deemed to be an odd
number.
(3) Require that persons living in dwelling structures which do not
have street address numbers assigned living in the city or persons
living in dwelling structures which live outside of the city but which
use water supplied from the Williston municipal water supply
system may use water outside such structure only during certain
hours of each day, as established by the director of the department
of public works of the city or by the board of city commissioners of
the city.
(4) Prohibit entirely the use of water for any of the purposes described
in paragraph (1) above during certain hours of the day, such as
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 22-63 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-64
AO:609

ARTICLE IV
Private Water Wells
§ 22-71. Definitions. [Ord. No. 939, § 1, 7-26-2011]
As used in this article:
CITY — The City of Williston, North Dakota.
CITY WATER SERVICE — The water supplied by the City of Williston.
CONSTRUCTION SITE DEWATERING — Temporary removal of ground
water from an excavating site.
OWNER — The person holding the legal or equitable title to real property
or a lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, an assignee
of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or any other person, firm or
corporation directly or indirectly in control of a building, structure or real
property or his duly authorized agent.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association, organization, or other legal entity.
WATER MAIN — A pipe owned or controlled by the city located within the
street right-of-way or other public easement used to carry water within the
city water service system to the water customer.
WATER WELL — A hole drilled or bored into the earth for the purpose of
removing water through mechanical or not mechanical means.
§ 22-72. Private water well prohibited. [Ord. No. 939, § 2,
7-26-2011]
Except as provided in Section 22-73, no person shall install, construct,
develop, maintain or use a water well within the City of Williston.
§ 22-73. Permitted water wells. [Ord. No. 939, § 3, 7-26-2011]
The following water wells are permitted within the City, under the terms
and conditions specified:
(a) A water well used solely for the purpose of construction site dewatering
or for conducting response activities, including sampling or treatment
of the groundwater, under a plan approved and permits issued by the
State of North Dakota.
(b) A water well lawfully in existence at the time of the enactment of this
article, provided, however, the size of such water well shall not be
expanded.
(c) A well used for geothermal purposes.
§ 22-71 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-74
AO:611
§ 22-74. Violations. [Ord. No. 939, § 4, 7-26-2011]
Any person who violates any provision of this article or who violates any
provision of a license issued under the provisions of the article shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500. Each day this article is violated shall
be considered as a separate violation.
§ 22-75. Enforcement officials. [Ord. No. 939, § 5, 7-26-2011]
City officials designated by resolution of the board of city commissioners
are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil
infraction citations directing alleged violators of this article to appear in
court.
§ 22-76. Nuisance. [Ord. No. 939, § 6, 7-26-2011]
A violation of this article is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is declared
to be offensive to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 22-77. Civil remedies. [Ord. No. 939, § 7, 7-26-2011]
In addition to enforcing this article through the use of a municipal civil
infraction proceeding, the city may initiate proceedings to abate or
eliminate the nuisance or any other violation of this article.
§ 22-74 WILLISTON CODE § 22-77
AO:612
Chapter 23
SALES TAX
§ 23-1. Imposition of tax. [Ord. No. 742, § 1, 6-11-1991; Ord. No.
861, § 1, 1-14-2003]
§ 23-2. Taxable event. [Ord. No. 742, § 2, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 861,
§ 2, 1-14-2003]
The occurrence of an event which pursuant to N.D.C.C. Chapter 57-39.2
gives rise to sales tax liability in favor of the state shall likewise give rise to
a sales tax liability in favor of the city, except as provided hereafter.
§ 23-3. State exemptions and limitations to apply. [Ord. No. 742,
§ 3, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 861, § 3, 1-14-2003]
The exemptions, exclusions, immunities, credits and privileges provided
for in N.D.C.C. Chapter 57-39.2 which avoid or limit the imposition of
the state sales tax provided for herein, or which give rise to the right of
refund, shall likewise avoid or limit the city sales tax imposed by this article
or give the right to a refund. Such exemptions shall specifically include
sales to contractors that are exempt pursuant to Subsection 15 of Section
57-39.2-04, N.D.C.C.
§ 23-4. Additional limitations on the scope of taxation. [Ord. No.
742, § 4, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 861, § 4, 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 951,
6-26-2012]
(a) (1) There is hereby imposed a 1% sales tax on gross receipts received
by retailers and arising from retail sales. The imposition of the tax
is subject, however, to the limitations, modifications, and
exemptions which follow.
(2) There is hereby imposed a 1% sales tax on gross receipts received
by retailers and arising from retail sales, which is to be applied to
the payment of general obligation bonds, relating to Williston
School District No. 1's construction of an addition to the high
school for use as a junior high and to update existing schools. The
imposition of the tax is subject, however, to the limitations,
modifications, and exemptions which follow.
(b) Although the tax imposed by this chapter is called a sales tax for
purposes of convenience, it is not intended by so doing to categorize or
to classify the tax conclusively and exclusively as a sales tax, but rather
the city commission intends to invoke all bases of authority available to
the city under state constitution, Chapter 40-05.1 of the North Dakota
Century Code, and the city home rule charter, which bases sustain the
legality of the exercise of the power being asserted in this chapter.
§ 22-77 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-4
AO:613
§ 23-5. Sales tax table to be used. [Ord. No. 742, § 5, 6-11-1991;
Ord. No. 861, § 5, 1-14-2003]
(a) The tax shall be imposed at the rate of 2% of the purchase price of the
property which involved in a taxable event under Subsection (a) of
Section 23-3 until the additional $0.01 tax under Section 23-1(a)(2) of
this section, which amends Ordinance 743, and has previously been
amended by Ordinances 779, 846, 861, 862 and 943, expires at which
time the rate shall be 1%.
(b) The tax shall be imposed at the rate of 2% of the fair market value of the
property which involved in a taxable event under subsections (b) and (c)
of Section 23-3 until the additional $0.01 tax under Section 23-1(a)(2) of
this section, which amends Ordinance 743, and has previously been
amended by Ordinances 779, 846, 861, 862 and 943, expires at which
time the rate shall be 1%.
(c) There shall be no sales or use tax imposed under this article upon that
portion of the receipts in excess of $2,500 per purchase.
(a) The taxpayer shall add the sales tax to the price of whatever has been
sold which gives rise to the tax, which tax until paid shall be a debt from
the purchaser to the seller. The tax shall be integrated in the state sales
tax bracket system provided for in N.D.C.C. 57-39.2-08.2 as follows:
(1) The tax as provided in Section 23-1(a)(1) above shall be:
Amount of Purchase Sales Tax
$0.01 to $0.15 none
$0.16 to $0.17 0.01
$0.18 to $0.34 0.02
$0.35 to $0.50 0.03
$0.51 to $0.67 0.04
$0.68 to $0.84 0.05
$0.85 to $1 0.06
Thereafter, the tax shall increase in $0.01 increments as the
purchase price increases in the following pattern of increments or
brackets:
$0.17
$0.17
$0.16
Alternatively, for purchases in excess of $1, the taxpayer may
multiply the purchase price by 0.06 to determine the sales tax to
charge the purchaser.
§ 23-4 WILLISTON CODE § 23-5
AO:614
§ 23-6. Tax returns and information reports. [Ord. No. 742, § 6,
6-11-1991; Ord. No. 861, § 1-14-2003]
The tax administrator is authorized to create and publish, and to require the
use of, such tax return forms and information reports as in his judgment are
necessary to administer the tax provided for herein. To the extent feasible,
these forms shall incorporate or be integrated with the returns and reports
required by the state tax commissioner under N.D.C.C. Chapter 57-39.2.
(2) The tax as provided in Section 23-1(a)(2) above shall be calculated
in addition to the above $0.01 tax. While both $0.01 sales taxes are
in effect the tax shall be calculated upon the basis of the following
table:
Amount of Purchase Sales Tax
$0.01 to $0.15 none
$0.16 to $0.17 0.02
$0.18 to $0.34 0.03
$0.35 to $0.50 0.04
$0.51 to $0.67 0.05
$0.68 to $0.84 0.06
$0.85 to $1 0.07
Thereafter, the tax shall increase in $0.02 increments as the
purchase price increases in the following pattern of increments or
brackets:
$0.17
$0.17
$0.16
Alternatively, for purchases in excess of $1, the taxpayer may
multiply the purchase price by 0.07 to determine the sales tax to
charge the purchaser.
(b) The tax administrator is authorized to establish a sales tax table which
integrates the tax imposed by this chapter with the special sales tax
provided for in N.D.C.C. 57-39.2-03.2. The integrated table must
provide that when the threshold amount of a sale is reached which
triggers the state tax that this tax is likewise imposed.
(c) The tax liability from the retailer to the city under Section 23-1(a)(1)
above, shall be 1% multiplied by the retailer's non-exempt sales and
under Section 23-1(a)(2) shall be an additional 1%.
§ 23-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7
AO:615
§ 23-7. Taxpayer expense deductions. [Ord. No. 742, § 7, 6-11-1991;
Ord. No. 861, § 7, 1-14-2003]
In order to alleviate to some extent the expense of record keeping,
accounting and clerical work resulting from the imposition of this tax, the
taxpayer shall be allowed to deduct and retain 3% of the tax due if he pays
the balance thereof before or when it is due and in the correct amount.
However, the deduction provided for in this section shall not exceed $83.33
per month or $250 per quarter per taxpayer. The total monthly and
quarterly deduction herein contemplated includes monthly and quarterly
deduction for the administration of use tax as set forth in Ordinance No.
743.36
§ 23-8. Tax payments; collections; penalties. [Ord. No. 742, § 8,
6-11-1991; Ord. No. 861, § 8, 1-14-2003]
The tax imposed herein shall be paid and collected as nearly as practical in
accordance with the payment, collection and penalty provisions of N.D.C.C.
Chapter 57-39.2.
§ 23-9. Incorporation by reference. [Ord. No. 742, § 9, 6-11-1991;
Ord. No. 861, § 9, 1-14-2003]
To accomplish the foregoing and to make explicit that which is already
implicit in the foregoing, there is hereby adopted by reference the
provisions of N.D.C.C. Chapter 57-39.2 and the regulations promulgated
thereunder by the state tax commissioner with the following modifications:
(a) Tax commissioner shall mean the tax administrator.
(b) State of North Dakota shall mean the City of Williston.
(c) The provisions of Section 23-7 hereof shall substitute for N.D.C.C.
57-39.2-12.1.
(d) Attorney general shall mean city attorney.
(e) Criminal penalties as opposed to civil penalties shall be the maximum
penalties which a municipality may lawfully impose under state law.
(f) State treasurer shall mean city auditor.
(g) General fund shall mean the sales tax fund.
(h) Office of management and budget shall mean city auditor.
(i) No separate city sales tax permit shall be required.
(j) N.D.C.C. 57-39.2-09 is adopted by reference.
36.Editor's note: Ordinance No. 743 is codified as Chapter 24 of the Code of Ordinances of
the City of Williston.
§ 23-7 WILLISTON CODE § 23-9
AO:616
§ 23-10. Tax administrator. [Ord. No. 742, § 10, 6-11-1991; Ord. No.
861, § 10, 1-14-2003]
The tax administrator shall be the city auditor. However, the city auditor
is authorized to contract with the state tax commissioner to enforce this
article, subject to confirmation of the contract by the city commission. If the
contract is made and confirmed, the tax administrator shall be the state tax
commissioner as long as the contract remains in force.
§ 23-11. Allocation of revenue. [Ord. No. 742, § 11, 6-11-1991; Ord.
No. 846, § 4-24-2001; Ord. No. 861, § 11, 1-14-2003; Ord. No. 921,
7-28-2009; Ord. No. 943, 12-13-2011, Ord. No. 951, 6-26-2012]
The proceeds of the tax specified in Section 23-1(a)(1) shall be placed in a
separate sales tax fund, which fund shall be dedicated as follows:
75% of the proceeds of such city sales and use tax shall be dedicated
to property tax relief through debt reduction and necessary city owned
infrastructure and 25% to a job creation fund (The Williston Star Fund)
which includes community development related to job creation, retention
and expansion. Upon passing a resolution by a 4/5ths vote of the
commissioners, the city commission may reallocate up to a total of 75% of
the proceeds to either use described above.
The proceeds of the tax specified in Section 23-1(a)(2) shall be placed in a
separate sales tax fund which fund shall be dedicated as follows:
§ 23-12. Termination of tax. [Ord. No. 742, § 12, 6-11-1991; Ord. No.
779, 6-27-1995; Ord. No. 846, 4-24-2001; Ord. No. 861, § 12,
1-14-2003; Ord. No. 921, 7-28-2009; Ord. No. 943, 12-13-2011; Ord.
No. 951, 6-26-2012; Ord. No. 1071, 11-28-2017]
(k) No tax shall be imposed on a sale when the goods are delivered or
services rendered outside the city.
(l) The rate of taxation and the scope of taxation provided in this article
shall be substituted for the rate of taxation and the scope of taxation
provided in Chapter 57-39.2 to the extent that this article contradicts or
conflicts with that chapter.
(a) Fifty percent of the additional 1% sales tax to be used by the Williston
Parks and Recreation District will be used for park district operations.
(b) Fifty percent of the additional 1% sales tax to be used by the Williston
Parks and Recreation District will be used for towards construction of a
new Community Recreation Center.
(a) The tax imposed under Section 23-1(a)(1) herein shall terminate as
follows:
§ 23-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-12
AO:617
Chapter 24
USE TAX
§ 24-1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 743, § 1, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 862, § 1,
1-14-2003]
DOING BUSINESS IN THE CITY — Activity which occurs within the city and
which by virtue of Subsection (7) of N.D.C.C. 57-40.2-01 makes the person
engaged in the activity a "retailer maintaining a place of business in this
state." In addition, it includes the delivery by a retailer of tangible personal
goods within the city to the ultimate user thereof by a means other than (i)
through the U.S. Mails or (ii) through a common carrier.
FAIR MARKET VALUE OF PROPERTY — A price at which a willing buyer
would buy it from a willing seller, each being equally well informed in
regard to the condition of the property and of the market for such property.
INVENTORY — Property held for sale or rent to others in the ordinary
course of business of the person so holding the property.
PURCHASE — The buying or renting of an item of tangible personal
property.
PURCHASE PRICE — Is used in the ordinary sense of the word except that
it shall be computed net of case discounts (for prompt or early payment)
and net of trade-in allowances.
RAW MATERIALS — Property including a component which is not intended
to be used by itself alone or in its present condition, but rather (i) which
is intended to be integrated with other components of raw material, or (ii)
which is intended to be processed, in either case so as to be converted into
inventory.
RETAIL — In respect to a purchase that the purchaser is the ultimate user
of the item purchased. In determining who is the ultimate user the tax
administrator shall disregard the possibility or probability that user in time
(1) On June 30,2030, unless prior to that date the electors of the city
vote by a simple majority of those voting to extend the tax
indefinitely or to a time certain.
(b) The tax imposed under Section 23-1(a)(2) herein shall terminate as
follows:
(1) The 1/2% of the additional 1% sales tax to be used in Section
23-11(a) for Park District operations shall expire 20 years after its
inception.
(2) The 1/2% of the additional 1% sales tax to be used in Section
23-11(b) for construction of a new community center shall expire at
the completion of paying for the bonds to build the recreation
center or 20 years, whichever is less.
§ 23-12 WILLISTON CODE § 24-1
AO:618
may sell the property as used property or for salvage when his use thereof
has terminated.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR — The city auditor.
USE — The exercise of dominion or control over an item of tangible personal
property by the owner thereof or the person in possession thereof, including
specifically but not limited to the storage or consumption of the item.
§ 24-2. Taxable property. [Ord. No. 743, § 2, 6-11-1991; Ord. No.
862, § 2, 1-14-2003]
Taxable property shall consist of all tangible personal property except:
§ 24-3. Taxable events. [Ord. No. 743, § 3, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 862,
§ 3, 1-14-2003]
(a) Property identified in N.D.C.C. Chapter 57-40.2 as being exempt from
the state use tax because of (i) its physical characteristics or design,
such as, for example, artificial limbs, (ii) the use to which it is put, such
as, for example, railway cars and locomotives used in interstate
commerce, or (iii) both its design and use;
(b) Natural gas;
(c) Farm machinery or farm machinery parts; or
(d) Farm irrigation equipment.
(a) The purchase of taxable property at retail with the intent of using it in
this city shall give rise to a taxable event under this chapter, except if
the intended use is as a raw material or inventory, or except if the retail
sale of this property gives rise to the imposition of the sales tax by (i)
this city or (ii) any other political subdivision of this state or any other
state.
(b) The bringing of taxable property into the city shall give rise to a taxable
event under this chapter, unless the property has already been
subjected to a sales tax or use tax by this city or some other local
political subdivision of this state or of any other state, or unless the
property raw materials or inventory in the hands of the person for
whose use it is brought into the city.
(c) The conversion within the city of raw materials to some other use,
unless that use is as inventory, or the conversion within the city of
inventory to the personal use of the owner, shall constitute a taxable
event under this chapter.
(d) If a buyer of taxable property at retail is domiciled within the city it
shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal, that the buyer intended to use
the property within the city at the time of purchase. The giving of a
Williston address by a buyer as part of the transaction of purchase shall
give rise to the rebuttal presumption that the buyer is domiciled in the
§ 24-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3
AO:619
§ 24-4. Rate of tax; limitation on tax. [Ord. No. 743, § 4, 6-11-1991;
Ord. No. 862, § 4, 1-14-2003]
§ 24-5. Collection. [Ord. No. 743, § 5, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 862, § 5,
1-14-2003]
§ 24-6. Allocation of revenue and termination of tax. [Ord. No. 743,
§ 6, 6-11-1991; Ord. No. 862, § 6, 1-14-2003]
The proceeds of the tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid into and shall
form part of the funds created by Ordinance No. 742 as amended. The tax
imposed by this chapter shall terminate when the tax imposed by Ordinance
No. 742, as amended, terminates.39
§ 24-7. Special rules for contractors. [Ord. No. 743, § 7, 6-11-1991;
Ord. No. 862, § 7, 1-14-2003]
city. In any judicial proceeding to enforce this chapter it shall be an
affirmative defense that certain property was inventory or was raw
materials.
(a) The tax shall be imposed at the rate of 2% of the purchase price of the
property which is involved in a taxable event under Subsection (a) of
Section 24-3 until the additional $0.01 tax under Section 23-1(a)(2) of
Ordinance No. 861 amending Ordinance 742 as amended by
Ordinances 779 and 84637 expires at which time the rate shall be 1%.
(b) The tax shall be imposed at the rate of 2% of the fair market value of the
property which is involved in a taxable event under Subsection (b) or (c)
of Section 24-3 as of the date of that taxable event until the additional
$0.01 tax under Section 23-1(a)(2) of Ordinance 861 amending
Ordinance 742 as amended by Ordinance 84638 expires at which time
the rate shall be 1%.
(c) There shall be no use tax imposed under this chapter upon that portion
of the receipts in excess of $2,500 from any one person in one day.
(a) The tax attributable to a taxable event under Subsection (a) of Section
24-3 shall be collected from the purchaser by the retailer making the
sale giving rise to the imposition of the tax and shall be paid over by the
retailer to the tax administrator if the retailer is doing business within
the City of Williston.
(b) When Subsection (a) is inapplicable the tax shall be paid by the person
for whose use the property is purchased, or imported into the city, or
converted from a prior use, and collected by the tax administrator.
37.Editor's Note: The ordinances referred to herein are codified in Chapter 23.
38.Editor's Note: The ordinances referred to herein are codified in Chapter 23.
39.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 742 is codified as Chapter 23.
§ 24-3 WILLISTON CODE § 24-7
AO:620
§ 24-8. Administration of tax. [Ord. No. 743, § 8, 6-11-1991; Ord.
No. 862, § 8, 1-14-2003]
(a) In making a purchase of taxable property a contractor shall not be
treated as the person who is the ultimate user of the property if:
(1) The taxable property is to be incorporated into the improvement of
real property which the contractor is building, and
(2) The contractor has filed with the seller of the property a current
certificate provided for in N.D.C.C. 57-40.2-06(1).
(b) If the contractor is exempt from paying the tax imposed by this chapter
through the operation of Subsection (a) the person selling the taxable
property to the contractor does not have to collect the tax. However, the
tax is not waived if a tax is imposed under Section 24-3 but rather the
contractor must pay it over to the tax administrator when the
contractor uses the tangible personal property in the performance of
his contract.
(c) The tax imposed on contractors shall not apply to property used to fulfill
contract or subcontract obligations bid prior to July 1, 1991.
(a) The tax administrator shall administer the tax imposed by this chapter.
However, he is authorized to contract with the office of the state tax
commissioner so as to allow it to discharge in his stead the duties and
responsibilities imposed upon him by this subsection, in which case it
shall exercise his lawful authority under this chapter in addition to its
own powers.
(b) To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter the provisions of
N.D.C.C. Chapter 57-40.2, including the cross-references contained
therein, and the regulations promulgated thereunder, shall apply to the
administration and enforcement of the tax imposed by this chapter, with
the following modifications when the context so requires:
(1) Tax commissioner shall mean the tax administrator.
(2) State of North Dakota shall mean the City of Williston.
(3) The provisions of Section 9 shall substitute for N.D.C.C.
57-40.2-07.1.
(4) Attorney general shall mean city attorney.
(5) Criminal penalties as opposed to civil penalties shall be the
maximum penalties which a municipality may lawfully impose
under state law.
(6) State treasurer shall mean city auditor.
(7) General fund shall mean the sales tax fund.
(8) Office of the management and budget shall mean city auditor.
§ 24-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-8
AO:621
§ 24-9. Credit for administration expenses. [Ord. No. 743, § 9,
6-11-1991; Ord. No. 862, § 9, 1-14-2003]
Chapter 25
TATTOOING
§ 25-1. Definition. [Ord. No. 767, § 1, 4-12-1994]
Tattooing means the marking of the skin of a person by insertion of
permanent colors by introducing such colors through puncture of the skin.
§ 25-2. Tattooing of minors prohibited. [Ord. No. 767, § 1,
4-12-1994]
No person shall tattoo any person under the age of 18 years, except in the
presence of and with the written permission of the parent or legal guardian
of such person. No person shall sell, trade, or otherwise provide materials
or kits for tattooing or self-tattooing to any person under the age of 18
years.
Zoning Ordinance
Chapter ZAO
ZONING ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter Z
ZONING ORDINANCE
(9) No separate city use tax permit shall be required.
(10)N.D.C.C. 57-40.2-08 is adopted by reference.
(a) A retailer who timely and accurately makes a payment to the tax
administrator required under this chapter may deduct and retain as
reimbursement for administrative expenses the lesser in the amount of
3% of the required payment. However, the deduction provided for in
this section shall not exceed $83.33 per month or $250 per quarter per
taxpayer. The total monthly and quarterly deduction herein
contemplated includes monthly and quarterly deduction for the
administration of sales tax as set forth in Ordinance No. 742 as
amended.40
40.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 742 is codified as Chapter 23.
§ 24-8 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 1
AO:622
SECTION 1. Short title. [Ord. No. 613]
This ordinance shall be known, cited, and referred to as the "Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Williston, North Dakota."
SECTION 2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 613]
SECTION 3. Establishment of districts. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 795,
Ord. No. 811, Ord. No. 968, Ord. No. 922, Ord. No. 1036, Ord. No.
1060, Ord. No. 1092]
A. Policy. These regulations have been made in accordance with the
policies and recommendations set forth in a duly adopted
Comprehensive Plan and have been enacted with the following
purposes in mind:
1. Lessen congestion in the streets.
2. Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers.
3. Promote health and the general welfare.
4. Provide adequate light and air.
5. Prevent the overcrowding of land.
6. Avoid undue concentration of population.
7. Facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage,
schools, parks, and other public requirements.
A. Districts enumerated. In order to effectively carry out the provisions of
these regulations, the land within the corporate limits and the land
within one mile of the corporate limits of the City of Williston shall be
divided into the following zoning districts:
1. F-H: Flood Hazard Overlay District.
2. A: Agricultural District.
3. R-1E: Rural Estate District.
4. R-1A: Rural Residential District.
5. R-1: Single-Family Residential District.
6. R-2: Single-Family, Twin home and Duplex Residential District
7. R-3: Lowrise-Multifamily and Townhouse Residential District.
8. R-4: Highrise-Multifamily Residential District.
9. R-5: Mobile Home Court District.
10. R-6: Manufactured Home Subdivision District.
SECTION 1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 3
AO:623
SECTION 4. District zoning map. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 850; Ord.
No. 1092]
11. R-7: Residential Manufactured Home Subdivision District.
12. P: Parks and Open Space District.
13. [Repealed by Ord. No. 1092]
13a. P-2: Planned Unit Development Overlay District
14. C-1: Neighborhood Commercial District.
15. C-2: General Commercial District.
16. C-3: Restricted Commercial District.
16a. HCC: Highway Corridor Commercial District
17. M-1: Light Industrial District.
18. M-2: Heavy Industrial District.
19. M-3: Industrial Park District.
20. MA: Municipal Airport District.
A. Official zoning map.
The City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction are hereby divided into
zones or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map, which together
with all explanatory matter thereon is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this ordinance.
The Official Zoning Map is a published paper version of a virtual map,
based on written records, maintained by the Planning Department.
The Planning Department shall publish an updated Official Zoning Map
at least quarterly, unless there have been no zone changes in the
preceding quarter.
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the notarized signature of
the Planning Director under the following words: "This is to certify that
this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Article IV of Ordinance
Number _____ of the City of Williston, North Dakota," together with the
effective date of this ordinance.
If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and Chapter
40-47, North Dakota Century Code, changes are made in district
boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, such
changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly by the
Planning Director after the amendment has been approved by the
City Commission, and an updated map published. The updated Official
Zoning Map shall be identified by the notarized signature of Planning
Director under the following words:
SECTION 3 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 4
AO:624
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces
the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being
replaced) as part of Ordinance No. _____ of the City of Williston, North
Dakota."
Official Zoning Maps that have been superseded by updated zoning
maps shall be archived by the Planning Director for three years from
the date of replacement.
No amendment to this ordinance, which involved matter portrayed on
the Official Zoning Map, shall become effective until after such change
and entry has been made on said map.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map,
or matter shown thereon, except in conformity with the procedures set
forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by
any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance
and punishable as provided under Section 26.D.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning
Map which may from time to time be made or published, either on
paper or online, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the
office of the Planning Director shall be the final authority as to the
current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other
structures in the City and its extra-territorial jurisdiction.
B. Replacement of Official Zoning Map.
In the event that the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed,
or lost, the Planning Director shall create a new copy of the virtual
zoning map. The replacement Official Zoning Map shall be identified by
the notarized signature of Planning Director under the following words:
"This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces
the Official Zoning Map adopted (date of adoption of map being
replaced) as part of Ordinance No. _____ of the City of Williston, North
Dakota, which was damaged, destroyed, or lost on (date)."
Unless the prior Official Zoning Map has been lost, or totally destroyed,
the prior map or any significant parts thereof remaining shall be
preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption
or amendment.
C. Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists
as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such
centerlines.
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
SECTION 4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 4
AO:625
SECTION 5. Application of district regulations. [Ord. No. 613, Ord.
No. 850]
3. Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall
be construed as following such City limits.
4. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed
to be midway between the main tracks.
5. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to
follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line
shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries
indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams,
rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow such center lines.
6. Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features
indicated in Subsections C.1 through C.5 above shall be so
construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official
Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
7. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Maps, or in other
circumstances not covered by Subsections C.1 through C.5 above,
the Board of Adjustments shall interpret the distance boundaries.
8. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the Board of
Adjustments may permit, as a special exception, the extension of
the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet
beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.
A. Regulations establish minimum requirements. The regulations set by
this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and
shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, and
particularly, except as hereinafter provided:
1. No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied;
and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered
except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for
the district in which it is located.
2. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered:
a. To exceed the height or bulk.
b. To accommodate or house a greater number of families.
c. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area.
SECTION 4 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 5
AO:626
SECTION 6. Nonconformities. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No.
837, Ord. No. 898]
Within the districts established by this ordinance or amendments thereto,
there exist lots, structures, uses of land and structures, and characteristics
of use which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended
but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of
this ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to
permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not
to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that
nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be
used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in
the same district.
Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with
permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure,
a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and
land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of
this ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs
intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses,
of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to
require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any
building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance and upon which
actual building construction has been carried on diligently.
d. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards,
or other open spaces, than herein required; or in any other
manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance.
3. No part of a yard, other open space, off-street, or loading space
required about or in connection with any building for the purpose
of complying with this ordinance, shall be included as part of a
yard, open space, off-street parking, or loading space similarly
required for any other building.
4. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall
be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements
set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this
ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements
established by this ordinance.
5. All territory which may hereafter be included in the one-mile extraterritorial
area due to City annexations shall be considered to be in
the A: Agricultural District unless otherwise classified.
A. Nonconforming lots of record. In any district in which single-family
dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary
accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the
SECTION 5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 6
AO:627
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, not
withstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance.
Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage
with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even
though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or
both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard
dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or
width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district
in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be
obtained only through action of the Board of Adjustments.
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portion of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of
passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots
do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, with
the exception of existing lots which are 50 feet or greater in width,
the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the
purposes of this ordinance; and no portion of said parcel shall be used
or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and
area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division
of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in this ordinance.
B. Nonconforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only).
Where at the time of passage of this ordinance lawful use of land exists
which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this
ordinance, and where such use involves no individual structure with a
replacement cost exceeding $1,000 the use may be continued so long as
it remains otherwise lawful, provided:
1. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
2. No such conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at
the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance.
3. If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than three years, any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the
district in which such land is located.
4. No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this
ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming
use of land.
C. Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could
not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions
on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other
requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be
SECTION 6 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 6
AO:628
continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
1. No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a
way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion
thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity.
2. Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of
structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50%
of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
ordinance.
3. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is moved.
4. If the original structure on the lot is damaged or destroyed beyond
50% of its replacement cost, then a similar structure may be built
subject to case by case review by the Building Official and City
Planner as to set backs, lot size, and building square footage. The
Building Official and City Planner shall have discretion as to the
replacement structure and foundation. Approval may be made by
Letter of Consent signed by the Building Official and City Planner.
D. Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in
combination. If lawful use involving individual structures with a
replacement cost of $1,000 or more, or of structure and premises in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the terms
of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued as long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
1. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally
altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use
permitted in the district in which it is located.
2. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a
building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use
at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no
such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such
buildings.
3. If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a
structure, or structure and premises, may as a special exception be
changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of
Adjustments, either by general rule or by making findings in the
specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate
or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming
use. In permitting such change, the Board of Adjustments may
SECTION 6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 6
AO:629
require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the
provisions of this ordinance.
4. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which
a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall
thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
5. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for three
years (except when government action impedes access to the
premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination,
shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the
regulations of the districts in which it is located.
6. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure
shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction
for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent
of more than 50% of the replacement cost at time of destruction.
E. Repairs and maintenance. On any nonconforming structure or portion
of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in
any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or
replacements of nonbearing wall, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an
extent not exceeding 10% of the current replacement cost of the
nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of the structure as
the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it
became nonconforming shall not be increased.
If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a
nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack
of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized
official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall
not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Nothing in this
ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to
a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe
by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of
such official.
F. Uses under special permitted use provisions not nonconforming uses.
Any use which is permitted as a Special Permitted Use in a district
under the terms of this ordinance (other than a change through Board
of Adjustments action from a nonconforming use to another use not
generally permitted in the district) shall not be deemed a
nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be
considered a conforming use. If the property ceases to be used for the
nonconforming use (Special Permitted Use) for a continuous three-year
period, this section shall not apply and any subsequent similar use shall
SECTION 6 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 6
AO:630
SECTION 7. F-H: Flood Hazard Overlay District. [Ord. No. 613, Ord.
No. 703, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 850; Ord. No. 1092]
require a special use permit pursuant to Section 27 of this Zoning
Ordinance.
A. Intent. This district is intended to be an overlay district and includes
lands subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
These lands (known as special flood hazard areas) include, but are not
limited to, those identified by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study for the City of Williston, dated August 5, 2010," with an
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map and all subsequent revisions
thereto. This map is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a
part of this ordinance. It is intended to discourage unwise and
incompatible development in special flood hazard areas so as to protect
the natural environment and to prevent loss of life and property due to
flooding.
B. Permitted uses. Uses permitted in this district shall be restricted to
those conforming with allowable uses in the underlying districts and to
those which meet the regulations of this section.
C. Permit procedures. Before development begins within any special flood
hazard area, a permit shall be obtained from the City Building Official.
The permit shall specifically include:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed structures.
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will
be floodproofed.
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any non-residential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in the Specific Standards Subsection G.2.
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
D. Use of other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not
been provided for the City of Williston and its extra-territorial
jurisdiction, the Building Official shall coordinate with the City
Engineer to obtain, review, and reasonable utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other
source, in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance.
E. Review procedures. All permit applications shall be reviewed (using the
best available base flood elevation data from any Federal, State, or local
source) to: assure sites are reasonably safe from flooding; determine
that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal State,
or local agencies from which prior approval is required; and to
SECTION 6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 7
AO:631
determine if the proposed development adversely affects the floodcarrying
capacity of a flood-prone area. For the purposes of this
ordinance, "adversely affects" means that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation
of the base flood more than one foot at any time.
1. If it is determined that there is not an adverse effect and the
development is not subject to other provisions of this ordinance,
then the permit shall be granted without further considerations.
2. If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, then technical
justification (i.e., a registered professional engineer) for the
proposed development shall be required.
3. If it is determined there is no adverse effect, then the following
provisions shall apply.
F. General standards. All new development and substantial improvements
including the placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile homes
(manufactured homes) shall conform to the following standards:
1. All new construction and substantial improvements (including
additions) shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or
lateral movement of the structure.
2. All mobile homes (manufactured homes) must be elevated and
anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods
of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top
or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting
wind forces.
3. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
4. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
5. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
6. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
7. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
SECTION 7 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 7
AO:632
8. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage; shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage; and shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
9. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
10. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development shall be prohibited in any
floodway unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that the
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during
the occurrence of the flood discharge.
G. Specific standards. Where base flood elevation data is available, the
following standards shall be met.
1. Residential construction.
a. New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation.
b. Mobile homes (manufactured homes) shall be placed so that
the lowest floor is elevated on fill to or above the base flood
elevation.
2. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
a. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop and/or review structural design,
specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify
that the design methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice.
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the City Building Official as
set forth in the Administrative Requirements Subsection H.2.b.
H. Administrative requirements. In all special flood hazard area, the City
Building Official shall:
SECTION 7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 7
AO:633
SECTION 8. A: Agricultural district. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 645,
Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 732, Ord. No. 807, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No.
850, Ord. No. 864, Ord. No. 865, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord.
No. 1026, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1050, Ord. No. 1062]
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new
or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the
structure contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure has been floodproofed.
b. Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in the
Specific Standards Subsection G.2.c.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this ordinance.
4. Notify nearby communities, water resource districts and the North
Dakota State Engineer, as necessary, prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Management Agency; and
5. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity is not diminished.
A. Intent. This district is intended to protect and preserve lands which are
presently rural or agricultural in character and use. These lands are not
presently required for urban development, but will accommodate
residential development opportunities for those who desire rural living
and are willing to live in more remote locations and to assume the costs
of providing many of their own services and amenities.
This district is also intended to protect and preserve areas of prime
agricultural soils as identified in the Williston Development Guide, for
continued agricultural and agriculturally-oriented uses. These areas
consist of the most agriculturally productive soils and should not be
converted from agricultural to another zoning classification unless and
until there are no other lands available in Williston and the
extraterritorial area to accommodate nonagricultural uses. This district
is not intended to regulate agricultural uses, but to regulate those uses
which threaten agriculture.
This district is also intended to allow development of mineral resources
including oil and gas, coal, potash, sand, gravel, scoria, and the like in
a manner that does not adversely impact the natural environment and
adjoining land uses.
SECTION 7 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 8
AO:634
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. None.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. General farming and dairying, including the sale of the product of
the farm, located within City's extraterritorial jurisdiction but
outside City limits, except as provided by Ordinance No. 777
incorporated as Section 4-2 of Williston Code of City Ordinances,
which provisions shall apply.
2. Public stables, greenhouses, nurseries, and the growing and
preservation of trees, provided that storage of manure shall not be
permitted nearer than 150 feet to any lot line.
3. Fish hatcheries, beekeeping, fur farms, and dog kennels.
4. Stock raising, but not including commercial feed lots.
5. Single-family dwellings, mobile homes and/or manufactured
homes.
6. Churches, schools, libraries, community centers, public parks, and
other public buildings and recreational facilities.
7. Educational, religious and philanthropic institutions, but not
including penal or mental institutions.
8. Electric substations and gas regulator stations, provided that for
each substation where transformers are exposed there shall be an
enclosing fence at least six feet high.
9. Fire stations, police stations, and telephone exchanges.
10. Radio or television towers, not exceeding 50 feet in height except
as may be restricted by airport zoning.
11. Cemeteries.
12. Parks, recreation areas, wildlife areas, game refuges, and forest
preserves.
13. Water supply buildings, reservoirs, wells, elevated tanks, regional
pipelines and powerlines, public sewage treatment facilities, and
similar essential public utilities and service buildings.
14. Railroad right-of-ways, but not railroad yards.
15. Animal hospital or veterinary clinic.
16. Seismographic exploration as regulated by State Statute.
17. Storage of flammable liquids above grade, up to 20,000 gallons,
subject to the locally adopted Fire Code Regulations.
SECTION 8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 8
AO:635
18. Storage of liquefied petroleum gases, up to 50,000 gallons, subject
to the locally adopted Fire Code Regulations.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Roadside stands for operation during six months of the year for the
sale of products produced on the farm. Signs for permitted uses
shall meet the requirements stated in Section 25.G.
3. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses.
1. Hospitals and sanitariums for contagious or infectious diseases,
provided:
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve the
location of said hospital or sanitarium.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe all
setback requirements.
2. Airports, provided:
a. They do not endanger the immediate area.
b. They meet all local, State, and Federal regulations.
3. Livestock sales rings, provided:
a. The State Livestock Sanitary Board has given approval for the
establishment.
b. Auctioning of farm implements shall be conducted as a
secondary "service" or "convenience" to the livestock auction
and shall, in no manner, be conducted for the sale of general
household wares, household appliances or furniture,
miscellaneous items or junk.
c. Parking or storage area for farm implements must be screened
and enclosed by a chain link fence at least six feet high. No
piece of farm equipment shall remain on the premises for more
than 15 consecutive days, except for machinery used for
maintenance of the livestock sales ring and premises.
d. All corrals, or pens for live animals shall be placed at least 200
feet from any public street or public road and shall be to the
rear of the main building.
SECTION 8 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 8
AO:636
e. The area shall include adequate off-street parking for
automobiles as well as trucks and shall be designed to provide
adequate truck maneuvering space for both loading and
unloading of trucks.
f. Livestock sales rings shall not be operated in any manner so as
to impair, or in any way affect, the public health, safety, or
welfare; or to operate said livestock sales ring in any manner
as to be a public nuisance.
g. No unusual amount of odor or noise disseminated beyond the
boundaries of the premises on which the use is located shall be
permitted.
h. No more than 10% of the total number of animals present for
sale at any one auction shall be kept on the premises for more
than 10 consecutive days following each auction.
i. The special permit for operation of a livestock auction ring, as
provided in these regulations, shall be enforced if inspection by
the Planning and Zoning Commission or its representatives
reveals that the feeding and keeping of animals, as in the
manner of a feed lot, is the primary use of the premises.
j. Storage of manure shall not be permitted.
k. Use of building or structure (temporary or permanent) for
restaurant or "coffee shop" be subject to all regulations of the
Williston Building Code and Williams County Health
Department.
l. When the application for livestock auction rings is filed with
the Planning and Zoning Commission, the applicant shall
present a plan showing the proposed development. Included in
the plan shall be the following:
(i) Topographic map showing two-foot contour intervals.
(ii) Drainage plan showing method of handling drainage
problems including storm sewer drainage locations, if
necessary.
(iii) Location of existing utilities and proposed utility
extensions.
(iv) Letters of commitment or intent from the utility companies
concerning satisfactory water and sanitary sewer service,
or from the local health jurisdiction concerning
satisfactory wells and septic tanks.
(v) Plat showing dimension and locations of all structures,
existing or proposed, on the tract of land.
SECTION 8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 8
AO:637
(vi) Parking plan defining off-street parking areas. Such plan is
subject to the provisions of these regulations.
(vii) Driveway plan indicating all interior driveways, curb cuts
and areas for maneuvering trucks.
4. Commercial feed lots shall be permitted subject to conditions set
below:
a. No unusual amount of odor or noise shall be disseminated
beyond the boundaries of the premises on which the use is
located.
b. Storage of manure shall not be permitted within 200 feet from
any lot line.
c. All corrals, pens, and buildings shall be located at least 200
feet from any lot line.
d. When the application for feed lots is filed with the Planning and
Zoning Commission the applicant shall present a plan showing
the proposed development. Included in the plan shall be the
following:
(i) Topographic map showing two foot contours.
(ii) Drainage plan.
(iii) Locations of existing utilities and proposed utility
extensions.
(iv) Letters of commitment or intent from the utility companies
concerning satisfactory water and sanitary sewer service
or from the local health jurisdiction concerning
satisfactory wells and septic tanks.
(v) Plat showing dimensions and locations of all structures,
existing or proposed, on the tract of the land.
(vi) Parking and loading plan defining off-street parking and
loading areas. Such plan is subject to Section 25.I and J of
these regulations.
(vii) Driveway plan indicating driveways, curb cuts, area for
maneuvering trucks.
(viii) Petition signed by at least 75% of the property owners
within a 1/2 mile radius of the site of the proposed feed lot.
(ix) All plans, plot plans, and petitions as required must be
submitted to the Williston Planning and Zoning
Commission at least 30 days prior to the public hearing
date.
SECTION 8 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 8
AO:638
e. If the operation is a registered livestock feed lot, the owner
must obtain registration number from the State Livestock
Sanitary Board.
5. Stockyard or the slaughter of animals.
6. Rock crushers, concrete and asphalt mixing plants, sand and gravel
pits, or any other such excavation or surface mining shall be
allowed provided they meet the requirements as set forth in
Section 25.L.
7. Oil and gas drilling, provided it meets the requirements as set forth
in Section 25.M.
8. Marina.
9. Private clubs.
10. Gun clubs, skeet, ranges or target ranges.
11. Golf driving rangers and golf courses.
12. Amusement parks, commercial baseball or athletic fields.
13. Race tracks or fairgrounds.
14. Open-air theaters.
15. Radio or television towers exceeding 50 feet in height.
16. Storage of explosives and blasting agents, subject to the locally
adopted Fire Code, provided it is located outside the City limits.
17. Storage of flammable liquids above grade, over 20,000 gallons,
subject to the locally adopted Fire Code Regulations.
18. Storage of liquefied petroleum gases, over 50,000 gallons, subject
to the locally adopted Fire Code Regulations.
19. Building material yards, contractor yards, and lumberyards.
20. Animal units, such as a horse, mule, jackass, goat or other animals
kept as a family pet, may be kept within the City limits provided
there is a minimum of three acres for the first two animal units; and
with one additional animal unit allowed for each acre over three.
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
2. Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
H. Minimum yard requirements.
SECTION 8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 8
AO:639
1. Front yard: 50 feet.
2. Side yard: 15 feet.
3. Rear yard: 25% of the depth of the lot.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. None.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area of any dwelling, excluding
attached garage, shall be 800 square feet.
K. Maximum height of buildings. None, other than that which may be set
forth by airport zoning.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. for Off-Street
Parking Requirements. Required off-street parking shall be provided in
such a manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. See Section 25.S., Buffer Yards.
O. Limited permitted use for temporary workforce housing.
1. Definitions.
a. TEMPORARY WORKFORCE HOUSING - Shall mean one or all
the following meaning: 1) employee housing, which may or
may not be located on a principal heavy industrial parcel to be
occupied by employees of a requesting business which use is
temporary and having received approval pursuant to City of
Williston Ordinance No. 925; 2) employee housing, which
consists of one or more workforce lodging units, ordinarily
designed for human living quarters which may or may not be
real property as defined in Section 57-02-04, N.D.C.C., and this
type of employee housing has been granted by a conditional
use permit by Williams County; and/or 3) employee housing
which is not otherwise permitted without receiving a special
grant by the City of Williston through the applicable special
permitted use process or by Williams County through the
applicable conditional use permit process Zoning Ordinance.
b. LIMITED PERMITTED USE - A use of land in conformity with
the uses temporarily permitted under a zoning classification
which use is expressly subject to expire and terminate at the
end of a fixed period. The intent of a limited permitted use is to
allow a use of land for a temporary basis which is in conformity
with a zoning classification but otherwise subject to what is
known as a sunset law with such use becoming a non-permitted
use at the end of a fixed period.
SECTION 8 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 8
AO:640
2. City of Williston approved temporary workforce housing. So long as
the temporary workforce housing meets and complies with all
requirements provided in Subsections O.4, 5, 6, 7 and 10 below,
existing temporary workforce housing approved under and in
accordance with City of Williston Ordinance No. 925 whose special
permitted use permit expired on or before December 31, 2015,
shall be considered a conforming limited permitted use as follows:
1) the temporary workforce housing facility may occupy their
structures until September 1, 2016; 2) the temporary workforce
housing facility shall have until May 1, 2018 to remove their facility
to an area zoned for outdoor storage; and 3) the temporary
workforce housing facility shall have until August 1, 2018 to
undertake site reclamation.
3. Williams county approved temporary workforce housing. So long as
the temporary workforce housing meets and complies with all
requirements provided in Subsections O.4, 5, 6, 7 and 10 below,
existing temporary workforce housing approved under and in
accordance with the applicable Williams County Zoning ordinance
and Williams County's designated permit process resulting in a
valid conditional use permit being issued by Williams County with
said existing temporary workforce housing then becoming subject
to the requirements of the City of Williston Zoning Ordinance and
City of Williston Resolution 13-127 upon being annexed into the
City of Williston corporate boundary or subject to the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston shall be considered a
conforming limited permitted use as follows: 1) the temporary
workforce housing facility may occupy their structures until
September 1, 2016; 2) the temporary workforce housing facility
shall have until May 1, 2018 to remove their facility to an area
zoned for outdoor storage; and 3) the temporary workforce housing
facility shall have until August 1, 2018 to undertake site
reclamation. Williams County Approved Temporary Workforce
Housing, as described herein, shall be subject to the limited
exceptions described in Subsection O.9 herein.
4. Application requirements.
a. Application fee. An application fee of $400, payable to the City
of Williston, is required for any request to become a limited
permitted use as defined herein which is located within the
corporate boundaries of the City of Williston or the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston.
b. Application form. Submit a completed form providing
information required to evaluate the request to become a
limited permitted use. This form shall be supplied by the
Williston City Planning Department.
c. Verification of settlement of outstanding fees owed to City of
Williston or Williams County. Documentation that any
SECTION 8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 8
AO:641
outstanding bed fees owed to City of Williston, if located within
the corporate City boundaries, or Williams County, if located
within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City of Williston,
for temporary workforce housing facilities have been paid in
full to the appropriate jurisdiction. No review of the limited
permitted use application will begin if any fees are outstanding
to the City of Williston or Williams County.
d. Per bed fee. A per-bed fee of $400 for the period January 1,
2016, to September 1, 2016 for all temporary workforce
housing facilities located in the corporate boundaries of the
City of Williston which are not taxed as real estate or motor
vehicles. A per-bed fee, as adopted by Williams County, for the
period of January 1, 2016, to September 1, 2016, for all
temporary workforce housing facilities located in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston which are not
taxed as real estate or motor vehicles. City staff may inspect
the temporary workforce housing facility to verify the number
of beds.
e. Site plan. A plan, if not already provided to the City of
Williston, of the entire site, drawn to scale, depicting and
identifying all existing structures, roadways, access from
dedicated public roadways, parking, fire hydrants, surface
drainage, connections to water and sewer/septic, propane
tanks, and other information the City may require.
f. Emergency response and security plan. A written plan, if not
already provided to the City of Williston, for fire suppression,
emergency vehicle circulation, and on-site security.
g. Facility rules and policies. A document of rules and policies, if
not already provided to the City of Williston, that all residents
of the crew camp must comply with. Emergency contact and
response information for residents to be included in this
document.
h. Verification of state health department inspection. If the
temporary workforce housing facility is served by a septic
system, an inspection of the facility by the North Dakota State
Health Department is required to verify compliance with state
health regulations prior to approving the limited temporary
use. Applicant shall submit documentation that such an
inspection has been recently completed.
i. Site restoration plan. A written plan, if not already provided to
the City of Williston, to reclaim the site, including removal of
all housing units and facilities to serve those housing units.
j. Site restoration bond. A bond to guarantee the restoration plan
for the proposed site can be completed. The bond must be
provided to the City of Williston on or before October 1, 2016,
SECTION 8 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 8
AO:642
and must be valid and remain in full force and effect until
December 31, 2018. The City will set for the amount of the
restoration bond, based on the City's review of the site plan
and site restoration plan.
5. The temporary workforce housing operator shall sign a written
agreement on or before October 1, 2016, with the City of Williston
acknowledging and accepting:
a. The applicant is not in violation of any federal, state, or local
law;
b. The occupancy for temporary workforce housing shall cease on
or before September 1, 2016;
c. The removal of the temporary workforce housing facility shall
occur on or before May 1, 2018;
d. The site reclamation of the temporary workforce housing
facility shall occur on or before August 1, 2018; and
e. The extension of the removal and reclamation of the temporary
workforce housing facility is contingent upon providing the
City of Williston proof of having a reclamation bond that is
valid and remains in full force and effect until December 31,
2018.
6. Failure to meet the requirements described in Subsection O.4
above and execute the agreement described Subsection O.5 above
prior to October 1, 2016, shall result in termination of the approval
process for the temporary workforce housing facility as provided
herein.
7. Unoccupied temporary workforce housing facilities shall be stored
only in areas zoned to allow outdoor storage and must meet the
development standards of such zones for outdoor storage.
8. The provisions of Subsection O. of Sections 8, 22, and 23 of
Ordinance 613 shall become null, void, and of no force and effect on
and after August 2, 2018.
9. Exception to Subsection O.3. The following Williams County
Approved Temporary Workforce Housing, as enumerated below,
are currently located in the extra-territorial jurisdiction for the City
of Williston and have properly obtained a valid conditional use
permit from Williams County through Williams County's designated
process. Therefore, the enumerated facilities below shall not be
subject to provisions of Subsection O.3. herein, but are subject to
all other provisions of this ordinance not otherwise in conflict with
their conditional use permit. The Williams County Approved
Temporary Workforce Housing enumerated below shall be
permitted to continue the use until the applicant's conditional use
SECTION 8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 8
AO:643
SECTION 9. R-1E: Rural estate district. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 645,
Ord. No. 672, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 807, Ord. No. 809, Ord. No.
811, Ord. No. 850 Ord. No. 933, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord.
No. 1011, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1062]
permit expires as described below. Upon expiration of the
conditional use permit use of Temporary Workforce Housing shall
become a non-permitted use.
a. Northern Improvement, located in the NE 1/4SE 1/4 NE 1/4,
excepting the south eight feet, of Section 30, Township 155
North, Range 100 West, was granted a conditional use permit
by Williams County which expires December 16, 2018.
b. In two Deep/Bob Horab/Concrete Jungle/McCody Concrete,
located in Sublot 9 of the E1/2SE1/4 of Section 19, Township
154 North, Range 101 West, was granted a conditional use
permit by Williams County which expires December 1, 2019.
10. Compliance with law. All Temporary Workforce Housing must be in
compliance with all applicable statutes of the State of North
Dakota; the ordinances, rules, and regulations of Williams County;
and the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Williston.
11. Conflict with other laws. If there is a conflict between the
regulations and standards in this ordinance with any other local,
state, or federal laws or regulations for Temporary Workforce
Housing, the more restrictive interpretation shall be followed.
A. Intent. This district is intended to provide low-density, limited-growth
residential areas. It is designed to accommodate residential
development opportunities for those who desire low-density or estate
living and are willing to live in more remote locations and to assume the
costs of providing many of their own services and amenities. Public
services may never be provided to these areas because Williston must
concentrate its limited resources in areas where more intense future
development is logical. The low density allowed in this district is needed
to preserve and support the existing public infrastructure. Accordingly,
capital improvements such as highways and major sewer interceptors
should be directed away from the Rural Estate District. The low
densities permitted in this district generally permit on-site water supply
and waste disposal systems.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for this district
shall be 10 acres.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. a. Single-family dwellings, mobile homes and/or manufactured
homes.
SECTION 8 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 9
AO:644
b. Housing structures built off-site and manufactured homes
which meet the definition of single-family detached dwellings,
fits the character of the neighborhood, and is placed in
accordance with the following permitting procedure:
(i) A Notice of Intent to grant a permit after 10 working days
shall be sent by certified mail to all property owners within
100 feet of the lot where the dwelling is to be placed.
(ii) The Building Official shall grant or deny the permit after
10 working days from the day that the notice was sent to
the adjoining property owners.
(iii) The Building Official shall send a notice of his decision to
the applicant and to all owners who supported or objected
to the permit notifying them of the decision and, if
adverse, the right to appeal the decision. The permit, if
granted, shall be stayed pending the appeal decision.
(iv) New housing structures built off-site, not previously
occupied and built to the requirements of the North
Dakota Building Code are exempt from the Notice of Intent
Process.
2. Farm animals, provided there is a minimum lot area of five acres for
the first four animal units, and no more than one animal unit per
acre of land over five acres.
3. Parks, playgrounds, and non-commercial recreational facilities
such as golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms,
libraries, and the like.
4. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of a governmental function, except for those
permitted only as special permitted uses.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses that are customarily
accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures shall
be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Community centers, schools, churches, and cemeteries.
2. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
3. Quasi-institutional homes.
SECTION 9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 9
AO:645
4. Group child care homes and child care centers.
5. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted principal
use structure.
6. Governmental maintenance and service shops.
7. Private clubs and country clubs.
8. Art galleries and museums depending on proximity to a particular
historical site.
9. Electrical substations and gas regulator stations, provided:
a. For each electric substation where transformers are exposed
there should be an enclosing fence at least six feet high.
b. The height requirements may be exceeded, provided that for
each additional one foot height an additional one foot of front,
rear, and side yard shall be required.
10. Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations, and
sewer lift stations, provided:
a. For each instance the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be provided with plot plans showing the proposed installation
and its relationship to any nearby property.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe
conditions as to setbacks, etc. for each installation.
11. Bed and breakfast inn.
F. Temporary uses. The following uses shall be considered as temporary
uses, provided the provisions set forth in Section 25.O are met:
1. Contractor's office and construction equipment sheds.
2. Real estate sales office.
3. Temporary shelter.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 40,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 120 feet.
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yard: 30 feet.
2. Side yard: The minimum requirements for a side yard shall be 10
feet. The required side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall
be one-half the required front yard on such street for the principal
building and all accessory buildings provided as follows:
SECTION 9 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 9
AO:646
SECTION 10. R-1A: Rural Residential District. [Ord. No. 613, Ord.
No. No 645, Ord. No. 672, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 807, Ord. No. 809
Ord. No. 811, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No.
1011, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1062]
a. No adjacent dwellings front on the same street, in which case
the entire front yard must be provided.
b. A garage being entered from the street, whether it be attached
or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback to prevent
obstruction of public right-of-way.
3. Rear yard: 30 feet. Accessory buildings may be built in a required
rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall not be nearer than
three feet to any side or rear lot line, except when a garage is
entered from an alley at right angles, it shall not be located closer
than 20 feet from the rear lot line. The required rear setback for an
attached garage with vehicular entry from an alley shall be 30 feet.
For attached garages with vehicular entry from other than the
alley, all yard requirements shall be the same for the principal
building. An attached garage is considered a part of the principal
building for the purpose of determining setbacks.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. Not more than 15% of the lot shall
be covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings. Any
solar collection device or related apparatus not included as floor area of
a building by definition, shall not be included in computing lot
coverage.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area of any dwelling, excluding
attached garage, shall be 800 square feet.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 35 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Two spaces per
dwelling. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a
manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
2. See Section 25.S, Buffer Yards.
A. Intent. This district is intended to include areas where community
sewer and water are not planned in the near future, but where other
public services may be available and topography and soil conditions
allow development at a low population density that can rely on on-site
water supply and waste disposal systems without creating public health
hazards. This district is intended primarily for areas devoted to large-lot
SECTION 9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 10
AO:647
suburban residential use, adjacent to existing or planned urban
development. The regulations and restrictions in this district are
intended to protect the residential character of these areas and
conserve their environmental resources.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for this district
shall be five acres.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. Single-family dwellings, mobile homes, and/or manufactured
homes.
2. Farm animals, located within the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction,
but outside City limits, are allowed provided there is a minimum lot
area of one acre, and no more than one animal unit per one-half
acre of land.
3. Parks, playgrounds, and non-commercial recreational facilities
such as golf course, swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms,
libraries, and the like.
4. Structure and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of a governmental function, except for those
permitted only as special permitted uses.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses that are customarily
accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and structures shall
be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Community centers, schools, churches, and cemeteries.
2. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
3. Quasi-institutional homes.
4. Group child care homes and child care centers.
5. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted principal
use or structure.
6. Governmental maintenance and service shops.
7. Private clubs and country clubs.
8. Art galleries and museums depending on proximity to a particular
historical site.
SECTION 10 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 10
AO:648
9. Electrical substation and gas regulator stations, provided:
a. For each electric substation where transformers are exposed,
there should be an enclosing fence at least six feet high.
b. The height requirements may be exceeded, provided that for
each additional one foot height an additional one foot of front,
rear, and side yard shall be required.
10. Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations, and
sewer lift stations provided:
a. For each instance the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be provided with plot plans showing the proposed installation
and its relationship to any nearby property.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe
conditions as to setbacks, etc. for each installation.
11. Bed and breakfast inn.
12. Animal units, such as a horse, mule, jackass, goat or other animal
kept as a family pet, may be kept within the City limits provided
there is a minimum of three acres for the first two animal units; and
with one additional animal unit allowed for each acre over three.
F. Temporary uses. The following uses shall be considered as temporary
uses, provided the provisions set forth in Section 25.O are met:
1. Contractor's office and construction equipment sheds.
2. Real estate sales office.
3. Temporary shelter.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 21,780 square feet (one-half acre).
2. Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yard: 30 feet.
2. Side yard. The minimum requirements for a side yard shall be eight
feet. The required side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall
be one-half the required front yard on such street for the principal
building and all accessory buildings, provided as follows:
a. No adjacent dwellings front on the same street, in which case
the entire front yard must be provided.
SECTION 10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 10
AO:649
SECTION 11. R-1: Single-Family Residential District. [Ord. No. 613,
Ord. No. 645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 672, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No.
807, Ord. No. 809, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No. 853, Ord.
No. 866, Ord. No. 884, Ord. No. 933, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007,
Ord. No. 1011, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1062, Ord. No. 1079, Ord.
No. 1090]
b. A garage being entered from the street, whether it be attached
or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback to prevent
obstruction of public right-of-way.
3. Rear yard: 30 feet. Accessory buildings may be built in a required
rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall not be nearer than
three feet to any side or rear lot line, except when a garage is
entered from an alley at right angles, it shall not be located closer
than 20 feet from the rear lot line. The required rear setback for an
attached garage with vehicular entry from an alley shall be 30 feet.
For attached garages with vehicular entry from other than the
alley, all yard requirements shall be the same for the principal
building. An attached garage is considered a part of the principal
building for the purpose of determining setbacks.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. Not more than 20% of the lot shall
be covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings. Any
solar collection device or related apparatus not included as floor area of
a building by definition, shall not be included in computing lot
coverage.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area of any dwelling, excluding
attached garage, shall be 800 square feet.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 35 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Two spaces per
dwelling. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a
manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. See Section 25.R Landscaping.
2. See Section 25.S Buffer Yards.
A. Intent. This district is intended to include lands suited by topography
and other natural conditions for urban development and which are
provided with a full range of public services, including sewers and
water. This district is intended primarily for single-family detached
dwellings at moderate population densities, but certain structures and
uses required to serve governmental, educational, religious,
SECTION 10 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 11
AO:650
recreational and other needs of residential areas are allowed, as
permitted, or special permitted uses subject to restrictions intended to
preserve and protect the residential character of the district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for this district
shall be two acres.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. a. Single-family detached dwellings, excluding mobile homes.
b. Housing structures built off-site and manufactured homes
which meet the definition of single-family detached dwellings,
fits the character of the neighborhood, and is placed in
accordance with the following permitting procedure:
(i) A Notice of Intent to grant a permit after 10 working days
shall be sent by certified mail to all property owners within
100 feet of the lot where the dwelling is to be placed.
(ii) The Building Official shall grant or deny the permit after
10 working days from the day that the notice was sent to
the adjoining property owners.
(iii) The Building Official shall send a notice of his decision to
the applicant and to all owners who supported or objected
to the permit notifying them of the decision and, if
adverse, the right to appeal the decision. The permit, if
granted, shall be stayed pending the appeal decision.
(iv) New housing structures built offsite, not previously
occupied and built to the requirements of the North
Dakota Building Code are exempt from the Notice of Intent
Process.
2. Parks, playgrounds, and open space for informal recreation.
3. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of a governmental function.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. a. Two-family dwellings.
SECTION 11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 11
AO:651
b. Housing structures built offsite and manufactured homes
which meet the definition of single-family detached dwellings,
fits the character of the neighborhood, and is placed in
accordance with the following permitting procedure:
(i) A Notice of Intent to grant a permit after 10 working days
shall be sent by certified mail to all property owners within
100 feet of the lot where the welling is to be placed.
(ii) The Building Official shall grant or deny the permit after
10 working days from the day that the notice was sent to
the adjoining property owners.
(iii) The Building Official shall send a notice of his decision to
the applicant and to all owners who supported or objected
to the permit notifying them of the decision and, if
adverse, the right to appeal the decision. The permit, if
granted, shall be stayed pending the appeal decision.
(iv) New housing structures built offsite, not previously
occupied and built to the requirements of the North
Dakota Building Code are exempt from the Notice of Intent
Process.
2. Community centers, schools, churches, and cemeteries.
3. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
4. Quasi-institutional homes.
5. Group child care homes and child care center.
6. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted principal
use or structure.
7. Games of chance, provided they are associated with other public or
quasi-public uses as listed in the City's Land Use Classification
System and allowed in the district.
8. Bed and breakfast inns.
9. Lodges, fraternities and sororities where no alcoholic beverages
are sold or consumed.
10. Professional offices as defined in this ordinance provided that a
Special Permitted Use for the professional office may only be
granted to allow professional offices to operate in already existing
structures that are along an arterial street and have not previously
been used as a residence. Any new construction to the existing
structure must be compatible with the general appearance of the
surrounding neighborhood, no metal buildings. Lighting of the
structure must also be in harmony with the surrounding
SECTION 11 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 11
AO:652
neighborhood. It is encouraged that the property not take direct
access from any residential or collector streets.
F. Temporary uses. The following uses shall be considered as temporary
uses, provided the provisions set forth in Section 25.O are met:
1. Contractor's office and construction equipment sheds.
2. Real estate sales office.
3. Temporary shelter.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 60 feet.
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yard.
a. Measured from the front property line, there shall be a front
yard of not less than 20 feet unless the property line fronts on a
State Highway, whereupon the minimum shall be 50 feet.
b. Attached or detached garage setback on New Residential
Development: 25 feet.
2. Side yard. A minimum of five feet on fifty-foot lots and six feet on
lots greater than 50 feet in width. The required side yard on the
street side of a corner lot shall be one-half the required front yard
on such street for the principal building and all accessory
buildings, provided as follows:
a. A garage being entered from the street, whether it be attached
or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback to prevent
obstruction of public right-of-way.
3. Rear yard: 20 feet. Accessory buildings may be built in a required
rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall not be nearer than
three feet to any side or rear lot line, except when a garage is
entered from an alley at right angles, it shall not be located closer
than 25 feet from the rear lot line. The required rear setback for an
attached garage with vehicular entry from an alley shall be 25 feet.
For attached garages with vehicular entry from other than the
alley, all yard requirements shall be the same for the principal
building. An attached garage is considered a part of the principal
building for the purpose of determining setbacks.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. Not more than 35% of the lot shall
be covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings. Any
solar collector device or related apparatus, not included as floor area of
a building by definition, shall be included in computing lot coverage.
SECTION 11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 11
AO:653
SECTION 12. R-2: Single Family, Twinhome, and Duplex Residential
Districts. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 672,
Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 728, Ord. No. 809, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No.
850, Ord. No. 853, Ord. No. 884, Ord. No. 933, Ord. No. 959, Ord.
No. 968, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1010, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No.
1062, Ord. No. 1090, Ord. No. 1092]
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area of any dwelling excluding
attached garage shall be 800 square feet.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The Maximum height of any building
shall be 35 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Two spaces per
dwelling. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a
manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
2. See Section 25.S, Buffer Yards.
A. Intent.
This district is intended to include lands suited by topography and other
natural conditions for urban development and which is provided with a
full range of public services, including sewers and water. This district
is intended primarily for single-family detached, single-family and twofamily
dwellings at moderate population densities, but structures and
uses required to serve governmental, educational, religious,
recreational, and other needs of residential areas are allowed as
permitted or special permitted uses subject to restrictions intended to
preserve and protect the residential character of the district.
Twinhomes are intended to create a single-family housing option that
allows an increased density of residential units while maintaining
single-family residential units on individual lots with individual front,
rear, and side yards, that are priced less than single-family detached
residences. Twinhomes are encouraged to be mixed with single-family
detached residences within blocks, either in pockets of twinhomes or
individually. Streets are not to be double-loaded with continuous rows
of twinhomes. The side of the street opposite a continuous row of
twinhomes is to be single-family detached residences or is to have no
driveways accessing the street. Twinhome lots must have the minimum
required lot width at the street frontage, and the twinhomes themselves
should relate to the street in a manner similar to single-family detached
dwellings.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements.
SECTION 11 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 12
AO:654
The minimum area for this district shall be two acres.
C. Permitted uses and structures.
The following shall be permitted:
1. a. Single-family detached, twinhomes, and duplexes, excluding
mobile homes.
b. Housing structures built off-site and manufactured homes
which meet the definition of single-family detached dwellings,
fits the character of the neighborhood, and is placed in
accordance with the following permitting procedure:
(i) A Notice of Intent to grant a permit after 10 working days
shall be sent by certified mail to all property owners within
100 feet of the lot where the dwelling is to be placed.
(ii) The Building Official shall grant or deny the permit after
10 working days from the day that the notice was sent to
the adjoining property owners.
(iii) The Building Official shall send a notice of his decision to
the applicant and to all owners who supported or objected
to the permit notifying them of the decision and, if
adverse, the right to appeal the decision. The permit, if
granted, shall be stayed pending the appeal decision.
(iv) New housing structures built off-site, not previously
occupied and built to the requirements of the North
Dakota Building Code are exempt from the Notice of Intent
Process.
2. Parks, playgrounds, and noncommercial recreational facilities such
as golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms,
libraries, and the like.
3. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of a governmental function, except for those
permitted only as special permitted uses.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures.
Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly
incidental to permitted uses and structures shall be permitted,
including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses.
SECTION 12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 12
AO:655
The following shall be considered for special permitted uses:
1. Community centers, schools, churches, and cemeteries.
2. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
3. Quasi-institutional homes.
4. Group child care homes and child care centers.
5. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted principal
use or structure.
6. Electrical substations and gas regulator stations, provided:
a. For each electric substation where transformers are exposed
there should be an enclosing fence at least six feet high.
b. The height requirements may be exceeded, provided that for
each additional one-foot height an additional one-foot of front,
rear and side yard shall be required.
7. Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations, and
sewer lift stations provided:
a. For each instance the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be provided with plot plans showing the proposed installation
and its relationship to any nearby property.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe
conditions as to setbacks, etc., for each installation.
8. Games of chance, provided they are associated with other public or
quasipublic uses as listed in the City's Land Use Classification
System and allowed in the district.
9. Fraternities, sororities and group housing projects.
10. Bed and breakfast inn.
11. Condominium.
a. Structure shall be limited to a maximum of four units.
b. Should any property owner within 150 feet of the proposed
structures property line (excluding streets and alley-ways)
protest the use, use will be disallowed. Proper notice to such
owners is required.
c. Land area shall be a minimum of 14,000 square feet.
d. Structure shall be limited to a maximum of two-stories.
12. Lodges, fraternities and sororities where no alcoholic beverages
are sold or consumed.
SECTION 12 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 12
AO:656
13. Professional offices as defined in this ordinance provided that an
SPU for the professional office may only be granted to allow
professional offices to operate in an already existing structures that
are along an arterial street and have not previously been used as a
residence. Any new construction to the existing structure must be
compatible with the general appearance of the surrounding
neighborhood, no metal buildings. Lighting of the structure must
also be in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. It is
encouraged that the property not take direct access from any
residential or collector street.
F. Temporary uses.
The following uses shall be considered as temporary uses, provided the
provisions set forth in Section 25.O are met:
1. Contractor's office and construction equipment sheds.
2. Real estate sales office.
3. Temporary shelter.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Lot
Width
1. Single-family
detached
6,000 square feet 50 feet
2. Duplex 8,000 square feet 50 feet
3. Twinhome 4,000 square feet 40 feet
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yard: 20 feet.
a. Garages must be set back 25 feet from the front property line.
b. Attached or detached garage setback on New Residential
Development: 25 feet.
2. Side yard. A minimum of five feet on fifty foot lots and six feet on
lots greater than 50 feet in width.
The required side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be
one-half the required front yard on such street for the principal
building and all accessory buildings, provided as follows:
a. A garage being entered from the street, whether it be attached
or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback to prevent
obstruction of public right-of-way.
SECTION 12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 12
AO:657
SECTION 13. R-3: lowrise multi-family and townhouse residential
districts. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 672,
Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 728, Ord. No. 809, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No.
850, Ord. No. 853, Ord. No. 858, Ord. No. 884, Ord. No. 933, Ord.
No. 959, Ord. No. 986, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1011, Ord. No. 1028,
Ord. No. 1062, Ord. No. 1090]
3. Rear yard: 20 feet. Accessory buildings may be built in a required
rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall not be nearer than
three feet to any side or rear lot line, except when a garage is
entered from an alley at right angles, it shall not be located closer
than 25 feet from the rear lot line. The required rear setback for an
attached garage with vehicular entry from an alley shall be 25 feet.
For attached garages with vehicular entry from other than the
alley, all yard requirements shall be the same for the principal
building. An attached garage is considered a part of the principal
building for the purpose of determining setbacks.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. Not more than 35% of the lot shall
be covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings. For
twinhomes, not more than 40% of each twinhome lot shall be covered
by the principal buildings and all accessory buildings.
Any solar collection device or related apparatus, not included as floor
area of a building by definition, shall not be included in computing lot
coverage.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area of any dwelling, excluding
attached garage, shall be 800 square feet.
K. Maximum height of buildings. Maximum height of any building shall be
35 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements.
See Section 25. H. Two spaces per dwelling. Required offstreet parking
shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do not encroach on a
public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
2. See Section 25.S, Buffer Yards.
A. Intent. This district is intended to include lands suited by topography
and other natural conditions for urban development and which are
provided with a full range of public services, including sewer, water, fire
protection, and surface transportation. This district is intended
primarily for lowrise-multifamily and townhouse dwellings at
moderately high population densities; but structures and uses required
SECTION 12 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 13
AO:658
to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational, and other
needs of residential areas are allowed as permitted or special permitted
uses subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect the
residential character of the district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for this district
shall be two acres.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. a. Single-family detached and two-family dwellings, excluding
mobile homes.
b. Housing structures built off-site and manufactured homes
which meet the definition of single-family detached dwellings,
fits the character of the neighborhood, and is placed in
accordance with the following permitting procedure:
(i) A Notice of Intent to grant a permit after 10 working days
shall be sent by certified mail to all property owners within
100 feet of the lot where the dwelling is to be placed.
(ii) The Building Official shall grant or deny the permit after
10 working days from the days that the notice was sent to
the adjoining property owners.
(iii) The Building Official shall send a notice of his decision to
the applicant and to all owners who supported or objected
to the permit notifying them of the decision and, if
adverse, the right to appeal the decision. The permit, if
granted, shall be stayed pending the appeal decision.
(iv) New housing structures built off-site, not previously
occupied and built to the requirements of the North
Dakota Building Code are exempt from the Notice of Intent
Process.
2. Multi-family.
3. Townhouses.
4. Parks, playgrounds, and noncommercial recreational facilities such
as golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms,
libraries, and the like.
5. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of governmental function.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
SECTION 13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 13
AO:659
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Community centers, schools, churches, and cemeteries.
2. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
3. Quasi-institutional homes.
4. Group child care homes and child care centers.
5. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted principal
use or structure.
6. Boarding, lodging houses, and bed and breakfast inns.
7. Fraternities and sororities.
8. Residential parking lots.
9. Group housing projects.
10. Private clubs and lodges, except those whose primary activity is
carried on as a business.
11. Multifamily dwelling units with floor areas of less than 450 square
feet per dwelling unit.
12. Games of chance, provided they are associated with other public or
quasi-public uses as listed in the City's Land Use Classification
System and allowed in the district.
13. Lodges, fraternities and sororities where no alcoholic beverages
are sold or consumed.
14. Commercial businesses, such as those enumerated in Section
19.C.1, located within a congregate/communal living unit
containing 10 or more individual living facilities, where the
intended purpose for such a business is to serve the tenants of the
unit. Not more than one non-illuminated name plate shall be
allowed. The name plate shall be attached flush against the
building in which the business is located and shall not exceed four
square feet in area.
15. Professional offices as defined in this ordinance provided that a
Special Permitted Use for the professional office may only be
granted to allow professional offices to operate in already existing
structures that are along an arterial street and have not previously
been used as a residence. Any new construction to the existing
structure must be compatible with the general appearance of the
surrounding neighborhood, no metal buildings. Lighting of the
structure must also be in harmony with the surrounding
SECTION 13 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 13
AO:660
neighborhood. It is encouraged that the property not take direct
access from any residential or collector streets.
F. Temporary uses. The following uses shall be considered as temporary
uses, provided the provisions set forth in Section 25.O are met:
1. Contractor's office and construction equipment sheds.
2. Real estate sales office.
3. Temporary shelter.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Lot
Width
Single-family detached 6,000 square feet 50 feet
Two-family 6,000 square feet 50 feet
Townhouse
Single-story 2,300 square feet 24 feet
Two-story 2,300 square feet 18 feet
Multifamily
Per structure 6,000 square feet 60 feet
Per dwelling unit 2,300 square feet N/A
Boarding, lodging, and
fraternity or sorority houses
7,200 square feet 70 feet
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yard: 20 feet.
a. Attached or detached garage setback on new residential
development: 25 feet.
2. Side yard. A minimum of five feet on lots up to 50 feet and six feet
on lots greater than 50 feet in width. The required side yard on the
street side of a corner lot shall be one-half the required front yard
on such street for the principal building and all accessory
buildings, provided as follows:
a. A garage being entered from the street, whether it be attached
or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback to prevent
obstruction of public right-of-way.
3. Rear yard: 20 feet. Accessory buildings may be built in a required
rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall not be nearer than
three feet to any side or rear lot line, except when a garage is
entered from an alley at right angles, it shall not be located closer
than 25 feet from the rear lot line. The required rear setback for an
SECTION 13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 13
AO:661
attached garage with vehicular entry from an alley shall be 25
feet. For attached garages with vehicular entry from other than
the alley, all yard requirements shall be the same for the principal
building. An attached garage is considered a part of the principal
building for the purpose of determining setbacks.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and impervious surface area ratios.
The portion of the lot occupied by buildings and impervious surfaces
shall not be greater than the following:
Lot Coverage By
Buildings
Impervious Surface
Area Ratio
Single-family detached 35% N/A
Two-family 35% N/A
Townhouse 40% N/A
Multifamily 40% 0.70
Boarding, lodging, and
fraternity or sorority
houses
40% 0.70
Any solar collection device or related apparatus, not included as floor
area of a building by definition, shall not be included in computing lot
coverage.
J. Minimum floor area.
1. Single-family and two-family. The minimum floor area shall be 800
square feet, excluding garage.
2. Townhouse, multifamily, and boarding, lodging, and fraternity or
sorority houses. The minimum floor area shall be 450 square feet
per dwelling unit.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 45 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H.
1. Single-family, two-family, townhouses and multifamily dwellings:
two spaces per dwelling.
2. Group dwellings, fraternity, sorority, boarding or lodging facilities -
One space per bedroom or sleeping room, unless it can be
demonstrated that occupants will not be driving. Required offstreet
parking shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do
not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
SECTION 13 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 13
AO:662
SECTION 14. R-4: Highrise-multifamily residential district. [Ord.
No. 613, Ord. No. 645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 672, Ord. No. 716,
Ord. No. 728, Ord. No. 809, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No.
858, Ord. No. 884, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 986, Ord. No. 1007, Ord.
No. 1011, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1062, Ord. No. 1090]
1. The maximum number of units in a townhouse structure shall be 12
units.
2. Multifamily Buildings with Facades Greater Than 100 Feet.
The intent of the below requirements are to focus development
on a sense of neighborhood and community as well as a long
term vision. This policy is intended to put a focus on the design
stage for future housing stock. End results should create some
diversity in styles that build community character and a sense of
neighborhood, ultimately raising the quality of life for residents
and neighbors of the buildings.
Multifamily buildings with facades greater than 100 feet shall meet
one of the following guidelines:
a. Facades greater than 100 feet shall incorporate "structural"
projections or recesses in the wall plane with a depth of at least
3% of the length of the facade and extending for at least 20% of
the length of the facade. Maximum uninterrupted length of
wall shall be 100 feet.
b. Facades shall display a repeating pattern of at least three
cycles of either color change, texture change, material change,
or expression of structural bays with an offset of at least 12
inches from the ruling plane of the facade.
c. Alternatives to these guidelines may be presented and if
through elevations and other visual descriptors can
demonstrate the proposed structure provides equal visual
interest and scale contributing to long term community appeal,
sustainable neighborhoods and meeting the intent clause of
this policy. Review would be by written request for
consideration of alternative styles to the Planning Department
for decision by the Planning Director.
d. Application. With a building permit application submit
elevations demonstrating how the building meets the listed
criteria.
3. See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
4. See Section 25.S, Buffer Yards.
A. Intent. This district is intended to include lands suited by topography
and other natural conditions for urban development and which are
SECTION 13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 14
AO:663
provided with a full range of public services, including sewers, water,
fire protection, and surface transportation. This district is intended
primarily for highrise-multifamily dwellings, townhouses at high
population densities, but structures and uses required to serve
governmental, educational, religious, recreational, and other needs of
residential areas are allowed as permitted or special permitted uses
subject to restrictions intended to preserve and protect the residential
character of the district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for this district
shall be two acres.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. Multifamily dwelling units.
2. Townhouses.
3. Parks, playgrounds, and noncommercial recreational facilities such
as golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms,
libraries, and the like.
4. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of a governmental function.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Community centers, schools, churches, and cemeteries.
2. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
3. Quasi-institutional homes.
4. Group child care homes and child care centers.
5. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted principal
use or structure.
6. Boarding, lodging houses and bed and breakfast inns.
7. Fraternities, sororities, and group homes.
8. Residential parking lots.
SECTION 14 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 14
AO:664
9. Private clubs and lodges, except those whose primary activity is
carried on as a business.
10. Multifamily dwelling units with floor areas of less than 450 square
feet per dwelling unit.
11. Games of chance, provided they are associated with other public or
quasi-public uses as listed in the City's Land Use Classification
System and allowed in the district.
12. Commercial businesses, such as those enumerated in Section
19.C.1 located within a congregate/communal living unit
containing 10 or more individual living facilities, where the
intended purpose for such a business is to serve the tenants of the
unit. Not more than one non-illuminated name plate shall be
allowed. The name plate shall be attached flush against the
building in which the business is located and shall not exceed four
square feet in area.
13. Professional offices as defined in this ordinance provided that a
Special Permitted Use for the professional office may only be
granted to allow professional offices to operate in already existing
structures that are along an arterial street and have not previously
been used as a residence. Any new construction to the existing
structure must be compatible with the general appearance of the
surrounding neighborhood, no metal buildings. Lighting of the
structure must also be in harmony with the surrounding
neighborhood. It is encouraged that the property not take direct
access from any residential or collector streets.
F. Temporary uses. The following uses shall be considered as temporary
uses, provided the provisions set forth in Section 25.O are met:
1. Contractor's office and construction equipment sheds.
2. Real estate sales office.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
Minimum Lot
Area
Minimum Lot
width
Multifamily
Per structure 6,000 square feet 60 feet
Per dwelling unit 1,450 square feet N/A
Boarding, lodging, fraternity
or sorority houses
7,200 square feet 70 feet
Townhouse
Single-Story 2,300 square feet 24 feet
Two-Story 2,300 square feet 18 feet
SECTION 14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 14
AO:665
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yard: 20 feet.
2. Side yard. A minimum of five feet on fifty foot lots and six feet on
lots greater than 50 feet in width. The required side yard on the
street side of a corner lot shall be one-half the required front yard
on such street for the principal building and all accessory
buildings, provided as follows:
a. A garage being entered from the street, whether it be attached
or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback to prevent
obstruction of public right-of-way.
3. Rear yard: 20 feet. Accessory buildings may be built in a required
rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall not be nearer than
three feet to any side or rear lot line, except when a garage is
entered from an alley at right angles, it shall not be located closer
than 25 feet from the rear lot line. The required rear setback for an
attached garage with vehicular entry from an alley shall be 25 feet.
For attached garages with vehicular entry from other than the
alley, all yard requirements shall be the same for the principal
building. An attached garage is considered a part of the principal
building for the purpose of determining setbacks.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings and impervious surface area ratios.
The portion of a lot occupied by buildings and impervious surfaces shall
not be greater than the following:
Lot Coverage By
Buildings
Impervious
Surface Area
Ratio
Multifamily dwellings 40% 0.70
Boarding, lodging, and
fraternity or sorority
houses
40% 0.70
Townhouses 40% N/A
Any solar collection device or related apparatus not included as floor
area of a building, by definition, shall not be included in computing lot
coverage.
J. Minimum floor area. Multifamily dwellings and boarding, lodging,
townhouses, fraternity, and sorority houses shall have a minimum of
450 square feet per dwelling unit.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 100 feet.
L. (Reserved)
SECTION 14 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 14
AO:666
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H.
1. Two-family, townhouses and multifamily dwellings: two spaces per
dwelling.
2. Group dwelling, fraternity, sorority, boarding and or lodging
facilities - One space per bedroom or sleeping room, unless it can
be demonstrated that occupants will not be driving.
3. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a manner that
vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. Multifamily buildings with facades greater than 100 feet.
The intent of the below requirements are to focus development
on a sense of neighborhood and community as well as a long
term vision. This policy is intended to put a focus on the design
stage for future housing stock. End results should create some
diversity in styles that build community character and a sense of
neighborhood, ultimately raising the quality of life for residents
and neighbors of the buildings.
Multifamily Buildings with facades greater than 100 feet shall meet
one of the following guidelines:
a. Facades greater than 100 feet shall incorporate "structural"
projections or recesses in the wall plane with a depth of at least
3% of the length of the facade and extending for at least 20% of
the length of the facade. Maximum uninterrupted length of
wall shall be 100 feet.
b. Facades shall display a repeating pattern of at least three
cycles of either color change, texture change, material change,
or expression of structural bays with an offset of at least 12
inches from the ruling plane of the facade.
c. Alternatives to these guidelines may be presented and if
through elevations and other visual descriptors can
demonstrate the proposed structure provides equal visual
interest and scale contributing to long term community appeal,
sustainable neighborhoods and meeting the intent clause of
this policy. Review would be by written request for
consideration of alternative styles to the Planning Department
for decision by the Planning Director.
d. Application. With a building permit application submit
elevations demonstrating how the building meets the listed
criteria.
2. The maximum number of units in a townhouse structure shall be 12
units.
SECTION 14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 14
AO:667
SECTION 15. R-5: Mobile Home Court District. [Ord. No. 613, Ord.
No. 645, Ord. No. 672, Ord. No. 617, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No. 850,
Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1011, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No.
1062]
3. See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
4. See Section 25.S, Buffer Yards.
A. Intent. This district is intended primarily for mobile homes and/or
manufactured homes in mobile home courts at moderately high
population densities except where sewer and water are provided on an
individual basis. This district is intended to provide reduced housing
costs while providing for a pleasant and healthy residential
environment protected from potentially adverse neighboring
influences.
It is intended that such mobile home courts shall be so located,
designed, and improved as to provide protection for adjacent
properties, access for vehicular traffic without traversing minor streets
in adjoining residential neighborhoods, and accessibility equivalent to
that for other forms of permitted residential development to public
facilities, places of employment, and facilities for meeting commercial
and services needs not met within the mobile home court.
It is the intent of this ordinance to require all mobile home courts which
have been constructed under the requirements in Subsection N. 4 and
5 herein to continue to meet these requirements. Established mobile
home courts built prior to and in non-conformity to the requirements in
Subsections A through N. 3 shall meet these requirements as individual
units are moved into the court even if the mobile home is zoned for
a use other than a mobile home court. Certain structures and uses
required to serve governmental, educational, religious, recreational,
and other needs of residential areas are allowed in this district as
permitted or special permitted uses subject to restrictions intended to
preserve and protect the residential character of the district.
Permits for the construction of buildings within the mobile home court
and for the moving of mobile homes and/or manufactured homes on
lots within the mobile home court shall be required of the mobile home
court owner/manager, however, the mobile home/manufactured home
owner may obtain the permit with mobile home court owner/manager
approval.
B. Minimal dimensional requirements, minimum number of lots or spaces
to be available at time of opening and density. Where a district is to be
established for the development of a mobile home court, the minimum
area shall be five acres. The minimum width of a tract for portions used
for general vehicular entrances and exits only (other than alleys or
service entrances) under a private arrangement shall be not less than
40 feet curb to curb for portions containing lots for dwellings and
SECTION 14 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 15
AO:668
buildings open generally to occupants, the minimum dimension shall be
200 feet. The minimum number of lots or spaces completed and ready
for occupancy before first occupancy is permitted, shall be 35 lots or
50% of the total proposed lots, whichever is less.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. One and two-family mobile homes and/or manufactured homes.
2. Parks, playgrounds, and noncommercial recreational facilities such
as golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms,
libraries, and the like.
3. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility,
performance of a governmental function, or performance of any
function necessary for the construction, operation, or maintenance
of mobile home courts, excepts for those requiring special approval
as provided in Subsection E.
In mobile home courts, recreational vehicles shall not be occupied
as living quarters and sales lots shall not be permitted. Areas
within mobile home courts may be designated for recreational
vehicle use for individuals in transit provided such designated area
is approved by the City and State (see Special Permitted Uses).
Dwellings may be sold on lots they occupy in residential use.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Commercial and service facilities provided they obtain specific
approval as required below.
3. Outdoor storage areas, provided they obtain specific approval as
required below.
4. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Commercial and service facilities in mobile home courts. In mobile
home courts so located that such facilities are not conveniently
available in the neighboring area and containing at least 100
dwelling units, commercial and service establishments intended to
serve only persons within the community, designed, improved, and
located to protect the character of the community and the
surrounding neighborhood, and occupying in total, including
related parking area, not more than 5% of the area of the
community, may be permitted.
SECTION 15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 15
AO:669
2. Outdoor storage areas in mobile home courts. In mobile home
courts, outdoor storage areas, including those for recreational
vehicles, may be permitted. Such areas shall be fenced with a
minimum five-foot fence and so designed, improved, and located as
to protect adjoining uses from adverse visual or other effects and
shall occupy, in total, not more than 5% of the area of the mobile
home court if within the boundaries of the main portion of the
court. If the property includes a separate parcel or parcels for
utility, maintenance, or storage facilities, the limitation as to area
shall not apply. Use of such are shall be limited to occupants of the
court.
3. Group child care homes and child care centers.
4. Recreational Vehicular Parks, provided that in addition to City
special permitted use approval, the park meets all State
Laboratories standards.
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements. None.
H. Minimum yard requirements. See Figure 1, Minimum Requirements for
Mobile Home and/or Manufactured Home Placement in Existing Mobile
Home Park.
1. Interior yard requirements:
a. Front yard: 15 feet along a public street; none along a private
street.
b. Side yard. No mobile home and/or manufactured home,
attachment, or other structure may be located within 15 feet of
any other mobile home, attachment, or structure on a
bordering lot. The required side yard on the street side of a
corner lot bordering a public street only shall be a minimum of
five feet for the principal building and all accessory buildings.
In addition, the following provisions shall be applicable.
(i) A garage being entered from the street, whether it be
attached or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback
to prevent obstruction of public right-of-way.
c. Rear yard. None when bordering a private street; 15 feet when
bordering a public street except that when a garage is entered
from a street or alley at right angles, it shall not be located
closer than 20 feet from the rear lot line. Accessory buildings
may be built in a required rear yard, but such accessory
buildings shall not be nearer than 15 feet from any structure
on a neighboring lot. The rear yard setback for mobile homes
and/or manufactured homes placed end to end without an
SECTION 15 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 15
AO:670
intervening street or alley shall be five feet for each structure
which maintains a distance of 10 feet between structures.
2. Exterior yard requirements:
a. Along public streets. Where mobile home courts adjoin public
streets along exterior boundaries, a yard at least five feet in
minimum dimensions shall be provided adjacent to such
streets. Such yard may be used to satisfy yard requirements for
individual lots, but no direct vehicular access to individual lots
shall be permitted through such yards, and no group parking
facilities or active recreation areas shall be allowed therein.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. The occupied area of a mobile
home and/or manufactured home lot may not exceed 75% of the lot
area.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area for residences, excluding
attached garage, shall be 600 square feet excluding the hitch.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 35 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25. H. Two spaces per
dwelling. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a
manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. Mobile home court without water supply system or waste water
treatment plant. In any mobile home court not served by a water
supply system and waste water treatment plant the minimum lot
size shall be one-half acre per dwelling unit, excluding streets and
alleys.
2. Mobile home and/or manufactured home placement, tiedown,
skirting requirements. All mobile homes shall be placed on mobile
home stands and anchored according to Part 4 of the Standard for
the Installation of Mobile Homes including Mobile Home Court
Requirements, NFPA, 501A, 1977, or later years, prior to
occupancy.
All manufactured homes shall meet the Guidelines for
Manufactured Housing Installations which shall comply with
applicable Set-up and Installation Procedures that meet the
manufacturer's installation requirements prior to occupancy.
Skirting shall be constructed of brick, stone, finished exterior
wood, finished metal, or other acceptable materials approved by
the Building Official. The skirting shall be in place within 30 days
of the placement of the mobile home and/or manufactured home
SECTION 15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 15
AO:671
on the lot. The tongue and axle of the mobile home and/or
manufactured home shall be removed if not covered by the skirting.
3. Site plan approval required for mobile home courts. Before
building permits may be issued for construction of mobile home
courts, in addition to other required permits, reports, and reviews,
the site plan must be approved by the Planning Commission and
City Commission.
4. Guides and standards for general site planning for new or
redesigned mobile home courts. The following guides, and
standards and requirements, shall apply in site planning for mobile
home courts:
a. External relationships. Site planning within the mobile home
court shall provide protection of the development from
potentially adverse surrounding influences and protection of
surrounding areas from potentially adverse influences within
the court.
(i) Principal vehicular access points. Principal vehicular
access points shall be designed to encourage smooth
traffic flow with controlled turning movements and
minimum hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
Merging and turnout lanes and/or traffic dividers shall be
required where existing or anticipated heavy flows
indicate need. In general, minor streets shall not be
connected with streets outside the district in such a way as
to encourage the use of such minor streets by substantial
amounts of through traffic. No lot within the community
shall have direct vehicular access to a street bordering the
development.
(ii) Access for pedestrians and cyclists. Access for pedestrians
and cyclists entering or leaving the court shall be by safe
and convenient routes. Such ways need not be adjacent to,
or limited to, the vicinity of vehicular access points. Where
there are crossings of such ways and vehicular routes at
edges of planned developments, such crossings shall be
safely located, marked, and controlled; and where such
ways are exposed to substantial vehicular traffic at edges
of courts, safeguards may be required to prevent crossings
except at designed points. Bicycle paths, if provided, shall
be so related to the pedestrian way system that street
crossings are combined.
(iii) Yards, Fences, Walls, or Vegetative Screening at Edges of
Mobile Home Courts.
See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
SECTION 15 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 15
AO:672
b. Internal relationships. The site plan shall provide for safe,
efficient, convenient, and harmonious groupings of structures,
uses, and facilities, and for appropriate relation of space inside
and outside buildings to intended uses and structural features,
particularly the following:
(i) Streets, drives, and parking and service areas. Streets,
drives, and parking and service areas shall provide safe
and convenient access to dwellings and mobile home court
facilities and for service and emergency vehicles; but
streets shall not be so laid out as to encourage outside
traffic to traverse the court, nor occupy more land than is
required to provide access as indicated, nor create
unnecessary fragmentation of the court into small blocks.
In general, block size shall be the maximum consistent
with use, the shape of the site, and the convenience and
safety of the occupants.
(ii) Street standards. Streets that are to be dedicated to the
jurisdiction, if any, shall be dimensioned and improved in
accord with general subdivision regulations. For other
streets, required paving widths shall have a moving lane
width of 12 feet for collector streets and 10 feet for minor
streets, with parallel parking lanes of eight feet in
locations where on-street parking is to be permitted.
(iii) Ways for pedestrians and cyclists; use by emergency,
maintenance, or service vehicles. Walkways shall form a
logical, safe, and convenient system for pedestrian access
to all dwellings, project facilities, and principal off-street
pedestrian destinations. Maximum walking distance in the
open between dwelling units and related parking spaces,
delivery areas, and trash and garbage storage areas
intended for use of occupants shall not exceed 100 feet.
Walkways to be used by substantial numbers of children as
play areas or routes to school, bus stops, or other
destinations shall be so located and safeguarded as to
minimize contacts with normal auto- motive traffic. If
substantial bicycle traffic is anticipated and an internal
walkway system is provided away from streets, bicycle
paths shall be incorporated in the walkway system. Street
crossings shall be held to a minimum on such walkways
and shall be located and designed to provide safety, and
shall be appropriately marked and otherwise safeguarded.
Ways for pedestrians and cyclists, appropriately located,
designed, and constructed, may be combined with other
easements and used by emergency maintenance or service
vehicles but shall not be used by other automotive traffic.
(iv) Protection of visibility. Visibility on public streets within a
mobile home court shall be in accord with the provisions
SECTION 15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 15
AO:673
set forth in Section 25.A. On a corner lot on a private
street, however, visibility triangles provided at an
intersection shall be formed by the intersecting edges of
the driving surface (projected where corners are rounded)
and a line joining points 20 feet along both intersecting
edges from such point of intersection. At street
intersections of driveways serving parking bays with 10
or more spaces, similar visibility triangles shall be
maintained. At street intersections of other driveways, the
required visibility triangle shall consist of the area within
the intersecting edges of the driving surface (projected)
and a line joining points 10 feet along both intersecting
edges from such point of intersection.
(v) Lots and location for dwelling on lots. The limits of each
mobile home and/or manufactured home lot shall be
clearly marked on the ground by permanent flush stakes,
markers, or other suitable means.
Lots shall be so located with respect to streets as to make
practical the placement of the mobile home and/or
manufactured home for occupancy. In determinations
concerning satisfaction of this requirement, the proposed
manner of placement shall be considered. Location on the
lot shall be suitable for the type of mobile home and/or
manufactured home proposed, considering size, required
open spaces, and manner of support. Mobile home and/
or manufactured home lots shall be designed so that the
minimum lot width shall be 50 feet and the minimum area
shall be 5,000 square feet. In addition, the court should be
designed with the following yard requirements:
(a) Interior yard requirements:
(1) Front yard: 20 feet along a public street; 15 feet
along a private street.
(2) Side Yard No mobile home and/or manufactured
home, attachment, or other structure may be
located within 15 feet of any other mobile home
and/or manufactured home attachment, or
structure on a bordering lot. The required side
yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be a
minimum of 15 feet for the principal building and
all accessory buildings provided as follows:
A garage being entered from the street, whether
it be attached to or detached, must maintain a
twenty-foot setback to prevent obstruction or
public right-of-way.
SECTION 15 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 15
AO:674
(3) Rear yard. The rear yard setbacks shall be a
minimum of 15 feet when bordering a street or 10
feet when bordering an alley except that when a
garage is entered from a street or alley at right
angles, it shall not be located closer than 20 feet
from the rear lot line.
Accessory buildings may be built in a required
rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall not
be nearer than 15 feet from any structure on a
neighboring lot. The rear yard setback for mobile
homes and/or manufactured homes placed end to
end without an intervening street or alley shall
be 7.5 feet for each structure which maintains a
distance of 15 feet between structures.
(b) Exterior yard requirements:
(1) Along public streets. Where mobile home courts
adjoin public streets along exterior boundaries, a
yard of a least 15 feet in minimum dimensions
shall be provided adjacent to such streets. Such
yards may be used to satisfy yard requirements
for individual lots, but no direct vehicular access
to individual lots shall be permitted through such
yards, and no group parking facilities or active
recreation areas shall be allowed therein.
(2) At Edges of the R-5 Districts Other Than Streets
or Alleys.
Where mobile home courts adjoin neighboring
districts without an intervening street, alley, or
other permanent open space, at least 15 feet shall
be maintained between the mobile home and/or
manufactured home and boundary line. Where the
adjoining district is Residential, the same
limitations on occupancy and use of such yards
shall apply as stated in part 4(b)(v)(2)(a) above
concerning yards on public streets.
5. Mobile home playgrounds. Each mobile home court containing 25
or more lots shall provide playground space equivalent to one lot
for every 25 lots in the court. 75% of the playground space, up to
one acre, shall be contiguous. A plot plan is to be submitted to the
Building Official and Planning Commission indicating type and
placement of playground equipment in the playground. The
playground shall be fully developed within one year after the first
occupancy.
EXHIBITS
SECTION 15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 15
AO:675
SECTION 16. R-6: Manufactured home subdivision district. [Ord.
No. 613, Ord. No. 645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 672, Ord. No. 716,
Ord. No. 728, Ord. No. 795, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No.
959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1011, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1062,
Ord. No. 1090]
FIGURE 1. MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR MOBILE HOME PLACEMENT IN EXISTING MOBILE
HOME PARK
A. Intent. This district is intended primarily for manufactured home
subdivisions allowing manufactured homes as single-family dwellings
together with other types of single-family dwellings. Lots and
manufactured homes would be in common ownership as in other
Residential Districts. Within Manufactured Home Subdivision Districts,
manufactured home subdivisions, manufactured home condominiums,
or a combination thereof may be established.
It is intended that such manufactured home developments shall be so
located, designed, and improved as to provide a desirable residential
environment, protection from potentially adverse neighboring
influences, protection for adjacent residential properties, access for
SECTION 15 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 16
AO:676
vehicular traffic without traversing minor streets in adjoining
residential neighborhoods, and accessibility equivalent to that for other
forms of permitted residential development to public facilities, places of
employment, and facilities for meeting commercial and service needs.
Certain structures and uses required to serve governmental,
educational, religious, recreational, and other needs of residential
areas are allowed in this district as permitted or special uses subject to
restrictions intended to preserve and protect the residential character
of the district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements for R-6 districts: minimum number
of lots available at time of opening.
The minimum area for this district shall be five acres. No lot in any
manufactured home subdivision or condominium shall be occupied until
at least 50% of the proposed lots have been fully improved and are
ready for occupancy. To be fully improved, lots should be leveled to
grade, streets should be brought to grade and graveled, and sewer,
water, and other utilities should be extended to the lots.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. Single-family detached and two-family dwellings including
manufactured homes.
2. Parks, playgrounds, and noncommercial recreational facilities such
as golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, game rooms,
libraries, and the like.
3. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of a governmental function.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered special
permitted uses:
1. Community centers, schools, churches, and cemeteries.
2. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
3. Quasi-institutional homes.
4. Group child care homes and child care center.
SECTION 16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 16
AO:677
5. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted principal
use or structure.
6. Games of chance, provided they are associated with other public or
quasi-public uses as listed in the City's Land Use Classification
System and allowed in the district.
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
Minimum Lot Area
Minimum Lot
Width
Single-family detached 6,000 square feet 50 feet
Two-family 8,000 square feet 60 feet
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yard: 15 feet.
a. Attached or detached garage setback on New Residential
Development: 25 feet.
2. Side yard. A minimum of 7.5 feet. The required side yard on the
street side of a corner lot shall be one-half the required front yard
on such street for the principal building and all accessory
buildings, provided as follows:
a. A garage being entered from the street, whether it be attached
or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback to prevent
obstruction of public right-of-way.
3. Rear yard. Five feet for manufactured homes placed with their
longest dimension perpendicular to the principal street frontage
and 20 feet for all manufactured homes placed with their longest
dimension parallel to the principal street frontage. Accessory
buildings may be built in a required rear yard, but such accessory
buildings shall not be nearer than three feet to any side or rear lot
line, except that when a garage is entered from an alley at right
angles, it shall not be located closer than 25 feet from the rear lot
line. The required rear setback for an attached garage with
vehicular entry from an alley shall be 25 feet.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. Not more than 35% of the lot shall
be covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings. Any
solar collection device or related apparatus, not included as floor area
of a building by definition, shall not be included in computing lot
coverage.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area for residences, excluding
attached garage, shall be 800 square feet.
SECTION 16 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 16
AO:678
SECTION 16a. R-7: Residential manufactured home subdivision.
[Ord. No. 795, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No.
1007, Ord. No. 1090]
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 35 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Two spaces per
dwelling. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a
manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. Manufactured home installation requirements. All manufactured
homes shall meet Guidelines for Manufactured Housing
Installations which shall comply with applicable Set-up and
Installation Procedures that meet the manufacturer's installation
requirements prior to occupancy.
2. Manufactured home skirting requirements. Skirting shall be
constructed of brick, stone, finished wood, finished metal, or other
acceptable materials approved by the Building Official. The skirting
shall be in place within 30 days of placement of the manufactured
home on the lot. The tongue and axle of the manufactured home
shall be removed if not covered by the skirting. Manufactured
homes having perimeter foundations shall not be required to have
the above types of skirting.
3. See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
4. See Section 25.S, Buffer Yards.
A. Intent. This district is intended primarily for manufactured home
subdivisions allowing manufactured homes as single-family dwellings
together with recreational vehicles (RV'S). Lots and manufactured
homes would both be owned by the same person(s) or entity as in other
Residential Districts. Within Residential Manufactured Home
Subdivision Districts, manufactured homes subdivisions, manufactured
home condominiums, or a combination thereof may be established.
It is intended that such manufactured home developments shall be so
located, designed, and improved as to provide a desirable residential
environment, protection from potentially adverse neighboring
influences, protection for adjacent residential properties, access for
vehicular traffic without traversing minor streets in adjoining
residential neighborhoods, and accessibility equivalent to that for other
forms of permitted residential development to public facilities, places of
employment, and facilities for meeting commercial and service needs.
SECTION 16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 16a
AO:679
Certain structures and uses required to serve governmental,
educational, religious, recreational, and other needs of residential
areas are allowed in this district as permitted or special uses subject to
restrictions intended to preserve and protect the residential character
of the district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements for R-7 districts; minimum number
of lots available at time of opening.
The minimum area for this district shall be five acres. No lot in any
manufactured home subdivision or condominium shall be occupied until
at least 50% of the proposed lots have been fully improved and are
ready for occupancy. To be fully improved, lots should be leveled to
grade, streets should be brought to grade and hard surfaced, and
sewer, water, and other utilities should be extended to the lots.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. Single-family detached and two-family dwellings and manufactured
homes.
2. Parks, playgrounds, non-commercial private clubhouses, and noncommercial
recreational facilities such as golf courses, swimming
pools, tennis courts, game rooms, libraries, and the like.
3. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of a governmental function.
4. RV-recreational vehicles shall be allowed within the district
provided it meets all North Dakota State Department of Health
standards and placement of the recreational vehicles are within a
designated contiguous area approved by the Building Official. No
recreational vehicles shall occupy any space for more than 180
days continuously.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including:
1. Home occupations, provided all requirements in Section 31 are
met.
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered shall be
considered special permitted uses:
1. Community centers, schools, churches and cemeteries.
2. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
3. Quasi-institutional homes.
4. Group child care homes and child care centers.
SECTION 16a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 16a
AO:680
5. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted principal
use of structure.
6. Games of chance, provided they are associated with other public or
quasi-public uses as listed in the City's Land Use Classification
System and allowed in the district.
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width
Single-family detached 5,000 square feet 50 feet
Two-family 8,000 square feet 60 feet
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yard: 15 feet. Side Yard - a minimum of 7.5 feet. The required
side yard on the street side of a corner lot shall be one-half the
required front yard on such street for the principal building and all
accessory buildings, provided as follows:
a. A garage being entered from the street, whether it be attached
or detached, must maintain a twenty-foot setback to prevent
obstruction of public right-of-way.
2. Rear yard: five feet for manufactured homes placed with their
longest dimension perpendicular to the principal street frontage
and 20 feet for all manufactured homes placed with their longest
dimension parallel to the principal street frontage. Accessory
buildings may be built in a required rear yard, but such accessory
buildings shall not be nearer than three feet to any side or rear lot
line, except that when a garage is entered from an alley at right
angles, it shall not be located closer than 25 feet from the rear lot
line. The required rear setback for an attached garage with
vehicular entry from an alley shall be 25 feet.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. Not more than 45% of the lot shall
be covered by the principal building and all accessory buildings. Any
solar collection device or related apparatus, not included as floor area
of a building by definition, shall not be included in computing lot
coverage.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area for residences, excluding
attached garage, shall be 800 square feet.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 35 feet.
L. Sign limitations. See Section 25.G, General Sign Regulations.
SECTION 16a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 16a
AO:681
SECTION 17. P: Parks and open space district. [Ord. No. 613, Ord.
No. 645, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1028,
Ord. No. 1062]
1. One identification sign shall be permitted per residential use,
provided such sign does not exceed two square feet in area; said
sign may be wall, freestanding or projecting type, but not
projecting over public property.
2. In connection with residential subdivisions, no sign intended to be
read from any public way adjoining the district shall be permitted
except:
a. No more than two identification signs, not exceeding 24 square
feet in area, for each principal entrance.
b. In the case of new subdivisions, one sign not exceeding 32
square feet in area, may be erected for a period of not more
than two years at each principal entrance to advertise the sale
of lots or dwellings.
3. No more than one sign, not exceeding six square feet in area,
advertising property for sale or rent.
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Two spaces per
dwelling. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a
manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. Manufactured home installation requirements. All manufactured
homes shall meet Guidelines for Manufactured Housing
Installations which shall comply with applicable Set-up and
Installation Procedures that meet the manufacturer's installation
requirements, prior to occupancy.
2. Manufactured home skirting requirements. Skirting shall be
constructed of brick, stone, finished wood, finished metal, or other
acceptable materials approved by the Building Official. The skirting
shall be in place within 30 days of placement of the manufactured
home on the lot. The tongue and axle of the manufactured home
shall be removed if not covered by the skirting. Manufactured
homes having perimeter foundations shall not be required to have
the above types of skirting.
3. See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
4. See Section 25.S, Buffer Yards.
A. Intent. This district is intended to contain major open lands and major
public and quasi-public recreational uses, including privately-owned
lands and uses that are essentially public in character. These lands and
uses include existing land reserves for public and institutional use.
SECTION 16a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 17
AO:682
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. None.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. Parks, playgrounds, cemeteries and noncommercial recreational
facilities such as golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, game
rooms, and the like.
2. Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility or
performance of a governmental function, except for those
permitted only as special permitted uses.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Libraries and recreation centers.
2. Watchman's dwelling as an accessory use for a permitted use or
structure.
3. Electrical substation and gas regulator stations, provided:
a. For each electric substation where transformers are exposed
there should be an enclosing fence at least six feet high.
b. The height requirements may be exceeded, provided that for
each additional one-foot height an additional one-foot of front,
rear, and side yard shall be required.
4. Water reservoirs, water storage tanks, water pumping stations, and
sewer lift stations provided;
a. For each instance the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be provided with plot plans showing the proposed installation
and its relationships to any near by property.
b. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prescribe
conditions as to setbacks, etc. for each installation.
5. Storage of flammable or combustible liquids above-ground, and
storage of liquefied petroleum gases and hazardous materials as an
accessory use, provided all Federal, State and local requirements
are met.
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements. The minimum lot requirements shall be the
same as those of the most restrictive neighboring district.
H. Minimum yard requirements. The minimum yard requirements shall be
the same as those of the most restrictive neighboring district.
SECTION 17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 17
AO:683
SECTION 18. (Reserved)41 [Ord. No. 1092]
SECTION 18a. P-2: Planned unit development overlay district. [Ord.
No. 922, Ord. No. 1092]
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. The maximum lot coverage by
buildings in this district shall be the same as the most restrictive
neighboring district. Any solar collection device or related apparatus,
not included as floor area of a building by definition, shall not be
included in computing lot coverage.
J. Minimum floor area. None.
K. Maximum height of building. The maximum height of any building shall
be the same as that of the most restrictive neighboring district.
L. Sign limitations. See Section 25.G, General Sign Regulations.
1. One sign or bulletin board, not to exceed 24 square feet in area,
shall be permitted on the same site as the principal building.
2. If sign or bulletin board is illuminated, the lights shall be directed
away from adjoining residential uses.
3. Ground signs shall be permanently anchored to the ground and
shall not exceed a height of six feet above normal grade.
4. On corner lots, no sign shall be constructed or located that will
obstruct the view of traffic approaching the street intersection.
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Required off-street
parking shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do not
encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. See Section 25.R, Landscaping.
2. See Section 25.S, Buffer Yards.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD)
regulations is to encourage and allow more flexible and creative design
of land developments than is possible under district zoning regulations.
Planned Unit Developments are intended to allow substantial flexibility
in planning and designing a proposal. This flexibility often accrues in
the form of relief from compliance with conventional zoning ordinance
site and design requirements. In return for greater flexibility in site
design requirements, planned developments are expected to deliver
quality community designs that preserve critical environmental
resources, provide above-average open space and circulation, and
41.Note: P-1: Planned Unit Development Overlay District established by Ord. Nos. 613 and
850 was repealed by Ord. No. 1092
SECTION 17 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 18a
AO:684
ultimately a development that is more desirable to live in than one
produced in accordance with typical zoning ordinance and subdivision
controls. In the PUD process greater density or more lenient siting
requirements may be granted, however, the Planned Unit Development
should contain features not normally required of traditional
developments. To insure compatibility with surrounding land uses and
to preserve health, safety, and general welfare of the community
residents, analysis of the proposal requires more information than
would be required if development were being pursued under
conventional zoning requirements.
B. Objectives.
1. Provide flexibility in architectural design, placement, and
clustering of buildings; use of open areas and outdoor living areas;
provision of circulation facilities and parking; and related site and
design considerations;
2. To promote logical development patterns of residential,
commercial, office, industrial and mixed use developments, while
protecting the character and quality of adjacent uses;
3. To ensure adequate provision of public services such as water,
sewer, electricity, open space and parks;
4. To avoid inappropriate development of lands and to provide
adequate drainage, water quality and reduction of flooding;
5. To encourage development of vacant properties within developed
areas;
6. Encourage conservation of natural features.
C. Applicability. A PUD overlay district may be approved only when the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Board of City
Commissioners that the PUD project would result in a greater benefit to
the City than would a development under conventional zoning district
regulations.
D. Project size. A PUD may have a lot size of less than six acres when the
City Commission finds:
1. That an unusual physical or topographic feature of importance to
the area as a whole exists on the site or in the surrounding
neighborhood that will contribute to and be protected by the PUD;
or
2. That the property or the surrounding area has an historic character
of importance to the community that will be protected by the PUD;
or
SECTION 18a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 18a
AO:685
3. That the proposed PUD is adjacent to an approved PUD that has
been completed and will contribute to the amenities and
functionality of the neighborhood; or
4. When undertaken on unused land or land in need of
redevelopment, at density levels that approximate, or in some
instances exceed, historic density patterns can improve efficient
use of existing infrastructure, conserve open space, achieve a
sense of neighborhood, and reduce public and private costs.
Architecture and building materials shall be consistent with the
design of the development and compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood.
E. Standards for planned unit developments.
1. Compatibility of uses. A PUD may include any uses permitted in any
zone classification provided that any combination of uses is
planned in manner compatible to each and to the surrounding
environment. Proposed uses must be specified as part of the
Master Land Use Plan. The Board of City Commissioners shall
establish the list of uses allowed in a PUD Zoning District in the
ordinance adopting the PUD Overlay District as part the PUD
Master Land Use Plan approval process.
In addition, the PUD shall not endanger the public health, welfare,
or safety in the neighborhood in which it is to be located.
2. Residential density. It is required that a zoning amendment request
accompany the PUD application if the gross density of the proposed
development substantially exceeds the gross density permitted in
the underlying zoning district.
The maximum density standards of the underlying zoning district
may be increased by the Board of City Commissioners during the
PUD review and approval process.
3. Lot size. The minimum lot size standards of the underlying zoning
district may be reduced by the Board of City Commissioners during
the PUD review and approval process.
4. Setbacks. The minimum setback standards of the underlying
zoning district may be reduced by the Board of City Commissioners
during the PUD review and approval process. Unless otherwise
expressly approved during PUD review and approval process,
buildings located on the periphery of the PUD must be set back a
minimum of 20 feet from the PUD District boundary.
5. Height. The maximum height limits of the underlying zoning
district may be increased by the Board of City Commissioners
during the PUD review and approval process.
SECTION 18a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 18a
AO:686
6. Building coverage. The maximum building coverage standards of
the underlying zoning district may be increased by the Board of
City Commissioners during the PUD review and approval process.
7. Open space. Unless otherwise expressly approved during the PUD
review and approval process at least 10% of the gross land area in
PUDs must consist of open space.
8. Site access. Any PUD containing over 50 dwelling units or 30,000
square feet of nonresidential floor space must provide at least two
access points, wherever possible.
9. Additional conditions. The Planning Commission shall recommend
and the Board of City Commissioners shall impose such other
conditions as are necessary to accomplish the purposes of this
ordinance.
F. Planned unit development zone description. The Planned Unit
Development (PUD) P-2 Zone is a type of overlay zoning district and a
type of development plan. PUD Zoning Districts are linked to PUD plans
in that no rights of development apply to a PUD zoning designation
other than those of the approved PUD plan.
G. Process overview. PUDs shall be processed in three stages: Master
Land Use Plan; Rezoning to the PUD Overlay District and Final Plan.
Master Land Use Plans and Rezoning may be processed concurrently,
provided that no rezoning to the PUD District may occur until approval
of a PUD Master Land Use Plan. If the proposal varies substantially
from the underlying zone, the base zone would need to be rezoned and
can run concurrently with the PUD Overlay District. After approval of a
Master Plan, approval can be obtained for a Final Plan for the total area
or for a phase. The applicant may request the Master Plan and Final
Plan be approved concurrently.
1. The PUD Master Land Use Plan application is reviewed with
respect to such issues as density, including the number, type and
location of dwelling units and other uses; impacts on surrounding
areas; access; and the adequacy of facilities and services. The
result of this review is the establishment of the basic parameters
for the development of the PUD. PUD Master Plan approval
establishes the maximum development "envelope" with regard to
density, lot sizes, overall scale, open space, environmental
protection and other land development and service provision
issues.
2. After approval of a PUD Master Plan, a PUD zoning map
amendment may be approved, or a PUD zoning map amendment
may be processed concurrently with the PUD Master Land Use
Plan. Approval of the Master Land Use Plan and related rezoning
shall establish the basic right of use for the area in conformity with
the plan as approved. Such plan shall be conditioned upon approval
SECTION 18a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 18a
AO:687
of a specific Final Plan, and shall not make permissible any of the
uses as proposed until a Final Plan is submitted and approved.
3. The PUD Final Plan is the document upon which building permits
and other applicable approvals are issued. The approved PUD Final
Plan shall control development within the PUD. The PUD Final Plan
review stage is the point at which developers bring forward
detailed plans for carrying out the type of project conceptually
approved during PUD Master Land Use Plan review. The applicant
must submit the detailed and technical information necessary to
demonstrate that all applicable standards, requirements, and
conditions have been met.
4. Coordination with the subdivision regulations. A subdivision plat
under the ordinance requirements for subdivisions may also be
considered.
H. PUD master land use plan. A PUD Master Land Use Plan is a
generalized land use plan for the entire area proposed to be included
within a PUD. The purpose of a PUD Master Land Use Plan is to allow
early review of the proposed PUD before substantial technical planning
work has been undertaken.
Application. An application for a Master Land Use Plan shall be filed
with the Planning Department and at a minimum; the application shall
contain the following information:
1. Development plan.
a. Name, address and phone number of applicant;
b. Name, address and phone number of registered surveyor,
registered engineer and/or consultant assisting in the
preparation of the Master land Use Plan;
c. Legal description of the property;
d. Description of existing use of the property and the immediately
adjacent land uses;
e. Current zoning districts for the subject property and for the
immediately adjacent properties;
f. Proposed underlying zoning districts for the subject property;
g. Definitions of the proposed land use designations, including
density ranges for each land use designation and proposed
housing product types for residential development shown on
the Master Land Use Plan graphics;
h. A statement comparing the proposed development with the
standards of the underlying zoning district and otherwise
applicable standards of the zoning ordinance. The reasons why,
SECTION 18a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 18a
AO:688
in the applicants opinion, the PUD would be in the public
interest;
i. A table setting the minimum and maximum total dwelling units
and nonresidential square footage, and the minimum acreage
for common open space, natural resource areas, public
buildings, and other public uses; and any other proposed uses;
j. A written description of residential and mixed-use
neighborhoods; commercial, office, and research and
development uses; common open space and natural resource
areas, public buildings, schools, and other public uses; and any
other proposed uses;
k. Implementation schedule. The proponents of a PUD District
shall submit a proposed schedule for the implementation of the
development to the satisfaction of the City Commission
including suitable provisions for assurance that each phase
could be brought to completion in a manner which would not
result in adverse effect upon the community as a result of
termination at that point.
2. Master land use plan graphics. A vicinity map showing property
lines, streets, existing and proposed zoning and such other items as
the administrator may require to show the relationship of the PUD
to the comprehensive plan and to existing schools and other
community facilities and services;
A map drawn to scale showing:
a. Topography at two foot intervals;
b. Land use designations for each distinct use in the site and in
adjacent areas;
c. A transportation circulation system including, primary points
of vehicular access and major interior street alignments that
include proposed right-of-way widths; proposed pedestrian
pathway locations and widths, and proposed bikeway locations
and widths. Other traffic impact information may be required
based on size of project and surrounding area;
d. Typical landscaping and screening treatments;
e. Common open space and natural resource areas;
f. A preliminary public infrastructure plan, including storm
drainage, sewer, water, power, telephone, natural gas and such
other characteristics as the Planning Director deems
necessary.
I. PUD Master land use plan review procedure.
SECTION 18a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 18a
AO:689
1. Preapplication conference. Before submitting a PUD Master Land
Use Plan, the applicant shall confer with the City Planner and other
designated City Officials. The purpose of this preapplication
conference is to discuss the proposal and the applicable
development review and approval procedures.
2. Application. A complete application for the PUD Master Land Use
Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department along with the
application fee that has been established by the Board of City
Commissioners 30 days prior to the date of the public hearing.
3. Public notice. A notice of such hearing shall be published in the
official newspaper of the City once a week for two successive weeks
prior to the date of hearing. A written notice of the Planning
Commission public hearing to neighboring property owners shall
follow the procedures of the City for a rezone.
4. Review and report-City planner. The City Planner shall prepare a
staff report that reviews the PUD Master Land Use Plan application
with the development standards and policies of this ordinance. The
City Planner shall provide a copy of the report to the Planning
Commission and the applicant.
5. Review and recommendation-planning commission. The Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider the proposed
Master Land Use Plan and rezoning according to the following
criteria:
a. The PUD Overlay Zone is necessary to accomplish the project
and the plan could not have been accomplished through strict
application of otherwise applicable base zoning district
standards, based on the purpose and intent of the zoning
ordinance;
b. The City and other agencies will be able to provide necessary
public services, facilities, and programs to serve the
development proposed, at the time the property is developed;
c. The streets and thoroughfares proposed are suitable and
adequate to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities
will not generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the
street network outside the PUD;
d. The PUD Master Land Use Plan complies with the PUD
standards of this ordinance;
e. That strict adherence to the requirements of the zoning
ordinance is not required in order to insure the health, safety
and welfare of the future occupants of the proposed
development;
SECTION 18a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 18a
AO:690
f. That the proposed development is consistent with the goals,
objectives and policies of the General Plan; The Planning
Commission shall recommend approval or denial of the PUD
Master Land Use Plan application and transmit a
recommendation of its action to the Board of City
Commissioners within 90 days after the time of referral of the
application for a PUD permit to the Planning Commission,
unless said Board and the applicant is agreeable to an
extension of time.
6. Review and action — Board of City Commissioners. After
submission of the recommendation by the Planning Commission to
the Board of City Commissioners, or, in the event of the failure of
the Planning Commission to so report, 90 days after the time of
referral of the proposed amendment to the Planning Commission,
the Board of City Commissioners shall hold a public hearing to
consider the proposed rezoning and PUD Master Land Use Plan
application. The Board of City Commissioners shall act to approve,
approve with conditions or deny the proposed PUD Master Land
Use Plan. A notice of such hearing shall be published in the official
newspaper of the City once a week for two successive weeks prior
to the date of hearing.
If the Board of City Commissioners acts to approve the PUD Master
Land Use Plan, it shall establish required time-frames for
development of the entire PUD and its individual phases, if any.
7. Effect of PUD master land use plan approval; lapse of approval.
Approval of a PUD Master Land Use Plan shall constitute
acceptance of the overall general planning concepts for the
proposed PUD development and is a prerequisite for the filing of a
PUD Final Plan and PUD overlay zoning classification.
An approved PUD Master Land Use Plan shall lapse and be of
no further force and effect if a PUD Final Plan for the PUD (or
a phase of the PUD) has not been approved within two years of
final legal authorization by the City Commission of the PUD Master
Land Use Plan. The approval of the PUD Master Land Use Plan
shall be considered lapse and shall be of no further force and effect
unless appropriate time extensions have been granted by the City
Commission prior to expiration. In the event of such lapse, the
PUD zoning classification shall be of no effect, and the property
shall be developed solely in accordance with the underlying zoning
classification. In the event of lapse of approval pursuant to this
section, the Planning Commission shall initiate action to remove
the land from the PUD Overlay Zoning District and may initiate
action to rezone the property to its former base zoning district
classification.
8. Appeal. If a protest against such planned unit development is filed,
duly signed by owners of 20% or more, of the area adjacent,
SECTION 18a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 18a
AO:691
extending 150 feet from the area which is the subject of the
proposed PUD permit, excluding the width of streets, the planned
unit development permit shall not become effective except by the
favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the Board of City
Commissioners. Protests must be in writing and must be filed with
the City Auditor prior to the time set for the hearing.
J. PUD final plans.
1. A survey of the proposed development site to include: showing the
dimension and bearings of the property lines, area of the site in
gross acres, topography and existing natural features of the
development site, including major wooded areas, structures,
streets, easements, utility lines and land uses;
2. A site plan to include: all the information required on the master
land use plan, the location and sizes of lots, location and proposed
density of dwelling units, nonresidential building intensity and land
use considered suitable for adjacent properties; parking areas,
streets, easements, utilities, buildings and setbacks, common open
space and recreation areas; vehicular and pedestrian circulation
and their relationship to the project;
3. Tabulation of the number of acres in the proposed project for
various uses; the number of housing units proposed by type;
standards for building height;
4. Engineering feasibility studies and plans showing, as necessary,
water, sewer, storm drainage, electricity, telephone and natural gas
installations; street improvements and a grading plan
demonstrating the nature and extent of earthwork required for site
preparation and development;
5. Flexibility in parking could be considered when demonstrated
through market studies or appropriate planning or transportation
engineering documentation to support the proposal;
6. Typical building plans and exterior elevations; architectural
features, such as building scale, form, material types and colors;
7. Landscaping plans;
8. Deed restrictions, protective covenants and other legal statements
or devices to be used to control the use, development and
maintenance of the land, and the improvements thereon, including
those areas which are to be commonly owned and maintained;
9. A financing plan for on-site and off-site improvements or
Development agreement detailing public improvements and
financing plan.
K. PUD final plan approval.
SECTION 18a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 18a
AO:692
1. Review and report — City planner. The City Planner shall prepare a
staff report that reviews the PUD Final Plan application with
respect to the approved PUD Master Land Use Plan and all other
applicable development standards and planning policies.
2. Review and action — planning commission. The Planning
commission shall consider the PUD Final Plan application and act
to approve or deny the PUD Final Plan application.
3. PUD Final plan review criteria. A PUD Final Plan shall be approved
by the Planning Commission if it is determined by the Planning
Commission to be in substantial compliance with the approved PUD
Master Land Use Plan so long as, when compared with the PUD
Master Land Use Plan, it does not result in:
a. An increase in project density or intensity, including the
number of housing units per acre or the amount of
nonresidential floor area per acre;
b. A change in the mix of housing types or the amount of land
area devoted to nonresidential uses;
c. A reduction in the amount of open space;
d. Any change to the vehicular system that results in a significant
change in the amount or location of streets, common parking
areas, and access to the PUD;
e. Any change determined by the Planning and Zoning
Commission to represent an increase in the development
intensity; or
f. A substantial change in the layout of buildings.
L. Effect of approval; lapse of approval. Approval of a PUD Final Plan shall
confer upon the applicant the right to develop the subject property in
accordance with the approved PUD Final Plan. The right to develop in
accordance with an approved PUD Final Plan shall lapse and be of no
further effect if all development shown on the PUD Final Plan is not
complete within the time-frame established by the Board of City
Commissioners during review of the Master Land Use Plan. In the event
of such lapse of approval, the PUD Final Plan and PUD zoning
classification shall be of no effect, and the property shall be developed
solely in accordance with the underlying zoning classification. In the
event of lapse of approval pursuant to this subsection, the Planning
Commission shall initiate action to remove the land from the PUD
Overlay Zoning District.
M. Appeal of the Planning Commission decision. Appeals would follow the
procedures as outlined in Section 28. Board of Adjustments/Appeals-
Subsection C. Remedies.
SECTION 18a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 18a
AO:693
N. Amendments to a final plan. Building permits and other development
approvals shall be issued on the basis of the approved Final Plan and
any conditions of approval. No City administrative personnel are
permitted to issue permits for improvements which are not indicated on
the approved final plan with the exception of the following:
1. Minor changes.
a. Minor changes to a planned unit development may be
approved administratively and in writing, if at all, by the
Planning Director, whereupon a permit may be issued. Such
changes may be authorized without additional public hearings
at the discretion of the Planning Director. This provision shall
not prohibit the Planning Director from requesting a
recommendation from a Planning Ad Hoc Committee, the
Planning Commission, or City Commission.
b. Minor changes shall be defined as:
(i) Those developments that do not change the character of
the development;
(ii) An increase of less than 5% in the approved number of
residential dwelling units;
(iii) An increase of less than 5% in the approved gross leasable
floor areas of retail, service, office and/or industrial
buildings;
(iv) The final plan shall not contain any changes which would
allow increased deviation/relaxation of the requirements
of this ordinance.
2. Major changes.
a. Major changes to a planned unit development shall be
approved, If at all, only by the City Commission, and must
follow the same planned unit development review and public
hearing process required for approval of a PUD Master Land
Use Plan.
b. Major changes shall be defined as follows:
(i) A change in the character of the development;
(ii) An increase of greater than 5% in the approved number of
residential dwelling units;
(iii) An increase of greater than 5% in the approved gross
leasable floor areas of retail, service, office and/or
industrial buildings;
(iv) A reduction in the approved open space;
SECTION 18a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 18a
AO:694
SECTION 19. C-1: neighborhood commercial district. [Ord. No. 613,
Ord. No. 635, Ord. No. 645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No.
728, Ord. No. 809, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1028, Ord.
No. 1062]
(v) A change in the location and placement of buildings;
(vi) An increase in the number of lots above what was
approved through the Final Plan review.
A. Intent. This district is intended to encourage the development of small
and compact areas for service establishments to serve frequent
commercial and personal service needs of residents within convenient
traveling distance. It is not intended to permit major commercial or
service establishments in such districts nor any automobile service
stations. Extension of this district along major streets in a "strip"
fashion is not intended and shall be discouraged.
The allowable uses in this district shall not be limited to those
enumerated as permitted uses and structures or special permitted uses,
however, all uses shall be similar in character. Also, uses similar to
those specified in the district shall not be dangerous or detrimental to
persons living or working in the vicinity, or to the public welfare, nor
shall they impair the use, enjoyment or value of any property in the
district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for this district
shall be one acre.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following shall be permitted:
1. Retail stores and shops and small service businesses providing they
do not employ more than five persons per shift, or serve alcoholic
beverages on the premises, including:
a. Bakery, confectionery, delicatessen, and the like, provided that
products prepared or processed on the premises shall be sold
on the premises.
b. Barber shop and beauty shop.
c. Drug store, newsstand, and tobacco shop.
d. Eating and drinking establishments, except drive-in and those
serving alcoholic beverages on the premises.
e. Florist, gift shop, stationery store, and the like.
f. Laundry and dry cleaning establishments including selfservice.
g. Convenience grocery stores, provided no gas pumps, are
included.
SECTION 18a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 19
AO:695
2. Churches.
3. Public buildings and uses appropriate to the character of the
district or requiring location within the district.
4. Public utilities installations and substations provided that offices or
storage or maintenance installations shall not be permitted.
Utilities substations other than individual transformers shall be
screened from Residential or Agricultural Districts by a masonry
wall or a fence with a properly maintained screening hedge.
5. Group child care homes and child care centers.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including:
1. One dwelling unit as an accessory use for occupancy by owners or
employees of permitted uses only, provided that such dwelling or
lodging unit shall be located above or behind permitted uses in
such a way they do not interrupt commercial frontage.
2. Solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Private clubs, lodges, social centers, athletic clubs, and the like.
2. Business and professional offices.
3. Medical offices and clinics.
4. Multi-family dwelling units located with permitted principle uses.
5. Convenience grocery store with gas pumps.
6. Games of chance.
7. Bed and breakfast inns.
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
1. Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: 80 feet.
H. Minimum yard requirements.
1. Front yards adjacent to Residential or Agricultural Districts. Where
a C-1 District adjoins a Residential or Agricultural District without
an intervening street or alley, and where lots separated by the
boundary have adjacent front yards, the first lot within the C-1
District, or 100 feet of such lot (whichever is less) shall provide a
SECTION 19 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 19
AO:696
SECTION 20. C-2: general commercial district. [Ord. No. 613, Ord.
No. 645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 703, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 728,
Ord. No. 809, Ord. No. 819, Ord. No. 865, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No.
971, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1016, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1039,
Ord. No. 1059, Ord. No. 1062, Ord. No. 1075, Ord. No. 1092]
front yard of the minimum depth required in the adjoining district.
Such yard shall be landscaped, as required by Section 25.R and
buffered as required by Section 25.S.
2. Side and rear yards adjacent to Residential or Agricultural
Districts. Where a C-1 District adjoins a Residential or Agricultural
District without an intervening street or alley, a side and rear yard
of the same minimum dimension as required for the adjoining yard
in the Residential or Agricultural District shall be provided. Side
and rear yards shall be landscaped as required by Section 25.R and
buffered as required by Section 25.S. No such yard shall be used
for parking.
3. Other than indicated above, all yards adjacent to streets shall have
a minimum depth of 10 feet which shall be landscaped as required
by Section 25.R and buffered as required by Section 25.S. No such
yard shall be used for parking.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. None.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area for individual dwelling
units which are located with permitted principal uses shall be 450
square feet.
K. Maximum height. Except as allowed below, no structure shall exceed
two stories, or 25 feet, or shall exceed the prevailing height of existing
residential structures on adjacent premises (including premises across
streets, easements, and right-of-ways).
Public, semi-public, or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions,
schools, or churches may be erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet,
provided that the front yard depth shall be 30% in excess of those
specified in this district, and further provided that the side yards of an
interior lot shall be 20 feet and the front yard requirements as stated
herein above.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Required off-street
parking shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do not
encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements. None.
A. Intent. This district is intended to include lands suited by topography
and other natural conditions for urban development and which are
SECTION 19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 20
AO:697
provided with a full range of public services, including sewer, water,
fire protection, and arterial streets, or are intended to be provided with
such services in the near future. This district is intended to encourage
those types of development which require large quantities of retail
space which are not available in the downtown business area.
The allowable uses in this district shall not be limited to those
enumerated as permitted uses and structures or special permitted uses;
however, all uses shall be similar in character. Also, uses similar to
those specified in the district shall not be dangerous or detrimental to
persons living or working in the vicinity, or to the public welfare, nor
shall they impair the use, enjoyment or value of any property in the
district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for this district
shall be two acres, except for areas as defined in the attached exhibit,
located along Highway 2/85 between 26th Street and 58th Street,
which are marked on the Future Land Use Map as "Commercial" or
"Future Industrial to Commercial Transition Area" to Areas which are
defined by the Future Land Use Map as "Commercial" or "Future
Industrial to Commercial Transition Area" which are delineated on this
map may be re-zoned to C-2: General Commercial, with no minimum
district size.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following uses shall be permitted:
1. Small business machine sales, repair and service shops, auto
supply stores, bicycle shops, carpenter and cabinet shops, and
household appliance repair shops.
2. Amusement places, taverns or lounges, package liquor stores,
theaters, bowling alleys, commercial recreation uses and games of
chance.
3. Antique shops and stores, providing all merchandise is displayed
and sold inside a building, art and art supply stores.
4. Apparel and accessory stores, clothing and costume rental shops,
custom dressmaking shops, furrier shops, tailor shops, department
stores, jewelry and metal and handicraft stores, watch repair
shops, leather goods and luggage stores, shoe and shoe repair
stores, sporting and athletic goods stores, toy stores, and variety
stores, and other specialty shops.
5. Governmental services, auditorium and similar places of public
assembly, libraries and museums.
6. Banks and other savings and lending institutions, office and office
buildings, office supply and office equipment stores, newspaper
offices, printing offices, and publishing offices.
SECTION 20 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 20
AO:698
7. Barber and beauty shops, dry cleaning and laundry establishments,
book and stationary stores, cigar and tobacco shops, drug stores,
florist, and gift shops.
8. Business and technical schools; schools for photography, music,
and dance; music stores; photographic studios; and picture frame
shops.
9. Churches.
10. Delicatessen and catering establishments, grocery stores, and
restaurants.
11. Furniture and home furnishing stores, hardware stores, household
appliance stores, interior decorating shops, and lumber yards.
12. Hotels, motels, private clubs, fraternities, sororities, and lodges.
13. Medical, dental, and health clinics; medical and orthopedic
appliance stores; optician and optometrist shops.
14. Nursing homes, hospitals and medical complexes.
15. Mortuaries.
16. Dwellings provided the ground floor is used as retail space.
17. Group child care homes and child care centers.
18. Quasi-institutional homes.
19. Railroads and railroad right-of-ways.
20. Automobile and mobile home sales, auto service and repair shops,
gasoline or service stations, car washes, and tire repair shops.
21. Wholesale establishments.
22. Plumbing and sheet metal shops.
23. Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics, provided they are in a
completely enclosed building, and pet shops.
24. Mini-storage buildings.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Parking lots and parking ramps.
2. Shopping centers.
SECTION 20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 20
AO:699
3. Bed and breakfast inns.
4. Schools.
5. Compassion Center — Distributer.42
F. Special permit temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under
Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements. None.
H. Minimum yard requirements. None.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. None.
J. Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area for individual dwelling
units which are located with permitted principal uses, shall be 450
square feet.
K. Maximum height of buildings. Except as provided in Section 25.D, no
structure shall exceed 10 stories, or 100 feet in height, provided that no
structure or portion of a structure shall be erected to a height
exceeding 45 feet on any portion of a lot less than 20 feet in distance
from any portion of a lot in any C-1 or Residential District.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Required off-street
parking shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do not
encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. See Section 25.R., Landscaping.
2. See Section 25.S., Buffer Yards.
EXHIBITS
Exception Parcels is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Future Transition Area and Commercial Area - See following page.
42.Editor's Note: See Appendix A Special Permitted Uses for additional provisions and
Exception Parcels Exhibit included as attachments to this chapter.
SECTION 20 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 20
AO:700
SECTION 21. C-3: restricted commercial district. [Ord. No. 613,
Ord. No. 633, Ord. No. 645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 703, Ord. No.
716, Ord. No. 728, Ord. No. 809, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No. 865, Ord.
No. 914, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 961, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1025,
Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1052 Ord. No. 1062, Ord. No. 1075, Ord.
No. 1092]
A. Intent. This district is intended to include lands suited by topography
and other natural conditions for urban development and which are
provided with a full range of public services, including sewer, water, fire
protection, and arterial streets, or are intended to be provided with
such services in the near future. This district is intended to protect and
SECTION 20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 21
AO:701
encourage the development of community core areas that function
efficiently as centers of community business activity.
The allowable uses in this district shall not be limited to those
enumerated as permitted uses and structures or special permitted uses;
however, all uses shall be similar in character. Also, uses similar to
those specified in the district shall not be dangerous or detrimental to
persons living or working in the vicinity, or to the public welfare, nor
shall they impair the use, enjoyment or value of any property in the
district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for this district
shall be two acres.
C. Permitted Uses and Structures in the C-3 Restricted Commercial
District, excluding the 2008 Renaissance Zone. The following uses shall
be permitted:
1. Small business machine sales, repair and service shops, auto
supply stores, bicycle shops, and household appliance repair shops.
2. Amusement places, taverns or lounges, package liquor stores,
theaters, bowling alleys, and commercial recreation uses, and
games of chance.
3. Antique shops and stores, providing all merchandise is displayed
and sold inside a building, art and art supply stores.
4. Apparel and accessory stores, clothing and costume rental shops,
custom dressmaking shops, furrier shops, tailor shops, department
stores, jewelry, metal and handicraft stores, specialty shops, watch
repair shops, leather goods and luggage stores, shoe and shoe
repair stores, sporting and athletic goods stores, toy stores, variety
stores and other specialty shops.
5. Governmental services, auditorium and similar places of public
assembly, libraries, and museums.
6. Banks and other savings and lending institutions, offices and office
buildings, office supply and office equipment stores, newspaper
offices, printing and publishing offices.
7. Barber and beauty shops, dry cleaners and laundry establishments,
book and stationery stores, cigar and tobacco shops, drug stores,
florist, and gift shops.
8. Business and technical schools; schools for photography, music and
dance; music stores; photographic studios, and picture frame
shops.
9. Churches.
SECTION 21 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 21
AO:702
10. Delicatessen and catering establishments, grocery stores, and
restaurants.
11. Furniture and home furnishings stores, hardware stores, household
appliance stores, and interior decorating shops.
12. Hotels, motels, and lodges.
a. Hotel/motel: the definition for "hotel or motel is in Section 31
of the Zoning Ordinance and states "a building used as a
transient abiding place for persons who are lodged for
compensation."
b. Lodging houses as defined in Section 31, are not permitted.
Lodges are defined as a building or portion thereof or premises
owned or operated by any corporation or association organized
for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, or for the
promotion of sports.
13. Medical, dental and health clinics, medical and orthopedic
appliance stores, opticians, and optometrist shops.
14. Nursing homes, hospitals and medical complexes.
15. Mortuaries.
16. Dwelling units, provided the ground floor is used as a permitted C-2
General Commercial use as defined by Section 20.C. of this
ordinance or amendments thereof and the basement of the building
is not used as a dwelling unit. [Amended 6-9-2020 by Ord. No.
1111]
a. Pursuant to Subsection 21.C.16, dwelling unit shall mean an
individual dwelling unit for a single family with a minimum
living area of 450 square feet and containing its own restroom
and cooking facilities. Residential units are intended to be
standard apartments and would fall under the definition of
family in Section 31. Individual dwelling units greater than
three bedrooms can be considered with an SPU.
b. Dwelling units will be considered above commercial (nonretail)
space as a special permitted use.
17. Group child care homes and child care centers.
18. Railroad and railroad right-of-ways, taxi, or bus stations.
19. Pet shops.
D. Permitted uses and structures in the C-3 Restricted Commercial District
within the 2008 Renaissance Zone.
The following uses shall be permitted:
SECTION 21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 21
AO:703
Intent of Zoning within the 2008 Renaissance Zone. Within the
Renaissance Zone, properties that are zoned C-3 are permitted to
contain dwellings above the first floor, as long as the first floor of the
building is used as retail space and the basement is not used as a
dwelling. "Retail Space" does not include offices, and is intended to
include restaurants and shops that sell goods. These uses fall under
the building code "M" (Mercantile) Occupancy. Offices will be allowed
on the second floor within the Renaissance Zone. Dwelling unit means
an individual dwelling unit for a single family with a minimum living
area of 450 square feet and containing its own restroom and cooking
facilities. Individual dwelling units greater than three bedrooms can be
considered with an SPU. Dwelling units are intended to be standard
apartments and would fall under the definition of family in Section 31.
The following are subject to review and approval at the time of the
building permit for any proposed residential, including the Renaissance
Zone:
a. Applicable building and fire codes.
b. Verification from private lot owner or the Parking Authority that
off-street parking for the proposed uses can be provided.
c. Consideration for loading/unloading demands for the associated
business and residential use.
The following are subject to review and approval at the time of the
building permit for any proposed development, including the Downtown
District:
a. Applicable building and fire codes.
b. Verification from private lot owner or the Parking Authority that
off-street parking for the proposed uses can be provided.
c. Consideration for loading/unloading demands for the associated
business and residential use.
d. Review by the Downtown Design Review Board, as established in
Resolution No. 16-063 and as noted in Section 21.O. Any exterior
modification in the Downtown District is required to be presented to
the Downtown Design Review Board, regardless of whether the work
requires a building permit.
1. Small business machine sales, repair and service shops, auto
supply stores, bicycle shops, and household appliance repair shops.
2. Amusement places, taverns or lounges, package liquor stores,
theaters, bowling alleys, and commercial recreation uses, and
games of chance.
3. Antique shops and stores, provided all merchandize is displayed
and sold inside a building, art and art supply stores.
SECTION 21 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 21
AO:704
4. Apparel and accessory shops, clothing and costume rental shops,
custom dressmaking shops, furrier shops, tailor shops, department
stores, jewelry, metal and handicraft stores, specialty shops, watch
repair shops, leather goods and luggage stores, shoe and shoe
repair stores, sporting and athletic good stores, toy stores, variety
stores and other specialty stores.
5. Governmental services, auditorium and similar places of public
assembly, libraries and museums.
6. Banks and other savings and lending institutions, offices and office
buildings, office supply and office equipment stores, newspaper
offices, printing and publishing offices.
7. Barber and beauty shops, dry cleaners and laundry establishments,
book and stationery stores, cigar and tobacco shops, drug stores,
florist and gift shops.
8. Business and Technical schools; schools for photography, music
and dance; music stores; photographic studios, and picture frame
shops.
9. Churches.
10. Delicatessen and catering establishments, grocery stores, and
restaurants.
11. Furniture and home furnishing shops, hardware stores, household
appliance stores, and interior decorating shops.
12. Hotels, motels, and lodges.
a. Hotel/motel: the definition for "hotel or motel" is Section 31 of
the Zoning Ordinance and states "a building used as a
transient abiding place for persons who are lodged for
compensation."
b. Lodging houses as defined in Section 31, are not permitted.
Lodges are defined as a building or portion thereof or premises
owned or operated by any corporation or association organized
for civic, fraternal, social, or business purposes, or for the
promotion of sports.
13. Medical, dental and health clinics, medical and orthopedic
appliance stores, opticians, and optometrist shops.
14. Nursing homes, hospitals, and medical complexes.
15. Mortuaries.
16. Dwelling Units, provided the ground floor is used as retail space,
and the basement of the building is not used as a dwelling unit.
SECTION 21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 21
AO:705
a. Pursuant to Subsection 21.D.16, dwelling unit shall mean an
individual dwelling unit for a single family with a minimum
living area of 450 square feet and containing its own restroom
and cooking facilities. Residential units are intended to be
standard apartments and would fall under the definition of
family in Section 31. Individual dwelling units greater than
three bedrooms can be considered with an SPU.
17. Group child care homes and child care centers.
18. Railroad and railroad right-of-ways, taxi or bus stations.
19. Pet shops.
E. Permitted accessory uses and structures in both Sections 21.C and
21.D. Uses and structures that are customarily accessory and clearly
incidental to permitted uses and structures shall be permitted,
including solar energy systems.
F. Special permitted uses in both Sections 21.C and 21.D. The following
shall be considered for special permitted uses:
1. Parking lots and parking ramps.
2. Gasoline and service stations, and car washes.
3. Shopping centers.
4. Auto dealerships.
5. Bed and breakfast inns.
6. Pet shops.
7. Quasi institutional homes.
8. Dwelling units with more than three bedrooms.
9. Compassion Center - Distributer.43
F(1). Temporary uses in both Sections 21.C and 21.D.
None, other than those allowed under SECTION 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements in both Sections 21.C and 21.D. None.
H. Minimum yard requirements in both Sections 21.C and 21.D. None.
I. Maximum lot coverage by building in both Sections 21.C and 21.D.
None.
J. Minimum floor area in both Sections 21.C and 21.D. The minimum floor
area for individual dwelling units which are located with permitted
principal uses, shall be 450 square feet.
43.Editor's Note: See Appendix A for additional provisions and Exception Parcels Exhibit.
SECTION 21 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 21
AO:706
K. Maximum height of buildings in both Sections 21.C and 21.D. Except as
provided in Section 25.D., no structure shall exceed 10 stories, or 100
feet in height, provided that no structure or portion of a structure shall
be erected to a height exceeding 45 feet on any portion of a lot less than
20 feet in distance from any portion of a lot in any C-1 or Residential
District.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements in both Sections 21.C and 21.D. See
Section 25.H. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a
manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements in both Sections 21.C and 21.D.
1. See Section 25.R., Landscaping.
2. See Section 25.S., Buffer Yards.
3. In the Downtown District, designated by Exhibit 21.A and the
Downtown Plan, adopted in 2014 by the Williston City Commission,
there are building materials that are inappropriate for a downtown
area and are inconsistent with the Downtown Plan. To further the
goals of the Downtown Plan, and as established by Resolution No.
16-063 property owners applying for building permits within the
downtown area must apply to the Design Review Board prior to
applying for building permits. The Design Review Board will ensure
a building's consistency with the Downtown Plan and Downtown
Design Review Guidelines. In addition, any exterior modification in
the Downtown District is required to be presented to the Downtown
Design Review Board, regardless of whether the work requires a
building permit.
EXHIBITS
Exception Parcels is included as an attachment to this chapter.
Downtown Boundary Map - See following
Williston 2008 Renaissance Zone - See following
SECTION 21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 21
AO:707
SECTION 21 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 21
AO:708
SECTION 21a. HCC: Highway Corridor Comercial District [Ord. No.
1060, Ord. No. 1075, Ord. No. 1092]
A. Intent. Prior to the growth beginning in the mid 2000's and before the
City urban area expanded along the corridor the nature of development
was more industrial oriented. The intent of this district is a specific
purpose zoning district that will allow for a mix of commercial to light
industrial uses and development standards to work with the existing
pattern of development that has occurred along the principal arterial
highway corridor. Further it is intended to achieve the goals of the
comprehensive plan of developing an urban entryway. These goals
include: 1) identify physical features that improve the appearance of
existing development at the gateways to the City, and work with
property owners to implement these features; 2) establish zoning which
requires higher industrial development standards to ensure that future
development and redevelopment contributes to a positive image of the
community. The goals serve to meet the input of the community to
transition the corridor into more of an urban corridor entryway.
The industrial uses permitted do not include heavy nuisance industry
uses that may be incompatible with promoting a mix of commercial
and light industrial uses that serve to promote an urban entryway.
The district is further intended to provide services for motorists and
to provide for non-pedestrian oriented retail, wholesale, service and
SECTION 21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 21a
AO:709
repair and light industrial uses. Uses in this district are intended for
operations which do not generate large volumes of heavy truck traffic,
do not emit significant amounts of noise, smoke, dust, odors or glare
that would interfere with adjacent residential areas. This district would
not be intended for residential uses.
These regulations establish development standards and conditions
through which uses may be located in this zone.
The allowable uses in this district shall not be limited to those
enumerated as permitted uses and structures or special permitted uses;
however, all uses shall be similar in character. Also, uses similar to
those specified in the district shall not be dangerous or detrimental to
persons living or working in the vicinity, or to the public welfare, nor
shall they impair the use, enjoyment or value of any property in the
district.
B. District implementation. This zone would only be applied to corridor
areas as determined appropriate for this zone by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and City Commission.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures. The following uses shall be
permitted:
Commercial Uses:
1. Small business machine sales, repair and service shops, auto
supply stores, bicycle shops, carpenter and cabinet shops, and
household appliance repair shops.
2. Amusement places, taverns or lounges, package liquor stores,
theaters, bowling alleys, commercial recreation uses, games of
chance, dance halls, night clubs, roller or ice skating facilities.
3. Antique shops and stores, providing all merchandise is displayed
and sold inside a building, art and art supply stores.
4. Apparel and accessory stores, clothing and costume rental
shops, custom dressmaking shops, furrier shops, tailor shops,
department stores, jewelry and metal and handicraft stores,
watch repair shops, leather goods and luggage stores, shoe and
shoe repair stores, sporting and athletic goods stores, toy stores,
and variety stores, and other specialty shops.
5. Governmental services.
6. Banks and other savings and lending institutions, office and
office buildings, office supply and office equipment stores,
newspaper offices, printing offices, and publishing offices.
7. Barber and beauty shops, dry cleaning and laundry
establishments, book and stationary stores, cigar and tobacco
shops, drug stores, florist, and gift shops.
SECTION 21a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 21a
AO:710
Commercial Uses:
8. Business and technical schools; schools for photography, music,
and dance; music stores; photographic studios; and picture
frame shops.
9. Delicatessen and catering establishments, grocery stores, and
restaurants.
10. Furniture and home furnishing stores, hardware stores,
household appliance stores, interior decorating shops.
11. Hotels, motels, private clubs.
12. Medical, dental, and health clinics; medical and orthopedic
appliance stores; optician and optometrist shops.
13. Hospitals and medical complexes.
14. Mortuaries.
15. Railroads and railroad right-of-ways.
16. Wholesale establishments.
17. Greenhouses, plant nurseries, taxidermy shops.
Industrial Uses:
1. Small business machine sales, tire sales and service, repair and
service shops, auto supply stores, carpenter and cabinet shops,
and household appliance repair shops.
2. Plumbing shops, sheet metal shops, roofing shops, mini-storage
buildings.
3. Contractor or commercial service business, offices, and
associated storage repair yards (This would include oilfield
service contractors).
4. Airports, railroads, essential public utilities, and public service
installations.
5. Light manufacturing industries consisting of the processing and
treatment of goods and foodstuffs, except fish, meat products,
vinegar and yeast.
6. Other light manufacturing and assembly plants.
7. Bottling plants.
8. Automobile, mobile home, recreational vehicle, or equipment
sales.
9. Building material yards and lumber yards (Not including:
wholesale oilfield pipe yards; storage/stacking laydown yards
for oilfield equipment/tanks as a primary use).
10. Gasoline or service stations, car washes.
SECTION 21a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 21a
AO:711
Industrial Uses:
11. Heavy commercial truck shops (This would not include truck
stops and freight terminals).
12. Animal hospitals or veterinary clinic.
13. Radio and television transmitting stations.
14. Pet shops, indoor kennels and boarding.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which
are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including solar energy systems.
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Storage of hazardous materials, subject to locally adopted Fire
Code and State Building Code regulations.
2. Storage of liquefied petroleum gases, subject to locally adopted
Fire Code regulations.
3. Storage of Special Industrial Explosive Device(s) under 50 pounds,
subject to the locally adopted Fire Code and State Building Code
regulations.
4. Underground oil and gas storage facilities, as approved by the City
Building Official and Fire Chief.
5. Storage of flammable liquids above-grade, and wholesale, subject
to locally adopted Fire Code regulations.
6. Outdoor RV/boat storage (Note: new use added, should be
conditioned for surface requirements and fencing/screening as
appropriate to the proposed location).
7. Grain and feed mills, grain elevators.
8. Compassion Center — Distributer.44
F. Temporary uses. In compliance with Section 25.O and most recent
amendments.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
1. Front yard - as described in Subsection L. Design Criteria.
2. Side yard - none, except for as described in Subsection L. Design
Criteria.
3. Rear yard - none, except for as described in Subsection L. Design
Criteria.
44.Editor's Note: See Appendix A for additional provisions and Exception Parcels Exhibit.
SECTION 21a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 21a
AO:712
4. Parcels abutting residential parcels - a twenty-foot non-buildable
setback must be maintained along the shared parcel line with a
residential zoning district including residential on an agriculture
zoned lot.
H. Minimum yard requirements. None.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. None.
J. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 100 feet.
1. Seventy-five feet from Residential: Structures or portions of
structures may not exceed 35 feet in height within 75 feet of any
single-family residential zoning district.
2. Seventy-six to 100 feet from Residential: Structures or portions of
structures may not exceed 45 feet in height when located 76 to 100
feet from any single family residential zoning district.
3. One-hundred one to 150 feet from Residential: Structures or
portions of structures may not exceed 55 feet in height when
located 101 to 150 feet from any single family residential zoning
district.
K. Sign limitations. See Section 25.G. General Sign Regulations and most
recent amendment.
L. Design criteria.
1. Building placement. Developments should maximize the amounts of
parking and storage located to the side or rear of buildings and
should locate buildings near their primary fronting streets, in order
to avoid large parking lots and storage areas along primary streets.
Where property faces the highway corridor the highway corridor is
the primary frontage regardless of access.
Where a property fronts a right-of-way, there shall be a front yard
landscape setback area from the right of way of not less, than 15
feet, which shall be maintained regardless of parking with no more
than one bay (a double row) of parking between the building and
the edge of the required landscape area.
If a property has a double frontage, parking shall be limited as
above along the frontage fronting the highway corridor, while the
secondary frontage shall be landscaped as appropriate based on
Ordinance No. 1007 or most recent amendments, but shall not be
limited to a single bay of parking.
2. Landscaping/screening. All landscaping, screening and parking lot
perimeter landscaping shall be in compliance with Ordinance No.
1007 or most recent amendments.
SECTION 21a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 21a
AO:713
Any area used for storage must be screened pursuant to Ordinance
No. 1007, Section 4C or more recent amendments and fenced from
any right-of-way.
Lots which are used only for outdoor storage must be fully
screened from the corridor, as pursuant to Ordinance No. 1007,
Section 4C or more recent amendments, including the use of
fencing and landscaping.
3. Buffer yard requirement. Buffer yards between other districts shall
be in compliance with Ordinance No. 1007 or most recent
amendments. Requirements shall be those for commercial districts
between any Agricultural, Residential, or Parks and open space
zone in the ordinance.
4. Parking and access. All required access and parking shall be hard
surface with hot mix asphalt or concrete. Required off-street
parking shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do not
encroach on a public right-of-way.
5. Yard storage areas. Yard storage areas shall be surfaced with
materials and recommended specifications below per approval by
the City Engineering Department that are stabilized and placed
upon a graded and prepared subgrade that provide a dust free/mud
free surface. Storage yards are to be maintained as to not create
blowing dust or tracking of mud onto streets.
a. The storage yard area shall be surfaced with one of the
following:
(i) Six inches of concrete pavement with a six inch aggregate
base placed upon a graded and prepared subgrade.
(ii) Four inches of asphalt pavement — paved in two lifts —
with a six inch aggregate placed upon a graded and
prepared subgrade.
(iii) Six inches of three inch minus scoria surface placed upon a
graded and prepared subgrade.
(iv) Six inches of three inch minus milled or crushed asphalt
watered and rolled until stabilized and placed upon a
graded and prepared subgrade.
(v) Six inches of material meeting the NDDOT specified
gradation for Salvaged Base Course watered and rolled
until stabilized and placed upon a graded and prepared
subgrade.
(vi) Six inches of material meeting NDDOT specified gradation
for Class 3 Course Concrete Aggregate watered and rolled
until stabilized and placed upon a graded and prepared
subgrade.
SECTION 21a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 21a
AO:714
b. For less intensive and more passive use storage yards in which
semi-trucks are not used, the yard area for storage and parking
of equipment may also be surfaced with one of the following:
(i) Six inches of material meeting NDDOT specified
graduation for Class 5 Aggregate watered and rolled until
stabilized and placed upon a graded and prepared
subgrade.
(ii) Six inches of material meeting NDDOT specified
graduation for Class 13 Aggregate watered and rolled
until stabilized and placed upon a graded and prepared
subgrade.
c. Alternative surfacing plans:
(i) Alternative surfacing types and combinations may be
proposed to the City Engineering Department for review
and approval when demonstrated that the proposal can
provide a dust-free, mud-free surface that meet the goals
of this ordinance and can be feasibly maintained for
continued compliance with the ordinance.
(ii) For display areas and very low activity areas grass
surfaces may be proposed when demonstrated that the
grass surface can be maintained and kept alive in
conjunction with the intended use providing a dust-free,
mud-free surface while meeting the goals of this
ordinance. Grass needs to be mowed and the area needs to
maintain compliance with the property maintenance code.
d. Heavy truck and equipment parking:
(i) A separate private parking and storage area used for
business owned equipment and heavy trucks which are
used in the operation of the business located on the
premise may be utilized. This parking and storage area
does not need to be hard surfaced (concrete or hot mix
asphalt) and may instead be surfaced as noted above for
storage yards. This area must be screened and landscaped
according to the standards pertaining to storage yards set
forth in this ordinance. Any public use traffic areas used
for heavy trucks using the services of the business and all
required parking and access must be hard surfaced with
concrete or hot mix asphalt.
M. Phased development allowances. Any new areas of development
required to be hard surfaced according to this ordinance must be
completed at time of development, prior to being issued a certificate of
occupancy.
SECTION 21a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 21a
AO:715
Pre-existing, non-conforming lots which are required to come into
compliance based on the Zoning Ordinance (This requirement is
enacted in the case of: new building permits or expansion of existing
buildings after the effective date of this ordinance amendment and
which increase the floor area by more than 1,000 square feet or 10%
of the existing building footprint area, whichever is greater; or two or
more expansions of square footage on the site that, in total, exceed
1,000 square feet or 10% of the existing building footprint area,
whichever is greater) must do so at time of development, prior to being
issued a certificate of occupancy. Alternatively, a property may, at time
of building permit application, apply for a phasing permit to allow the
non-conforming portion of the property to come into compliance over
a period of time. To request a phasing permit for the non-conforming
portions of the property, the applicant must submit a written request to
the Planning and Zoning Department outlining the need for a phased
time allowance to complete the required improvements. The written
request must include a phased plan drawing that shows the areas to be
improved, use and activity level for each phase and the timed order in
which each phase will be implemented. The highest activity areas must
be addressed in the earliest stages of the phased plan. The storage area
phases must utilize the surfacing standards laid out in Subsection L
above.
As part of a phased plan approved by the Planning and Zoning and City
Engineering Departments, lots may be allowed up to two construction
seasons per two acres for completion of surfacing. Property owners
working within a phased plan must complete two acres of surfacing
every two construction seasons. However, a full acre does not need to
be completed each year (i.e. grading of the full two acres could take
place in year one, while final surfacing could take place in year two).
Starting and completing 10 acres of surfacing in year 10 would not
meet the requirements of this ordinance.
For example:
1. A property of two acres and less may have up to two construction
seasons to complete any surfacing required to bring a nonconforming
lot into compliance.
2. A property of more than two acres and up to four acres may have
up to four construction seasons to complete any surfacing required
to bring a non-conforming lot into compliance.
3. A property of over four acres and up to six acres may have up to six
construction seasons to complete any surfacing required to bring a
non-conforming lot into compliance.
For every additional two acres, a property would be able to utilize
an additional two construction seasons to complete any surfacing
required to bring a non-conforming lot into compliance.
SECTION 21a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 21a
AO:716
SECTION 22. M-I: Light industrial district. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No.
645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 732, Ord. No. 749, Ord.
No. 809, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No. 864, Ord. No. 865, Ord. No. 945,
Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1025, Ord. No. 1026, Ord. No.
1028, Ord. No. 1050, Ord. No. 1052, Ord. No. 1062]
The phasing permit and plan must be approved by the Planning and
Zoning Department and City Engineering Department.
N. Comprehensive plan consistency. This specific purpose zoning district is
intended to implement specified areas as identified in the
comprehensive plan. This zoning district is set up as a special purpose
district implemented at the direction of the City. If an area were
considered other than the area defined in the comprehensive plan, a
comprehensive plan amendment would be needed for its
recommendation by the City for consideration.
EXHIBITS
Exception Parcels is included as an attachment to this chapter.
A. Intent. This district is intended to include lands suited by topography
and other natural conditions for light industrial development, including
light manufacturing, processing, storage, wholesaling, and distribution
operations, and other and operations which do not require large
numbers of workers; do not generate heavy truck traffic, do not emit
significant amounts of noise, smoke, dust or glare; and do not require
large volumes of public water or sewer. Limited commercial use is
allowed in this district to serve the uses for which the district is
primarily intended. Sewer, water, fire protection, and other essential
services shall be provided either by public utilities or approved private
means.
The allowable uses in this district shall not be limited to those
enumerated as permitted uses and structures or special permitted uses;
however, all uses shall be similar in character. Also, uses similar to
those specified in the district shall not be dangerous or detrimental to
persons living or working in the vicinity, or to the public welfare, nor
shall they impair the use, enjoyment or value of any property in the
district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for Industrial
Districts shall be 20 acres. Industrial Districts of less than 20 acres are
allowed provided they abut another Industrial District and the
combined acreage of the districts is 20 acres or more. Different
Industrial Districts such as Light Industrial, Heavy Industrial, and
Industrial Park Districts may abut each other; however, the districts and
uses therein must remain separate.
C. Permitted principal uses and structures. The following uses shall be
permitted:
SECTION 21a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 22
AO:717
1. Small business machine sales, tire sales and service, repair and
service shops, auto supply stores, carpenter and cabinet shops, and
household appliance repair shops.
2. Furniture and home furnishings stores, hardware stores, household
appliance stores, interior decorating shops.
3. Plumbing shops, sheet metal shops, roofing shops, mini-storage
buildings.
4. Contractor or commercial service businesses, offices, and
associated storage repair yards.
5. Trucking, moving and storage, and freight terminals.
6. Airports, railroads, essential public utilities, and public service
installations.
7. Grain and feed mills, grain elevators.
8. Underground oil and gas storage facilities, as approved by the City
Building Official and Fire Chief.
9. Storage of flammable liquids above-grade, and wholesale, subject
to locally adopted Fire Code regulations.
10. Storage of liquefied petroleum gases, up to 50,000 gallons, subject
to locally adopted Fire Code regulations.
11. Light manufacturing industries consisting of the processing and
treatment of goods and foodstuffs, except alcohol or alcoholic
beverages, fish, meat products, vinegar and yeast.
12. Other light manufacturing and assembly plants.
13. Bottling plants.
14. Automobile, mobile home, recreational vehicle, or equipment sales.
15. Building material yards and lumber yards.
16. Concrete mixing and concrete products manufacturing plants.
17. Gasoline or service stations, car washes, and truck-stop service and
eating facilities.
18. Animal hospitals or veterinary clinic.
19. Radio and television transmitting stations.
20. Pet shops.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures which
are customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including solar energy systems.
SECTION 22 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 22
AO:718
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Storage of hazardous materials, subject to locally adopted Fire
Code and State Building Code regulations.
2. Storage of liquefied petroleum gases, over 50,000, subject to
locally adopted Fire Code regulations.
3. Storage of special industrial explosive device(s) under 50 pounds,
subject to the locally adopted Fire Code and State Building Code
regulations.
4. Junkyard, auto wrecking yard or salvage yard subject to the
following conditions:
(i) Located on a tract of land at least 300 feet from a Residential
District zone.
(ii) The operation shall be conducted wholly within a
noncombustible building or within an area completely
surrounded on all sides by a solid fence or wall at least six feet
high. The fence or wall shall be of uniform height, uniform
texture and color, and shall be so maintained by the proprietor
as to insure maximum safety to the public and preserve the
general welfare of the neighborhood. The fence or wall shall be
installed in such a manner as to retain all scrap, junk, or other
material within the yard.
(iii) No junk shall be loaded, unloaded, or otherwise placed either
temporarily or permanently outside the enclosed building,
fence or wall, or within the public right-of-way.
5. Commercial recreation uses.
6. Games of chance.
7. Taverns, lounges, restaurants, package liquor stores and bait
shops.
8. Office and office buildings.
9. Vocational or training schools.
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements.
1. Front yard: None, except for along major arterial streets there shall
be a front yard of not less than 15 feet.
2. Side yard: None.
3. Rear yard: None.
SECTION 22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 22
AO:719
H. Minimum yard requirements. None.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. None.
J. Minimum floor area. None.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any building
shall be 100 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Required off-street
parking shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do not
encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. A buffer zone is required where any Light Industrial District abuts a
Residential District. Buffer zones shall be determined by the
Planning Director and shall be a maximum of 30 feet in depth from
the property line of a lot zoned Residential or from a street right-ofway
which separates the Light Industrial District from a Residential
District. The buffer zone shall be used for walls, fences, or similar
devices as required by the Planning Director.
2. In the Downtown District, designated by the Exhibit Map and the
Downtown Plan, adopted in 2014 by the Williston City Commission,
there are building materials that are inappropriate for a downtown
area and are inconsistent with the Downtown Plan. To further the
goals of the Downtown Plan, and as established by Resolution No.
16-063 property owners applying for building permits within the
downtown area must apply to the Design Review Board prior to
applying for building permits. The Design Review Board will ensure
a building's consistency with the Downtown Plan and Downtown
Design Review Guidelines. Any exterior modification in the
Downtown District is required to be presented to the Downtown
Design Review Board, regardless of whether the work requires a
building permit.
Note: See also Section 25.R. Landscaping and Section 25.S. Buffer
Yards.
O. Limited permitted use for temporary workforce housing.
1. Definitions.
a. TEMPORARY WORKFORCE HOUSING - Shall mean one or all
of the following meanings: 1) employee housing, which may or
may not be located on a principal heavy industrial parcel to be
occupied by employees of a requesting business which use is
temporary and having received approval pursuant to City of
Williston Ordinance No. 925; 2) employee housing, which
consists of one or more workforce lodging units, ordinarily
SECTION 22 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 22
AO:720
designed for human living quarters which may or may not be
real property as defined in Section 57-02-04, N.D.C.C, and this
type of employee housing has been granted by a conditional
use permit by Williams County; and/or 3) employee housing
which is not otherwise permitted without receiving a special
grant by the City of Williston through the applicable special
permitted use process or by Williams County through the
applicable conditional use permit process Zoning Ordinance.
b. LIMITED PERMITTED USE - A use of land in conformity with
the uses temporarily permitted under a zoning classification
which use is expressly subject to expire and terminate at the
end of a fixed period. The intent of a limited permitted use is to
allow a use of land for a temporary basis which is in conformity
with a zoning classification but otherwise subject to what is
known as a sunset law with such use becoming a non-permitted
use at the end of a fixed period.
2. City of Williston approved temporary workforce housing. So long as
the temporary workforce housing meets and complies with all
requirements provided in Subsections O.4, 5, 6, 7 and 10 below,
existing temporary workforce housing approved under and in
accordance with City of Williston Ordinance No. 925 whose special
permitted use permit expired on or before December 31, 2015,
shall be considered a conforming limited permitted use as follows:
1) the temporary workforce housing facility may occupy their
structures until September 1, 2016; 2) the temporary workforce
housing facility shall have until May 1, 2018 to remove their facility
to an area zoned for outdoor storage; and 3) the temporary
workforce housing facility shall have until August 1, 2018 to
undertake site reclamation.
3. Williams county approved temporary workforce housing. So long as
the temporary workforce housing meets and complies with all
requirements provided in Subsections O.4, 5, 6, 7 and 10 below,
existing temporary workforce housing approved under and in
accordance with the applicable Williams County Zoning ordinance
and Williams County's designated permit process resulting in a
valid conditional use permit being issued by Williams County with
said existing temporary workforce housing then becoming subject
to the requirements of the City of Williston Zoning Ordinance and
City of Williston Resolution 13-127 upon being annexed into the
City of Williston corporate boundary or subject to the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston shall be considered a
conforming limited permitted use as follows: 1) the temporary
workforce housing facility may occupy their structures until
September 1, 2016; 2) the temporary workforce housing facility
shall have until May 1, 2018 to remove their facility to an area
zoned for outdoor storage; and 3) the temporary workforce housing
facility shall have until August 1, 2018 to undertake site
SECTION 22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 22
AO:721
reclamation. Williams County Approved Temporary Workforce
Housing, as described herein, shall be subject to the limited
exceptions described in Subsection O.9 herein.
4. Application requirements.
a. Application fee. An application fee of $400 payable to the City
of Williston, is required for any request to become a limited
permitted use as defined herein which is located within the
corporate boundaries of the City of Williston or the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston.
b. Application form. Submit a completed form providing
information required to evaluate the request to become a
limited permitted use. This form shall be supplied by the
Williston City Planning Department.
c. Verification of settlement of outstanding fees owed to City of
Williston or Williams County. Documentation that any
outstanding bed fees owed to City of Williston, if located within
the corporate City boundaries, or Williams County, if located
within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City of Williston,
for temporary workforce housing facilities have been paid in
full to the appropriate jurisdiction. No review of the limited
permitted use application will begin if any fees are outstanding
to the City of Williston or Williams County.
d. Per bed fee. A per-bed fee of $400 for the period of January 1,
2016, to September 1, 2016 for all temporary workforce
housing facilities located in the corporate boundaries of the
City of Williston which are not taxed as real estate or motor
vehicles. A per-bed fee, as adopted by Williams County, for the
period of January 1, 2016, to September 1, 2016, for all
temporary workforce housing facilities located in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston which are not
taxed as real estate or motor vehicles. City staff may inspect
the temporary workforce housing facility to verify the number
of beds.
e. Site plan. A plan, if not already provided to the City of
Williston, of the entire site, drawn to scale, depicting and
identifying all existing structures, roadways, access from
dedicated public roadways, parking, fire hydrants, surface
drainage, connections to water and sewer/septic, propane
tanks, and other information the City may require.
f. Emergency response and security plan. A written plan, if not
already provided to the City of Williston, for fire suppression,
emergency vehicle circulation, and on-site security.
g. Facility rules and policies. A document of rules and policies, if
not already provided to the City of Williston, that all residents
SECTION 22 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 22
AO:722
of the crew camp must comply with. Emergency contact and
response information for residents to be included in this
document.
h. Verification of state health department inspection. If the
temporary workforce housing facility is served by a septic
system, an inspection of the facility by the North Dakota State
Health Department is required to verify compliance with state
health regulations prior to approving the limited temporary
use. Applicant shall submit documentation that such an
inspection has been recently completed.
i. Site restoration plan. A written plan, if not already provided to
the City of Williston, to reclaim the site, including removal of
all housing units and facilities to serve those housing units.
j. Site restoration bond. A bond to guarantee the restoration plan
for the proposed site can be completed. The bond must be
provided to the City of Williston on or before October 1, 2016,
and must be valid and remain in full force and effect until
December 31, 2018. The City will set for the amount of the
restoration bond, based on the City's review of the site plan
and site restoration plan.
5. The temporary workforce housing operator shall sign a written
agreement on or before October 1, 2016, with the City of Williston
acknowledging and accepting:
a. The applicant is not in violation of any federal, state, or local
law;
b. The occupancy for temporary workforce housing shall cease on
or before September 1, 2016;
c. The removal of the temporary workforce housing facility shall
occur on or before May 1, 2018;
d. The site reclamation of the temporary workforce housing
facility shall occur on or before August 1, 2018; and
e. The extension of the removal and reclamation of the temporary
workforce housing facility is contingent upon providing the
City of Williston proof of having a reclamation bond that is
valid and remains in full force and effect until December 31,
2018.
6. Failure to meet the requirements described in Subsection O.4
above and execute the agreement described Subsection O.5 above
prior to October 1, 2016, shall result in termination of the approval
process for the temporary workforce housing facility as provided
herein.
SECTION 22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 22
AO:723
7. Unoccupied temporary workforce housing facilities shall be stored
only in areas zoned to allow outdoor storage and must meet the
development standards of such zones for outdoor storage.
8. The provisions of Subsection O. of Sections 8, 22, and 23 of
Ordinance 613 shall become null, void, and of no force and effect on
and after August 2, 2018.
9. Exception to Subsection O.3. The following Williams County
Approved Temporary Workforce Housing, as enumerated below,
are currently located in the extra-territorial jurisdiction for the City
of Williston and have properly obtained a valid conditional use
permit from Williams County through Williams County's designated
process. Therefore, the enumerated facilities below shall not be
subject to provisions of Subsection O.3. herein, but are subject to
all other provisions of this ordinance not otherwise in conflict with
their conditional use permit. The Williams County Approved
Temporary Workforce Housing enumerated below shall be
permitted to continue the use until the applicant's conditional use
permit expires as described below. Upon expiration of the
conditional use permit use of Temporary Workforce Housing shall
become a non-permitted use.
a. Northern Improvement, located in the NE 1/4 SE 1/4 NE 1/4,
excepting the south eight feet, of Section 30, Township 155
North, Range 100 West, was granted a conditional use permit
by Williams County which expires December 16, 2018.
b. In two Deep/Bob Horab/Concrete Jungle/McCody Concrete,
located in Sublot 9 of the E 1/2 SE 1/4 of Section 19, Township
154 North, Range 101 West, was granted a conditional use
permit by Williams County which expires December 1, 2019.
10. Compliance with law. All Temporary Workforce Housing must be in
compliance with all applicable statutes of the State of North
Dakota; the ordinances, rules, and regulations of Williams County;
and the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Williston.
11. Conflict with other laws. If there is a conflict between the
regulations and standards in this ordinance with any other local,
state, or federal laws or regulations for Temporary Workforce
Housing, the more restrictive interpretation shall be followed.
EXHIBITS
Downtown Boundary Map- See following
SECTION 22 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 22
AO:724
SECTION 23. M-2: Heavy Industrial District. [Ord. No. 613, Ord.
No. 645, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 732, Ord. No. 749, Ord. No. 850,
Ord. No. 864, Ord. No. 865, Ord. No. 925, Ord. No. 945, Ord. No.
959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1026, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1050,
Ord. No. 1062, Ord. No. 1075, Ord. No. 1092]
A. Intent. This district is intended to include lands suited by topography
and other natural conditions, including the presence of natural
resources, for industrial development, including heavy manufacturing,
shipping terminals, natural resources extraction, and other processes
or operations which involve one or more of the following: large number
of workers, heavy truck traffic, significant environmental effects, or
large-volume public water or sewer service. Sewer, water, fire
protection, surface transportation (including direct access to arterial
streets or principal highways), and other essential services shall be
SECTION 22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 23
AO:725
provided either by public utilities or approved private means.
Commercial and retail uses are generally not allowed in this district.
The allowable uses in this district shall not be limited to those
enumerated as permitted uses and structures or special permitted uses;
however, all uses shall be similar in character. Also, uses similar to
those specified in the district shall not be dangerous or detrimental to
persons living or working in the vicinity, or to the public welfare, nor
shall they impair the use, enjoyment or value of any property in the
district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for Industrial
Districts shall be 20 acres. Industrial Districts of less than 20 acres are
allowed provided they abut another Industrial District and the
combined acreage of the districts is 20 acres or more. Different
Industrial Districts such as Light Industrial, Heavy Industrial, and
Industrial Park Districts may abut each other; however, the districts and
uses therein must remain separate.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following uses shall be permitted:
1. Uses permitted in M-1 Districts provided no dwelling units are
permitted except only for those employees having duties in
connection with any premises requiring them to live on said
premises, including families of such employees when with them
and workforce, temporary housing as permitted and defined in
Section 25.P.45
2. Any other use, not otherwise prohibited by law; provided, however,
that none of the following uses shall be established or
reconstructed, structurally altered, enlarged or moved unless the
Planning and Zoning Commission approves the issuance of a permit
under the same procedure as set forth for Special Permitted Uses
in Section 27:
a. Pipe yards.
b. Acid manufactures.
c. Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of paris manufacture.
d. Distillation of bones, coal, tar, petroleum, refuse, grain, or
wood.
e. Storage of special industrial explosive device(s) under 50
pounds subject to the locally adopted Fire Code and State
Building Code regulations.
f. Glue manufacture.
45.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 925 currently inapplicable based on Ord. No. 1050. See Section
8.O.
SECTION 23 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 23
AO:726
g. Dump.
h. Drilling for or removal of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbon
substance provided it meets the requirements set forth in
Section 25.M.
i. Fat rendering and fertilization manufacture.
j. Gas manufacture.
k. Smelting of tin, copper, zinc, or iron ores.
l. Petroleum or petroleum products refining.
m. Storage of hazardous materials, subject to locally adopted Fire
Code and State Building Code regulations.
n. Tannery.
o. Junk yard, auto wrecking yard or salvage yard subject to the
following conditions:
(i) Located on a tract of land at least 300 feet from a
Residential District zone.
(ii) The operation shall be conducted wholly within a
noncombustible building or within an area completely
surrounded on all sides by a solid fence or wall at least six
feet high. The fence or wall shall be of uniform height,
uniform texture and color, and shall be so maintained by
the proprietor as to insure maximum safety to the public
and preserve the general welfare of the neighborhood. The
fence or wall shall be installed in such a manner as to
retain all scrap, junk, or other material within the yard.
(iii) No junk shall be loaded, unloaded, or otherwise placed
either temporarily or permanently outside the enclosed
building, fence or wall, or within the public right-of-way.
p. Adult entertainment center.
q. Any other use which is objectionable by reason of emission of
odor, dust, smoke, gas, vibration, or noise, or which may
impose a hazard to health or property.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including solar energy systems.46
E. Special permitted uses and structures. Uses included in Section 23.C.2
come under the general guidelines of Special Permitted Uses and
Structures.
46.Editor's Note: See Section 25. N.
SECTION 23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 23
AO:727
1. Compassion center — grower.47
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.0.
G. Minimum lot requirements. None.
H. Minimum yard requirements. None.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. None.
J. Minimum floor area. None.
K. Maximum height of buildings. The maximum height of any buildings
shall be 100 feet.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. Required off-street
parking shall be provided in such a manner that vehicles do not
encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. A buffer zone is required where any Heavy Industrial District abuts
a Residential District. Buffer zones shall be determined by the
Planning Director and shall be a maximum of 50 feet in depth from
the property line of a lot zoned Residential or from a street right-ofway
which separates the Heavy Industrial District from a
Residential District. The buffer zone shall be used for landscaping,
walls, fences or similar devices as required by the Planning
Director.
Note: See also Section 25.R Landscaping and Section 25.S Buffer
Yards.
O. Limited permitted use for temporary workforce housing.
1. Definitions.
a. Temporary Workforce Housing shall mean one or all of the
following meanings: 1) employee housing, which may or may
not be located on a principal heavy industrial parcel to be
occupied by employees of a requesting business which use is
temporary and having received approval pursuant to City of
Williston Ordinance No. 925; 2) employee housing, which
consists of one or more workforce lodging units, ordinarily
designed for human living quarters which may or may not be
real property as defined in Section 57-02-04, N.D.C.C., and this
type of employee housing has been granted by a conditional
use permit by Williams County; and/or 3) employee housing
which is not otherwise permitted without receiving a special
47.Editor's Note: See Appendix A Special Permitted Uses for additional provisions and
Exception Parcels Exhibit included as attachments to this chapter.
SECTION 23 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 23
AO:728
grant by the City of Williston through the applicable special
permitted use process or by Williams County through the
applicable conditional use permit process Zoning Ordinance.
b. Limited permitted use. A use of land in conformity with the
uses temporarily permitted under a zoning classification which
use is expressly subject to expire and terminate at the end of a
fixed period. The intent of a limited permitted use is to allow a
use of land for a temporary basis which is in conformity with a
zoning classification but otherwise subject to what is known as
a sunset law with such use becoming a non-permitted use at
the end of a fixed period.
2. City of Williston approved temporary workforce housing. So long as
the temporary workforce housing meets and complies with all
requirements provided in Subsections O.4, 5, 6, 7 and 10 below,
existing temporary workforce housing approved under and in
accordance with City of Williston Ordinance No. 925 whose special
permitted use permit expired on or before December 31, 2015,
shall be considered a conforming limited permitted use as follows:
1) the temporary workforce housing facility may occupy their
structures until September 1, 2016; 2) the temporary workforce
housing facility shall have until May 1, 2018 to remove their facility
to an area zoned for outdoor storage; and 3) the temporary
workforce housing facility shall have until August 1, 2018 to
undertake site reclamation.
3. Williams County approved temporary workforce housing. So long
as the temporary workforce housing meets and complies with all
requirements provided in Subsections O.4, 5, 6, 7, and 10 below,
existing temporary workforce housing approved under and in
accordance with the applicable Williams County Zoning ordinance
and Williams County's designated permit process resulting in a
valid conditional use permit being issued by Williams County with
said existing temporary workforce housing then becoming subject
to the requirements of the City of Williston Zoning Ordinance and
City of Williston Resolution 13-127 upon being annexed into the
City of Williston corporate boundary or subject to the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston shall be considered a
conforming limited permitted use as follows: 1) the temporary
workforce housing facility may occupy their structures until
September 1, 2016; 2) the temporary workforce housing facility
shall have until May 1, 2018 to remove their facility to an area
zoned for outdoor storage; and 3) the temporary workforce housing
facility shall have until August 1, 2018 to undertake site
reclamation. Williams County Approved Temporary Workforce
Housing, as described herein, shall be subject to the limited
exceptions described in Subsection O.9 herein.
4. Application requirements.
SECTION 23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 23
AO:729
a. Application fee. An application fee of $400, payable to the City
of Williston, is required for any request to become a limited
permitted use as defined herein which is located within the
corporate boundaries of the City of Williston or the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston.
b. Application form. Submit a completed form providing
information required to evaluate the request to become a
limited permitted use. This form shall be supplied by the
Williston City Planning Department.
c. Verification of settlement of outstanding fees owed to City of
Williston or Williams County. Documentation that any
outstanding bed fees owed to City of Williston, if located within
the corporate City boundaries, or Williams County, if located
within the extra-territorial jurisdiction of the City of Williston,
for temporary workforce housing facilities have been paid in
full to the appropriate jurisdiction. No review of the limited
permitted use application will begin if any fees are outstanding
to the City of Williston or Williams County.
d. Per bed fee. A per-bed fee of $400 for the period January 1,
2016 to September 1, 2016 for all temporary workforce
housing facilities located in the corporate boundaries of the
City of Williston which are not taxed as real estate or motor
vehicles. A per-bed fee, as adopted by Williams County, for the
period of January 1, 2016, to September 1, 2016, for all
temporary workforce housing facilities located in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston which are not
taxed as real estate or motor vehicles. City staff may inspect
the temporary workforce housing facility to verify the number
of beds.
e. Site plan. A plan, if not already provided to the City of
Williston, of the entire site, drawn to scale, depicting and
identifying all existing structures, roadways, access from
dedicated public roadways, parking, fire hydrants, surface
drainage, connections to water and sewer/septic, propane
tanks, and other information the City may require.
f. Emergency response and security plan. A written plan, if not
already provided to the City of Williston, for fire suppression,
emergency vehicle circulation, and on-site security.
g. Facility rules and policies. A document of rules and policies, if
not already provided to the City of Williston, that all residents
of the crew camp must comply with. Emergency contact and
response information for residents to be included in this
document.
h. Verification of state health department inspection. If the
temporary workforce housing facility is served by a septic
SECTION 23 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 23
AO:730
system, an inspection of the facility by the North Dakota State
Health Department is required to verify compliance with the
state health regulations prior to approving the limited
temporary use. Applicant shall submit documentation that
such an inspection has been recently completed.
i. Site restoration. A written plan, if not already provided to the
City of Williston, to reclaim the site, including removal of all
housing units and facilities to serve those housing units.
j. Site restoration bond. A bond to guarantee the restoration plan
for the proposed site can be completed. The bond must be
provided to the City of Williston on or before October 1, 2016,
and must be valid and remain in full force and effect until
December 31, 2018. The City will set for the amount of the
restoration bond, based on the City's review of the site plan
and site restoration plan.
5. The temporary workforce housing operator shall sign a written
agreement on or before October 1, 2016, with the City of Williston
acknowledging and accepting:
a. The applicant is not in violation of any federal, state, or local
law;
b. The occupancy for temporary workforce housing shall cease on
or before September 1, 2016;
c. The removal of the temporary workforce housing facility shall
occur on or before May 1, 2016;
d. The site reclamation of the temporary workforce housing
facility shall occur on or before August 1, 2018; and
e. The extension of the removal and reclamation of the temporary
workforce housing facility is contingent upon providing the
City of Williston proof of having a reclamation bond that is
valid and remains in full force and effect until December 31,
2018.
6. Failure to meet the requirements described in Subsection O.4
above and execute the agreement described Subsection O.5 above
prior to October 1, 2016, shall result in termination of the approval
process for the temporary workforce housing facility as provided
herein.
7. Unoccupied temporary workforce housing facilities shall be stored
only in areas zoned to allow outdoor storage and must meet the
development standards of such zones for outdoor storage.
8. The provisions of Subsection O. of Section 8, 22, and 23 of
Ordinance 613 shall become null, void, and of no force and effect on
and after August 2, 2018
SECTION 23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 23
AO:731
SECTION 24. M-3: Industrial Park District. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No.
645, Ord. No. 662, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 749, Ord. No. 864, Ord.
No. 865, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1028, Ord. No. 1062]
9. Exception to Subsection O.3. The following Williams County
Approved Temporary Workforce Housing, as enumerated below,
are currently located in the extra-territorial jurisdiction for the City
of Williston and have properly obtained a valid conditional use
permit from Williams County through Williams County's designated
process. Therefore, the enumerated facilities below shall not be
subject to provisions of Subsection O.3 herein, but are subject to all
other provisions of this ordinance not otherwise in conflict with
their conditional use permit. The Williams County Approved
Temporary Workforce Housing enumerated below shall be
permitted to continue the use until the applicant's conditional use
permit expires as described below. Upon expiration of the
conditional use permit use of Temporary Workforce Housing shall
become a non- permitted use.
a. Northern Improvement, located in the NE 1/4 SE 1/4 NE 1/4,
excepting the south eight feet, of Section 30, Township 155
North, Range 100 West, was granted a conditional use permit
by Williams County which expires December 16, 2018.
b. In two Deep/Bob Horab/Concrete Jungle/McCody Concrete,
located in Sublot 9 of the E 1/2 SE 1/4 of Section 19, Township
154 North, Range 101 West, was granted a conditional use
permit by Williams County which expires December 1, 2019.
10. Compliance with law. All Temporary Workforce Housing must be in
compliance with all applicable statutes of the State of North
Dakota; the ordinances, rules, and regulations of Williams County;
and the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of Williston.
11. Conflict with other laws. If there is a conflict between the
regulations and standards in this ordinance with any other local,
State, or Federal laws or regulations for Temporary Workforce
Housing, the more restrictive interpretation shall be followed.
EXHIBITS
Exception Parcels is included as an attachment to this chapter.
A. Intent. This district is intended to provide opportunities for
development of large tracts of land for Light Industrial uses with special
considerations given to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics,
and compatibility with other land uses. This district is intended to
include light manufacturing, processing, storage, wholesaling, and
distribution operations, and other processes and operations which do
not generate heavy truck traffic, do not emit significant amounts of
noise, smoke, dust, or glare; and do not require large volumes of public
SECTION 23 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 24
AO:732
water and sewer. Limited commercial use is allowed in this district to
serve the uses for which the district is primarily intended. Sewer, water,
fire protection, and other essential services shall be provided either by
public utilities or approved private means.
The allowable uses in this district shall not be limited to those
enumerated as permitted uses and structures or special permitted uses;
however, all uses shall be similar in character. Also, uses similar to
those specified in the district shall not be dangerous or detrimental to
persons living or working in the vicinity, or to the public welfare, not
shall they impair the use, enjoyment or value of any property in the
district.
B. Minimum dimensional requirements. The minimum area for Industrial
Districts shall be 20 acres. Industrial Districts of less than 20 acres are
allowed provided they abut another Industrial District and the
combined acreage of the districts is 20 acres or more. Different
Industrial Districts such as Light Industrial, Heavy Industrial, and
Industrial Park Districts may abut each other; however, the districts and
uses therein must remain separate.
C. Permitted uses and structures. The following uses shall be permitted:
1. Wholesale, distributive businesses, and related storage yards.
2. Small business machine sales, tire sales, and service, repair and
service shops, auto supply stores, carpenter and cabinet shops,
household appliance repair shops.
3. Taverns, lounges, package liquor stores, and bait shops.
4. Furniture and home furnishings store, hardware stores, household
appliance stores, and interior decorating shops.
5. Plumbing shops, sheet metal shops, roofing shops, and ministorage
buildings.
6. Manufacturing or assembly plants.
7. Contractor or commercial service business, offices and associated
repair yards.
8. Warehouses, trucking, moving and storage, and freight terminals.
9. Airports, railroads, essential public utilities, and public service
installations.
10. Animal hospitals or veterinary clinics.
11. Offices and office buildings.
12. Radio or television transmitting stations, vocational or training
schools.
SECTION 24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 24
AO:733
13. Bottling plants.
14. Commercial recreation uses.
15. Parking lots.
16. Games of chance.
17. Automobile, mobile home, recreational vehicle or equipment sales.
18. Building material yard and lumberyards.
19. Dairy processing plants. No industry or other business shall be
established, maintained or operated upon this property which
constitutes an annoyance or nuisance by reason of unsightliness or
the emission of vibrations, smoke, dust, noise, glare, odor, fumes,
or offensive effluents of any kind or character whatsoever; and no
portion of said property shall be used for the manufacture, storage,
distribution, or sale of materials or products which might
depreciate the value of any adjoining property.
D. Permitted accessory uses and structures. Uses and structures that are
customarily accessory and clearly incidental to permitted uses and
structures shall be permitted, including solar energy systems."
E. Special permitted uses. The following shall be considered for special
permitted uses:
1. Governmental services, public facilities, such as schools and child
care facilities.
2. Mortuaries.
3. Grain and feed mills grain elevators.
4. Light manufacturing consisting of the processing and treatment of
goods and foodstuff, except alcohol or alcoholic beverages, fish,
meat products, vinegar and yeast.
5. Concrete mixing and concrete products manufacturing plants.
6. Gasoline or service stations, car washes, and truck stop service and
eating facilities.
7. Storage of special industrial explosive device(s) under 50 pounds,
subject to the locally adopted Fire Code and State Building Code
regulations.
F. Temporary uses. None, other than those allowed under Section 25.O.
G. Minimum lot requirements. None.
H. Minimum yard requirements.
SECTION 24 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 24
AO:734
1. Front yard: None, except for along major arterial streets there shall
be a front yard of not less than 15 feet.
2. Side yard: None.
3. Rear yard: None.
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. None.
J. Minimum floor area. None.
K. Maximum height of buildings. None, except as may be set forth by
airport zoning.
L. (Reserved)
M. Off-street parking requirements. See Section 25.H. All parking spaces
must be off-street parking and located to the rear or side of any building
or structure. Only customer parking will be allowed in the front of
buildings or structures between street right-of-ways and the building
setback line. Common or combined parking areas may be shared with
loading areas or between separate firms when it can be demonstrated
that this arrangement will be advantageous for efficient utilization of
space. All customer parking lots must be paved upon the installation of
street improvements (paving, curb and gutter) adjoining the affected
property. Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a
manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
N. Other requirements.
1. Loading. Truck loading docks shall be constructed only on the sides
or rear of any building or structure, and the traffic area around the
loading docks shall be adequately surfaced. Truck loading docks
shall be located so as to accommodate all trucks and trailers
without requiring maneuvering or protrusion into any street during
the time of loading or unloading.
2. Storage. All open storage yards shall be surfaced with gravel,
crushed rock or pavement where traffic will occur to eliminate the
carrying of mud, clay, debris, etc., onto streets. These open storage
areas will be for temporary placing of goods, equipment, supplies,
and other materials. All open storage yards shall be enclosed with a
fence at least six feet in height.
3. Fences. All fencing for screening, security, or other purposes shall
be attractive in appearance and shall be of an industrial type of
galvanized or nonferrous material. The Planning Director shall
determine the construction of any fences required in buffer zones.
No fence, masonry wall, hedge, or mass planting shall be permitted
to extend into the required front yard of any lot fronting on an FAP
or FAS road unless approved by the Planning Director.
SECTION 24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 24
AO:735
SECTION 24a. MA: Municipal Airport District. [Ord. No. 1036]
4. Buffer zone. A buffer zone is required where the Industrial Park
District abuts a Residential District. Buffer zones shall be
determined by the Planning Director and shall be a maximum of 30
feet in depth from the property line of a lot zoned Residential or
from a street right-of-way which separates the Industrial Park
District from a Residential District. The buffer zone shall be used
for landscaping, walls, fences or similar devices as required by the
Planning Director.
5. Landscaping. All unpaved land between the front of a building and
the front property line of the property upon which said building is
located shall be landscaped and grassed areas, as well as all
unused or undeveloped land, all building and structures and all
parking and other unpaved areas, shall be maintained at all times
by the property owner in a clean, presentable, and safe condition.
A. Intent. This district will only apply to City owned airport land
specifically and not adjacent private lands. Adjacent non-City owned
properties will be governed under a separate Joint Powers Agreement.
B. Municipal Airport District surfaces. The Municipal Airport District
consists of the following surfaces, which are hereby established and
defined as follows:
1. Precision instrument approach surfaces. A precision instrument
approach surface is established at each end of the instrument
runway for instrument landings and takeoff. The instrument
approach surface shall have a width of 1,000 feet at a distance of
200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter
uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a distance of 50,200 feet
beyond each end of the runway, its center line being the
continuation of the center line of the runway.
2. Non-precision instrument approach surfaces. A surface
longitudinally centered on the extended runway center line and
extending outward and upward from each end of the primary
surface. This approach surface has a width of 500 feet at a distance
of 200 feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter
uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a distance of 10,200 feet
beyond each end of the runway.
3. Primary surfaces. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway
and extending 200 feet beyond the end of each hard surface
runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the
same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway center
line. The width of the primary is 500 feet for non-precision
instrument runways having visibility minimums greater than 0.75
statute miles and 1,000 feet for precision instrument runways.
SECTION 24 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 24a
AO:736
4. Transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward
at right angles to the runway center line and the runway center line
extended at a slope of seven to one from the sides of the primary
surface and from the sides of the approach surfaces. Transitional
surfaces for those portions of the precisions approach surface
which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface,
extended a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the
edge of the approach surface and at right angles to the runway
center line.
5. Horizontal surfaces. A horizontal plan 150 feet above the
established airport elevations, the perimeter of which is
constructed by swinging arcs of specified radii from the center of
each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the
adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
6. Conical surfaces. A surface extending outward and upward from
the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
C. Height limits. Unless otherwise specifically provided in this section, no
structure or tree may be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or
maintained, in the Municipal Airport District zone to the height in
excess of the maximum height limit established for such zone. These
provisions shall not be constructed as prohibiting the growth,
construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height of up to
35 feet above the surface of the land.
1. Precision instrument approach surfaces. One foot in height for
each 50 feet in horizontal distance beginning at a point 200 feet
from and at the center line elevation of the end of the instrument
runway and extending a distance of 10,200 feet from the end of the
runway; thence one foot in height for each 40 feet in horizontal
distance to a point 50,200 feet from the end of the runway.
2. Non-precision instrument approach surfaces. One foot in height for
each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of the
primary surface of the non-precision instrument runway and
extending to a point 10,200 feet from the end of the runway.
3. Transitional surfaces. One foot in height for each seven feet in
horizontal distance beginning at the edge and normal to the
primary surface, extending to a height of 150 feet above the airport
elevation. In addition, there are established heights limits of onefoot
vertical height for each seven feet of horizontal distance
measured from the edges of all approach surfaces for the entire
length of the approach surface and extending upward and outward
to the points where they intersect the horizontal or conical
surfaces. Further, where the precision instrument approach
surface projects through and beyond the conical surface, a height
limit of one foot for each seven feet of horizontal distance shall be
SECTION 24a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 24a
AO:737
maintained beginning at the edge of the instrument approach
surface and extending a distance of 5,000 feet from the edge of the
instrument approach surface measured normal to the center line of
the runway extended.
4. Horizontal surfaces. This is determined to be 150 feet above the
airport elevation. A 10,000-foot horizontal arc swung from the
center of each end of each primary surface and connecting, the
adjacent arcs by lines tangent to these arcs make up the perimeter
of the horizontal surface.
5. Conical surfaces. One foot in height for each 20 feet of horizontal
distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface,
extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
D. Permitted uses and structures. As governed by the airport regulatory
document, "Williston Basin International Airport: Development
Standards."
E. Permits. Per the direction of the Municipal Airport Director as required
by the airport regulatory document, "Williston Basin International
Airport: Development Standards."
F. Hazard marketing and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if
such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this
section and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to
require the owner of the structure or tree in question at their own
expense, to permit the Municipal Airport of the City of Williston, North
Dakota, to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and
lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an
airport hazard.
G. Minimum lot requirements. None
H. Minimum yard requirements. As governed by the airport regulatory
document, "Williston Basin International Airport: Development
Standards."
I. Maximum lot coverage by buildings. As governed by the airport
regulatory document, "Williston Basin International Airport:
Development Standards."
J. Maximum height of buildings. As governed by the airport regulatory
document, "Williston Basin International Airport: Development
Standards."
K. Sign limitations. As governed by the airport regulatory document,
"Williston Basin International Airport: Development Standards."
L. Off-street parking requirements. As governed by the airport regulatory
document, "Williston Basin International Airport: Development
Standards."
SECTION 24a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 24a
AO:738
M. Other requirements. All development standards regarding the
Municipal Airport District are regulated by the airport regulatory
document, "Williston Basin International Airport: Development
Standards" as directed by the Municipal Airport Director.
N. Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Uses, structures and
trees must be maintained and remain in compliance with the Federal
Aviation Administration rules and regulations and the development
standards of the airport as governed by the airport regulatory
document, "Williston Basin International Airport: Development
Standards." When determined by the Airport Director that a use,
structure or tree as permitted is not in compliance with the Federal
Aviation Administration rules and regulations and the airport
regulatory document, "Williston Basin International Airport:
Development Standards" the Airport Director shall issue a notice of
correction outlining the non-compliance and required action by the
tenant. Failure to comply with a notice of correction issued by the
Airport Director shall be deemed a violation of the Ordinance No. 613,
otherwise known as the Zoning Ordinance, and subject to the penalties
therein.
O. Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance
from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship.
1. Variance. A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be
granted by the Municipal Airport Director unless and until a
written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
a. That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which
are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the
same district.
b. That literal interpretation of the provision of this ordinance
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other properties in the same district under the terms of this
ordinance.
c. That the special conditions and circumstances do not result
from the actions of the applicant.
d. That granting the variance requested will not confer on the
applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance
to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district.
2. Non-conforming use. No non-conforming use of neighboring lands,
structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or
nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other
districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
SECTION 24a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 24a
AO:739
The procedure by which a variance shall be considered is as
follows:
3. Notice of public hearing. Notice of Public Hearing shall be given by
the Municipal Airport Director. Notice of said Public Hearing shall
be published once a week for two successive weeks prior to the
time set for said hearing in the official paper of the City of Williston.
a. The Public Hearing shall be held by the Municipal Airport
Director. Any part may appear in person, or by agent, or by
attorney.
b. The Airport Director shall make written findings that the
requirements of have been met by the applicant for a variance.
c. The Airport Director shall further make a written finding that
the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of
the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance
that will make possible the reasonable use of the land,
building, or structure.
d. Upon receipt of the written findings of the Municipal Airport
Director, or in the event of the failure of the Municipal Airport
Director to so report within 90 days after receipt of the written
application for the variance, the Board of City Commissioners
shall hold a hearing to decide the variance. Any party may
appear at the hearing in person, by agent, or by attorney. If the
decision of the Board of City Commissioners should differ from
the findings of the Municipal Airport Director, the Board shall
prepare a written report stating the findings on which their
decision was made.
4. The Board of City Commissioners. The Board of City
Commissioners may, so long as such action is in conformity with the
terms of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed
from, and may make such order, requirements, decision, or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the
powers of the Municipal Airport Director from whom the appeal is
taken. The Board of City Commissioners shall serve as the Board of
Adjustments, unless the Board of City Commissioners otherwise
creates a Board of Adjustments.
P. Appeals to the Board of City Commissioners.
1. Appeals to the Board of City Commissioners concerning
interpretation or administration of this ordinance may be taken by
any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the governing
body of the City affected by any decision of the Municipal Airport
Director. Written findings on the appeal shall be forwarded to the
Board of City Commissioners within a reasonable time, not to
exceed 30 days after the receipt of the appeal. The Municipal
SECTION 24a WILLISTON CODE SECTION 24a
AO:740
SECTION 25. Supplementary district regulation. [Ord. No. 613,
Ord. No. 639, Ord. No. 645, Ord. No. 650, Ord. No. 657, Ord. No.
662, Ord. No. 672, Ord. No. 690, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 729, Ord.
No. 731, Ord. No. 789, Ord. No. 808, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No. 864,
Ord. No. 867, Ord. No. 889, Ord. No. 912, Ord. No. 925, Ord. No.
936, Ord. No. 958, Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 960, Ord. No. 962, Ord.
No. 963, Ord. No. 965, Ord. No. 981, Ord. No. 982, Ord. No. 993,
Ord. No. 998, Ord. No. 999, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1009, Ord. No.
1028, Ord. No. 1031, Ord. No. 1032, Ord. No. 1033, Ord. No. 1048,
Ord. No. 1058, Ord. No. 1061, Ord. No. 1062, Ord. No. 1065, Ord.
Airport Director shall forthwith transmit to the Board of City
Commissioners any and all other papers constituting the record
upon which the appealed action was taken. The Board of City
Commissioners shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
appeals, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the
parties in interest and decide the same in reasonable time. At the
hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney.
2. Legal interest. Any person or persons, or any board, taxpayer,
department, board or bureau of the City who has a legal interest
which is immediately, directly and adversely affected by any
decision of the Board of City Commissioners may seek review by
the court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the
laws of the State of North Dakota and particularly by Chapter
40-47, North Dakota Century Code.
3. Filing an appeal. An appeal must be filed with the City Auditor
within 15 days of the date the order or decision being appealed is
served upon an aggrieved party. If no service is made, the
aggrieved party shall have 30 days from the date such order or
decision is signed to file a written notice of appeal. The Auditor
shall deliver the appeal notice to the Board of City Commissioners
and the Municipal Airport Director.
4. Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall describe the order being
appealed; the basis of such appeal; the name, address and
telephone number of the appealing party; and the right or interest
which has been adversely affected.
Q. Administration and enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Municipal
Airport Director to administer and enforce the Municipal Airport
District regulations of this section, "The Williston Basin International
Airport: Development Standards," and any applicable regulations
promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration. Applications for
permits and variances shall be made to the Municipal Airport Director
in a form established by the City Airport. Applications shall be promptly
considered and granted or denied. The Municipal Airport District
regulations of this section may be subject to the regulations
promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration.
SECTION 24a ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25
AO:741
No. 1073, Ord. No. 1084, Ord. No. 1089, Ord. No. 1090, Ord. No.
1092, Ord. No. 1094]
SECTION 25.A. Fences, hedges, and visibility at the intersection of
streets.
SECTION 25.B. Accessory buildings.
No accessory buildings shall be erected in any required front yard.
Accessory buildings may be built in a required rear yard, but such accessory
buildings shall not occupy more than 30% of a required rear yard and
shall not be nearer than three feet to any side or rear lot line, except
when a garage is entered from any alley at right angles, it shall not be
nearer than 25 feet to the rear lot line. No accessory building, other than
a residential garage with regard to the principal building, shall be erected
closer than six feet to any other building. A residential garage located
closer than six feet to the principal building shall be regarded as a part
of the principal building for the purposes of determining side and rear
yards (Figures 3-6 show examples of setbacks for attached and detached
residential garages). No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot
until the construction of the main building has been actually commenced,
and no accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by
domestic servants employed entirely on the premises.
1. In Residential Districts no fence shall be more than seven feet in height
in any rear or side yard or four feet in height in any front yard; provided
further that on a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or
allowed to grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision within
the sight triangle zone, which is defined as a height of between 2.5 feet
and 10 feet above the established curb grades of the intersections
streets within the triangle formed by the curb lines of the intersection
streets and the line joining points a distance of 25 feet on each curb line
from their point of intersection (Figure 1).
2. In Commercial and Industrial Districts, no fence shall be more than
nine feet in height in any yard.
1. No accessory buildings shall be erected in any required front yard.
2. No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until the
construction of the main building has been actually commenced, and no
accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes other than by
domestic employees employed entirely on the premises.
3. Structures within slab on grade foundations are limited to 10'-0" side
walls and 16'-0" in "height," i.e. at mid span between eave and peak for
gable roofs.
4. Overhead doors facing alleys must be set back 20'-0" from the alley lot.
5. Walls must be at least 3'-0" from the side and rear property lines and
must comply with setback requirements on corner lots.
SECTION 25 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.B
AO:742
SECTION 25.C. Erection of more than one principal structure on a
lot.
In any district, no more than one structure housing a permitted or
permissible use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other
requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each structure as though it
were on an individual lot.
SECTION 25.D. Exceptions of height regulations.
The height limitations contained in the Schedule of District Regulations
do not apply to spires, grain elevators, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water
tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other appurtenances usually required to be
placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. Although
exempted from structural height limitations, these structures should not
6. Walls must be at least 6'-0" from walls of other structures.
7. Eaves must be at least 2'-0" from side and rear property lines.
8. Eaves must be at least 2'-6" from any part of another structure.
9. On lots of less than 24,000 square feet, a maximum of two accessory
buildings totaling 1,200 square feet is allowed per residence. On lots
over 24,000 square feet, 5% of the lot is allowed for accessory buildings
with a maximum of three accessory buildings. Each accessory
building's square footage shall not exceed that of the primary structure.
10. Square feet of attached, or if no attached garage, then primary garages
in excess of 720 square feet must be deducted from allowable square
feet for detached accessory buildings unless allowed by the Building
Official.
11. Square feet of existing accessory buildings must be deducted from
allowable accessory building square feet.
12. In addition to the maximum allowed accessory building per residence, a
residence may also have one storage shed that is 120 square feet or less
in size. The property owner may substitute one accessory building for
an additional storage shed that is 120 square feet or less in size.
13. All accessory buildings shall conform to the style or decor of the
principal building unless plans for upgrading the principal structure
will also occur. No corrugated or sheet metal shall be used for siding
the dwelling or the accessory building. No galvalume color shall be
used.
14. Figures 3 through 6 of this Section show examples of set backs for
attached and detached residential garages.
15. The guideline requirements of this Section do not apply to areas zoned
as: A, R- 1E, R-1A, C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, or M-3, unless specifically
outlined in individual sections.
SECTION 25.B ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.D
AO:743
significantly impair solar access of buildings or solar collector locations.
Not an exception to height regulations are dishes for receiving of
telecommunications. When placed on buildings, telecommunications dishes
shall be limited to the height restrictions as placed on buildings in the
district.
SECTION 25.E. Access to structures.
Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to
a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all
structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient
access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking.
SECTION 25.F. Additional yard regulations.
1. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed by
any structure, except for the projection of sills, belt course, cornices
and ornamental features which are not to exceed two feet.
2. Planters not more than three feet in height may extend not more than
three feet into any required yard.
3. Open-lattice enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways,
balconies opening upon fire towers and the ordinary projections of
chimneys and flues may be permitted by the Building Official for a
distance of not more than 3.5 feet into any side or rear yard and where
the same are so placed as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
Any uncovered, open deck shall have the same rear setback
requirements as provided for accessory buildings under Section 25.B
of this ordinance whether or not such deck is attached to the main
building; all other setbacks shall be as follows:
Open decks may only project up to four feet into any required side
or rear yard (setback), however, must not be closer than four feet
to the lot line and up to six feet into a required front yard. Front
yard decks shall not be higher than the first floor entrance to the
building. Enclosed decks are considered part of the principal structure
for determining setback requirements, including setbacks required for
accessory buildings.
An apparatus needed for the operation of active and passive solar
energy systems may also project into required yards, including but not
limited to, overhangs, movable insulating walls and roof, detached solar
collectors, reflectors, and piping.
4. Telecommunication dishes, when not placed on top of a building, shall
be considered as an accessory building; and therefore, must meet
setbacks required thereof.
5. A covered or uncovered porch which is placed in front of the main
entrance of the principal building and which is not more than four feet
SECTION 25.D WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.F
AO:744
Editor's Note: Exhibits (Figures 2 through 7 and Exhibit A Downtown
Boundary Map) are included as attachments to this chapter.
SECTION 25.G. General sign regulations.
wider than the entrance, may project into a required front yard for a
distance of not more than six feet.
6. Where lots have double frontage, the required front yards shall be
provided on both streets except in the M-3: Industrial Park District
where minimum rear yard setback for double frontage lots shall be 12
feet from the property line.
7. The front yards heretofore established shall be adjusted in the following
cases:
a. Where 40% or more of the frontage on the same side of a street
between two intersecting streets is developed with two or more
buildings that have (with a variation of five feet or less) a front yard
greater in depth than herein required, new buildings shall not be
erected closer to the street than the front yard so established by
the existing building nearest the street line.
b. Where 40% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between
two intersecting streets is developed with two or more buildings
that have a front yard of less depth than herein required then:
Where a building is to be erected on a parcel of land that is within
100 feet of existing buildings on both sides, the minimum front yard
shall be a line drawn between the two closest front corners of the
adjacent buildings on each side; or, where a building is to be
erected on a parcel of land that is within 100 feet of an existing
building on one side only, such building may be erected as close to
the street as the existing adjacent building.
8. Front, side, and rear yards on interior, corner, reversed frontage, and
through lots of nonrectangular shape shall be identified and measured
in accordance of Figure 7 included as an attachment to this chapter.
9. Required setbacks for additions to existing principal structures shall be
in accordance with established setback lines; however, a minimum of
three feet must be maintained.
10. Parking and construction for townhouses and condominiums shall be in
accordance to the development proposal as submitted to and approved
by the City and shall meet covenants which are on the property. Parking
and driveways shall not be located in required front yards except where
garages have been provided for in the development proposal.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this Section 25.G is to permit such signs that
will not, by their reason, size, location, construction, or manner of
display, endanger the public safety of individuals, confuse, mislead, or
obstruct the vision necessary for traffic safety, or otherwise endanger
public health, safety, and general welfare; and to permit and regulate
SECTION 25.F ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:745
signs in such a way as to support and complement land use objectives
set forth in this ordinance.
2. Definition of terms. The following definitions shall be used for terms
contained in this Subsection that are not otherwise defined in the
Williston Municipal Code or in this zoning ordinance.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which refers to a discontinued business,
profession, commodity, service, or other activity or use formerly
occupying the site; or which contains no sign copy on all sign faces for
a continuous period of six months.
BUILDING OR STORE FRONTAGE — The length of any side of a
building or store which fronts upon a public street. If an independent
occupant in a building does not face a street but, rather, only fronts
upon a customer parking lot, then that frontage on the parking lot can
be considered towards calculating total building frontage.
BUSINESS CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign that identifies
a building or group of commercial buildings, with three or more
businesses with shared parking and/or access.
CAMPUS — A cohesive area on which are institutional primary uses
with secondary accessory uses that are not intended to attract offcampus
clientele.
FIXED YARD SIGN — A fixed sign or advertising display made with
stained or painted wood or other finished rigid light materials, with no
changeable copy, designed to convey information visually, which is fixed
into the ground to direct attention to the lot on which it stands. These
signs are regulated in Section 25.G.6.k.
MURAL — A graphic displayed on the exterior of a building, generally
for the purposes of decoration or artistic expression, including but
not limited to painting, fresco, or mosaic. These are not regulated as
signage, as they are considered artwork. Murals must be determined by
the Planning Director to contain no commercial content and therefore
are excluded from the definition of signs.
NON WORDED ADVERTISEMENT — Balloons, blades, flags or
pennants without wording, which are used to draw attention to a
temporary special on the property on which they are located. This is
intended for short term use; properties should not be ringed in nonworded
blade signs or covered by pennants. These may be no larger
than 32 square feet. These signs are regulated in Sections 25.G.12.d
and 25.G.2.t.
OBSCENE OR INDECENT SIGN — A sign that, in whole or in part, show
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — A portable advertising or business ground
sign typically constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or tentlike
shape, or a "T" sign which is perpendicular to the ground with a
single base, with each sign face typically used for advertising.
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:746
SIGN — Any surface, fabric, device, or display which bears lettered,
pictorial, or sculptured matter, including forms shaped to resemble any
human, animal, or product, designed to convey information visually
and which is exposed to public view. For purposes of this ordinance,
the term "sign" shall include all structural members. A sign shall be
construed to be a display surface or device containing organized and
related elements composed to form a single unit. In cases where matter
is displayed in a random or unconnected manner without organized
relationship of the components, each such component shall be
considered to be a single sign.
SIGN ANIMATION — For dynamic messaging signs, any depictions of
people, animals, or objects in motion.
SIGN FACE — That area or display surface of a sign used to convey
the message. Rules for computation of sign area are included in Section
25.G.7.a, Computations, below.
SIGN MESSAGING — Any information displayed on the sign face. Types
of sign messaging are:
SIGN, EMERGENCY LOCATOR — A sign installed near the address
entry of any multi-building development in which the individual
buildings do not front on public streets that indicates the address, unit
number, or other location of the buildings and the access route to those
buildings from the address entrance.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING — Any sign which does not conform to the
regulations of the ordinance.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE ADVERTISING — A sign which identifies or
directs attention to:
SIGN, PERMANENT — A sign that is attached to a building, installed
on a lot, or authorized to be placed on the public right-of-way by the
CHANGEABLE COPY — Any sign's display that has the ability to
have its message readily changed by physical interaction.
(i)
DYNAMIC MESSAGING — Any sign's display that has the ability
to change its message independent from physical interaction and/
or exposes to public view any message via an electronic medium
and not simply by illumination. This shall include but is not limited
to all electronic scrolling, electronic off-premise signs, digital offpremise
sign, animated sign, or rotating message signs.
(ii)
STATIC MESSAGING — Any sign's display that is not able to be
readily changed by any means.
(iii)
A business, commodity, service, campaign, or attraction conducted,
sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the
sign is located, and/or
(i)
The ideological or non-commercial views of a party who is not an
occupant of the premises.
(ii)
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:747
political subdivision, that directs attention to the following, including
but not limited to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment
conducted, sold, or offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
Within the meaning of this ordinance, this shall not include off premise
advertising signs. Types of permanent signs are:
AWNING — A sign on which the sign face is displayed on a usually
fabric or hard-surfaced window covering that projects from the
wall of a structure.
(i)
BUSINESS CENTER IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign that
identifies a building or group of commercial buildings with three or
more businesses, with shared parking and/or access.
(ii)
CANOPY — A roof-like cover, including an awning, that projects
from the wall of a building over a door, window, or entrance; or
a freestanding or projecting cover above an outdoor service area,
such as at a gasoline service station.
(iii)
FREESTANDING — A self-supporting sign resting on or supported
by means of poles, standards, or any other type of base on the
ground. These include monument, monopole, and business center
identification signs.
(iv)
MARQUEE — Any sign attached to and made part of a marquee.
A marquee is defined as a permanent roof-like structure projecting
beyond a building wall at an entrance to a building or extending
along and projecting beyond the building's wall and generally
designed and constructed to provide protection against the
weather.
(v)
MONOPOLE — A freestanding sign supported by a single pole or
other vertical structure, with the sign face located more than four
feet from the ground.
(vi)
MONUMENT — A type of freestanding sign supported by a base
of at least 75% of the sign width, with the sign face located within
four feet from the ground, and is independent from any building.
(vii)
PROJECTING — A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a
building for support and which projects more than 12 inches from
such building.
(viii)
ROOF — A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which
is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects
above the parapet of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of
a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof or the deck line of a
building with a mansard roof. New roof signs are not permitted.
Existing signs are considered to be non-conforming. Such signs
may be replaced and the logo changed, as long as the new sign
maintains the size, style, materials and historical integrity of the
sign.
(ix)
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:748
SIGN, SUBDIVISION — A permanent sign designating a common
grouping of homes or apartment buildings on no less than two acres
which share a common name or brand. These can be located on one lot
or on multiple lots.
SIGN, TEMPORARY, COMMERCIAL — Any sign, blade, banner,
pennant, flag, finished (stained or painted) wood or advertising display
with lettering, pictorial or sculptured matter, designed to convey
information visually and which is exposed to public view, constructed
of cloth, canvas, light fabric, wallboard or other light materials, with or
without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited period of time
only, and located only in P, C-1, C-2, C-3, HCC, M-1, M-2, A. These signs
are regulated in Section 25.G.12. Types of temporary commercial signs
are:
WALL — A sign fastened to the wall of a building or structure in
such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for,
or forms the background surface of the sign and which does not
project more than 12 inches from such building or structure.
Image 25.1. Types of Signs
(x)
BALLOON — A sign that is inflated with a lighter-than-air gas and
is tethered to the ground, building, another sign, or vehicle. Any
signs attached to the tether are csidered - part of the balloon sign.
(i)
BANNER — A sign displayed on flexible material, such as fabric or
plastic, that is not permanently affixed to a structure for display.
(ii)
BLADE — A sign generally formed from a loop of solid material,
which serves as a signpost, and which encloses an area of flexible
material bearing the message. Blades without words on them are
considered non-worded and fall under "Non-Worded
Advertisement," Section 25.G.12.d and 25.G.2.t.
(iii)
FLAG — Any sign printed or painted on cloth, plastic, canvas, or
other like material with distinctive colors, patterns or symbolic
devices attached to a pole or staff. Flags without words on them,
which are not covered under Section 25.G.6.b are considered nonworded
and fall under "Non-Worded Advertisement," Section
25.G.12.d and 25.G.2.t.
(iv)
INFLATABLE — A sign that depends for its structure on being
inflated by air, with or without wording or graphics. Inflatable signs
which wave rapidly and erratically are prohibited in Williston.
(v)
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:749
SIGN, TEMPORARY, RESIDENTIAL — Any sign, blade, banner, pennant,
flag, sandwich sign, finished (Stained or painted) wood or advertising
display with lettering, pictorial or sculptured matter, designed to
convey information visually and which is exposed to public view,
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, wallboard, or other light
materials, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a limited
period only, to direct attention to an activity being temporarily
undertaken on the premises on which the sign is located, located only
in R-1A, R-1E, R1, R-2, R-2A, R-6, and R-7 zones, or in A, R-3, R-4,
and R-5 Zones. These signs are regulated in Section 25.G.6 and Section
25.G.12.c. Types of temporary residential signs are broken into two
categories:
PENNANT — A small flag peculiar in shape, color, or design flown
during any function. Pennants without words on them are
considered non-worded and fall under "Non-Worded
Advertisement," Section 25.G.12.d and 25.G.2.t.
(vi)
PORTABLE — Any sign which is constructed so as to be movable,
either by skids, wheels, truck or other conveyance; any sign which
does not have a permanent foundation or is not otherwise
permanently fastened to the ground and/or which is not wired for
electricity in accordance with the sign code. When on a trailer, the
removal of the wheels or undercarriage does not place the sign in
another category, neither does the anchoring of the sign by means
of concrete blocks, sandbags, or other types of temporary anchors.
(vii)
VEHICLE — A sign attached to or painted on a motor vehicle or
trailer that is parked on or adjacent to property for more than 24
consecutive hours, the principal purpose of which is to serve as a
stationary advertising device and to attract attention to a product
sold or to a business, not including vehicle sales authorized by the
City. A logo or business name on a motor vehicle or on equipment
shall not be prohibited unless the motor vehicle or equipment is
used as a stationary advertising device.
(viii)
Signs in R-1E, R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-6 and R-7 Zones, regulated
in Sections 25.G.6.I and 25.G.12.c.
(i)
Signs in A, R-3, R-4, R-5 Zones, regulated in Sections 25.G.6.j and
25.G.12.c.
(ii)
3. Resolution of conflicting regulations. This Section 25.G is not meant to
repeal or interfere with enforcement of other sections of the City of
Williston's Municipal Code. In cases of conflicts between Code sections,
State or Federal Regulations, the more restrictive regulations shall
apply.
4. Permits required.
a. Unless specified herein, no person shall erect, alter, reconstruct, or
relocate any permanent sign without first obtaining a sign permit
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:750
for such work from the Building Official. No permit shall be issued
until the Building Official determines that such work is in
accordance with the requirements contained in this ordinance and
the current version of the Uniform Sign Code adopted by the City,
except where amended by this ordinance. When a sign permit has
been issued by the Building Official, it shall be unlawful to change,
modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms or conditions
of said permit without prior approval of the Building Official. A
written record of such approval shall be entered upon the original
permit application and maintained in the files of the Building
Official.
b. Unless specified herein, no person shall erect, alter, reconstruct, or
relocate any temporary sign without first obtaining a sign permit
for such work from the Planning Director. No permit shall be issued
until the Planning Director determines that such work is in
accordance with the requirements contained in this ordinance and
the current version of the Uniform Sign Code adopted by the City,
except where amended by this ordinance. When a temporary sign
permit has been issued by the Planning Director, it shall be
unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the
terms or conditions of said permit without prior approval of the
Planning Director. A written record of such approval shall be
entered upon the original permit application and maintained in the
files of the Planning Director.
Image 25.2. Sample Sign Site Plan
c. Upon application for a sign permit, a dimensioned site plan must be
submitted showing the location of the lot lines, structures
(including accessory structures), above-ground and under-ground
utilities, easements, the location of the proposed sign, and details
showing sign area dimensions. This site plan shall be at a legible
scale and such scale shall be listed on the site plan. If the proposed
sign(s) is to be located on the building facade, dimensioned
elevations with building height and width must be submitted. In
addition, an engineer's construction specifications for the sign
including structural loading data must be submitted.
d. Businesses that sell or rent signs may display the signs to be sold or
rented without applying for a sign permit. Signs displayed must
clearly indicate they are being used as displays or examples and
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:751
may not replicate, or substantially replicate, the messaging on the
approved permanent sign for that business.
e. Any owner of portable signs renting such portable signs on a
regular basis may permit their signs for use at various business
establishments, provided all other regulations laid out in this
ordinance are followed. The application for the permit shall be
made to the Planning Director, and the permit fee, as established
by Resolution by the Board of City Commissioners and shall be paid
prior to the issuance of the permit and at each yearly renewal
period. A monthly report prior to the time of sign placement shall
be provided to the Planning Director for each sign owner licensed
in this manner, or, a sign owner may submit individual placement
requests prior to placing the sign. The reports shall include the
following:
(i) Name and address of owner of sign.
(ii) Owner approval to place sign on location for dates shown.
(iii) Dates of placement of each sign on property.
(iv) Number of signs to be placed on each property.
(v) Placement location of each sign.
(vi) Site plan of location of each sign.
5. Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited in all zoning
districts.
a. Obscene or indecent signs.
b. Abandoned signs.
c. Painted wall signs that do not meet the regulations applied to a
mural sign, Section 25.G.14.
d. Revolving signs.
e. Signs installed or displayed in any public right-of-way, pursuant to
Section 25.G.5.r and excluding sandwich board signs in the
Downtown Area, as defined by Exhibit A, or in other areas where
private property on which to display such signs is limited and
where the storefront abuts the right-of-way. Such signs must be
permitted.
f. Signs that obstruct the view of street or railroad crossings.
g. Signs that unreasonably obstruct from view any other sign or use
currently in existence.
h. Signs that reduce any required parking for any use on the lot upon
which the sign is placed.
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:752
i. Signs that obstruct any access to any habitable structure.
j. Signs that obstruct or overhang any driveway required for fire
department access.
k. Signs unable meet the structural loading requirements as
established in the currently adopted version of the North Dakota
State Building Code or otherwise be structurally sound.
l. Signs that overhang or project into any public right-of-way, except
as specifically noted in this ordinance.
m. Any sign that projects into or is placed within the site triangle zone,
which is defined as a height of between 2.5 feet and 10 feet above
the established curb grades of the intersecting streets within the
triangle formed by the curb lines of the intersecting streets and the
line joining points a distance of 25 feet on each curb line from their
point of intersection.
Image 25.3. Vision Clearance Zone
n. Signs that protrude above the point of a building with a flat roof,
the eave line of a gambrel, gable, or the hip roof of the deck line of
a mansard roof, except for roof signs as defined by Section
25.G.2.o.(ix).
o. Any sign which is not included under the types of signs permitted in
district regulations or in this Subsection G.
p. Any sign, outdoor commercial advertising or lighting device that
has not received a permit. Such devices constituting a nuisance
because of lighting glare, focus, animation, or flashing are
prohibited in any district.
q. Any sign which conflicts in any manner with the clear and obvious
appearance of public signs and traffic control devices.
r. Any notice, political poster or handbill, advertisement or any other
sign upon any power or telephone pole, bridge, fire hydrant, official
public sign, street light pole, or in any portion of a public right-ofway.
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:753
s. Any freestanding sign on public property, except by approval of the
City Commission.
t. Inflatable signs, which wave rapidly and erratically, with or without
wording, which are intended to draw business or attention to a
business and which do not meet the allowances below.
6. Signs Allowed on private property without sign permits. The following
shall be exempt from the application of these Section 25.G sign
regulations:
a. Signs not exceeding four square feet in area and bearing only post
box numbers, names of occupants of premises, address, or name of
home occupation.
b. Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed in
connection with commercial promotion.
c. Signs from government agencies directing and guiding traffic, and
parking on public or private property, but bearing no advertising
matter.
d. Street banners. Signs advertising a public event, providing that
specific sign approval is granted under regulations established by
the City.
e. Seasonal holiday decorations. Signs pertaining to national holidays
and national observances.
f. Public signs. Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by or upon the order of a public officer in the
performance of his public duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
trespassing signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of
historical interest and other similar signs, including signs
designating hospitals, libraries, schools and other institutions or
places of public interest or concern, with no advertising.
g. Integral signs. Signs for churches or temples, or names of
buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations, commemorative
tablets and other similar signs when carved into stone, concrete or
other building material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other
permanent type of construction and made an integral part of the
structure to which they are attached.
h. Window signs. Such signs that are displayed inside of or on a
window or within a building.
i. Temporary signs on A, R-3, R-4 and R-5 properties no more than 32
square feet and no more than six feet tall. However, no more than
one temporary sign is allowed per street frontage. If a property has
more than 200 feet of frontage, an additional temporary sign may
be allowed every 200 feet, but may not be allowed within 200 feet
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:754
of another temporary commercial sign. Additional Regulations can
be found in Section 25.G.12.c(iv)(b)(2).
j. Temporary signs on R-1E, R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-6 and R-7
properties that are no more than six square feet. However, no more
than one temporary sign is allowed per street frontage. If a
property has more than 200 feet of frontage, an additional
temporary sign may be allowed every 200 feet, but may not be
allowed within 200 feet of another temporary commercial sign.
Additional Regulations can be found in Section 25.G.12.c(iv)(b)(1).
k. Fixed Yard Signs on P, C-1, C-2, C-3, HCC, M-1, M-2, and M-3 lots
which are no more than 32 square feet and no more than six feet
tall. However, no more than one fixed yard sign is allowed per
street frontage. If a property has more than 200 feet of frontage, an
additional temporary commercial sign may be allowed every 200
feet, but may not be allowed within 200 feet of another temporary
commercial sign.
l. Drive-through menu signs, provided the message on such signs
includes only menu information and does not advertise the
business.
m. Signs that are not visible from a public right-of-way, private way, or
court or from a property other than that on which the sign is
installed.
n. Directional signs provided that such signs:
(i) Do not exceed four square feet in maximum size or four feet in
maximum height, except in cases of medical, college, or other
campus, which require a sign master plan, a sign permit, and a
building permit.
(ii) Are limited to one sign at each driveway or access point with a
public street; and one sign at any critical decision point
internal to a development, including at or above building
entrances.
7. Computations. The following rules shall control the computation of sign
area and sign height.
a. Sign area:
1. Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face
shall be calculated by means of the smallest rectangle that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation,
emblem, or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background of the display or
used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure
against which it is placed. The supporting structure or bracing
of a sign shall not be counted as a part of sign face area unless
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:755
such structure or bracing is made a part of the sign's message.
The supporting structure must be proportional to the sign face.
2. Computation of area of multifaced signs. Where a sign has two
display faces back to back, the area of only one face shall be
considered the sign face area. Where a sign has more than one
display face, all areas which can be viewed simultaneously
shall be considered the sign face area.
b. Sign height. The height of a sign is measured from the average
grade level below the sign to the topmost point of the sign or sign
structure.
Image 25.4. Sign Area Calculations
8. Messaging. Types of messaging are defined in Section 25.G.2.I.
a. Static messaging:
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:756
(i) All permanent signs may have static messaging.
(ii) All temporary signs may have static messaging.
b. Changeable copy:
(i) All permanent signs may have changeable copy.
(ii) Commercial temporary portable signs may have changeable
copy; the message on the sign may change during the event,
but the structure of the sign shall be regulated by the
permitting process laid out in Section 25.G.4.
c. Dynamic messaging:
(i) Only permanent signs may have dynamic messaging.
(ii) Individual messages shall be displayed in no more than three
screens over a period of no longer than nine screens shall take
no longer than one second to change. Messages displaying
time and/or temperature shall be displayed no longer than
three seconds.
(iii) Prohibited display elements:
(a) Animation not related to the message displayed.
(b) Any flashing of all or any part of the screen.
(c) Any spinning or similar motion of all or any part of the
display.
(iv) The message shall not contain materials that may be confused
as a traffic control device, simulate automobiles either
outgoing or oncoming, or direct the driver to make any abrupt
turning movements. Light emitted shall not obscure any traffic
control device.
(v) The brightness of the illumination shall be approximately
adjusted as ambient light decreases by utilizing an ambient
light sensor for automatic dimming.
(vi) Light emitted shall be a maximum of 0.3 foot-candle above
ambient light levels measured per industry standard
procedure.
(vii) All regulations for dynamic messaging signs shall be applicable
to all signs that fit the definition regardless of size,
construction, or mounting.
(viii) Dynamic messaging signs within 150 feet of a residential zone
that face the residential zone shall display a static message
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:757
(ix) No dynamic messaging signs shall be mounted perpendicular
to the surface to which they are attached. These signs must be
attached to a marquee sign or freestanding sign, or must be a
wall sign.
(x) The area of the sign face of the dynamic messaging portion of
any sign shall be counted towards the maximum allowable sign
face square footage allowed under this Subsection G.
(xi) Dynamic messaging signs are not permitted in the Center
Downtown Area, as defined by Exhibit A. Existing dynamic
messaging signs in the Center Downtown Area will be
considered non-confirming signs.
(xii) Dynamic messaging signs may be used for non-residential uses
that do not include home occupations inside a residential
district, but may be no more than 45 square feet, only 25 of
which may be utilized for a dynamic messaging screen. These
must be monument style, and may be more than six feet tall on
any local or collector street, and no more than eight feet tall on
any arterial street. One such sign may be allowed per street
frontage. These must follow all regulations laid out in Sections
25.G.9, 25.G.11 and 25.G.19. Dynamic messaging signs not
associated with such non-residential uses are not permitted in
a residential zone.
9. General sign regulations.
a. Design, construction, and maintenance. All signs shall be designed,
constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following
standards:
(i) All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the City of
Williston's building and electrical codes at all times.
(ii) Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs
conforming in all respects with the requirements of this
ordinance, all signs shall be constructed of permanent finished
materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a
building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid
wall, frame, or structure.
(iii) All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition at all
times.
(iv) When any sign becomes unsafe or is unlawfully installed or
maintained in violation of this ordinance, the owner shall be
notified to bring the sign into compliance within 72 hours. If
the owner can demonstrate that parts have been ordered and,
through no fault of the owner, are not immediately available, or
repair of the sign has been scheduled with a service technician,
the Building Official can extend the time.
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:758
(v) Abandoned signs shall be removed by the property owner
within 30 days of the discontinuance, after which the Planning
Director will have the right to levy a penalty for each day the
signage is not brought into compliance.
b. All signs which were lawful on the date of adoption of this
ordinance but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted
under the terms of this ordinance shall be treated pursuant to
Section 6, Nonconformities, of this zoning ordinance.
c. All signs must bear a sticker, plate, or other permanent marking of
at least six square inches in area indicating the owner or installer
of the sign, a current mailing address, and a current contact phone
number. The sticker, plate, or other permanent marking must
appear on the lower part of each sigh face. Signs not displaying
such a sticker, plate, or other permanent marking will be
considered to be the responsibility of the owner of the property on
which the sign is installed or displayed.
d. Illumination on all signs shall be designed to minimize glare, light
trespass, and excessive amounts of misdirected light. All lighted
signs, including interior-lit cabinets, shall be designed by a
qualified professional. The use of minimum lumens or foot-candles
required to adequately illuminate the sign is required.
10. Emergency locator signs. "Emergency Locator Sign" is defined in
Section 25.G.2.j.
a. Emergency locator signs:
(i) Will not be counted in the total signage for the location for
which they are required.
(ii) Require a sign permit.
(iii) May be illuminated.
(iv) Must be static messaging.
(v) Shall be of sufficient size to be clearly visible from the address
entrance driveway.
(vi) Must be displayed in a manner that is clearly visible from the
address entrance driveway into the property.
(vii) Must be installed prior to certificate of occupancy for the first
building in the multi-building development.
(viii) Must be of sturdy, weatherproof construction.
(ix) Shall be in a format approved by the Williston Fire Chief.
(x) Shall contain no advertising.
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:759
(xi) Shall not be used a "for rent" or "vacancy" sign.
11. Permanent signs. "Permanent Sign" is defined in Section 25.G.2.o.
a. Permanent signs may:
(i) Have static messaging, changeable copy, or dynamic
messaging.
(ii) Have direct or indirect illumination.
b. Awning and canopy signs. Awning and canopy signs, where
permitted, are subject to the following regulations:
Image 25.5. Projecting, Canopy, and Awning Signs
(i) The sign area of an awning sign shall not exceed 25% of the
total face area of the awning. The combined area of all frontfacing
awning panels shall not exceed 35% of the total wall
area.
(ii) The sign area of a canopy sign shall not exceed 35% of the total
face area of the canopy.
(iii) Awnings shall not extend above the eave or parapet of the
building facade and shall be a minimum of eight feet, six inches
above the sidewalk or grade, whichever is higher. Awnings
shall not extend over any area utilized by motor vehicles.
(iv) Under-canopy or under-awning signs shall maintain a
minimum of a vertical clearance of eight feet.
(v) Awnings may project no more than nine feet from the facade of
the wall to which they are mounted, but shall not extend within
five feet of the curb face of any public right-of-way if any trees,
lighting standards, or street poles are present within a two-foot
radius of the proposed awning. Otherwise, the maximum
projection of any awning shall not extend within three feet of
the curb face of any public right-of-way. Any extension beyond
six feet shall have plans stamped by a licensed architect or
professional engineer, certifying the ability of the wall and
associated structures to carry all imposed loads.
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:760
(vi) Awnings and canopies shall maintain a vertical clearance of 14
feet over parking lots;
(vii) Canopies shall maintain a vertical clearance of 18 feet over
driveways.
(viii) Awnings or canopies which project into a North Dakota
Department of Transportation (NDDOT) Right-of-Way may
require a permit from that department. If a permit is required
by the NDDOT, it must be obtained.
c. Business center identification signs. Business center identification
signs may not be monopole signs. See Section 25.G.11.f, Monopole
Signs. A Sign Master Plan is required.
d. Marquee signs. Marquee signs, where permitted, are subject to the
following regulations:
(i) Marquee signs shall not extend within five feet of the vertical
plane of the inside curb line of any public right-of-way if any
trees, lighting standards, or street poles are present within a
two-foot radius of the sign. Otherwise, the maximum projection
of any awning shall not extend within three feet of vertical
plane of the inside curb line of any public right-of-way.
(ii) Each marquee sign, including under-canopy signs, must
maintain at least the following vertical clearances:
(a) Eight feet, six inches over sidewalks.
(b) Twelve feet within three feet of any parking area or
driveway.
(c) Fourteen feet over parking lots.
(d) Eighteen feet over driveways.
(iii) No marquee extending three feet or more from a property line
may be located within 25 feet of any other marquee sign
extending three feet or more from a property line.
e. Projecting signs and graphics. Projecting signs and graphics,
where permitted, are subject to the following regulations:
(i) Projecting signs must minimize visible support structure,
including guy wires, cables, turnbuckles, angle iron, or other
similar external support structure.
(ii) The maximum projection of any projecting sign shall not
extend within five feet of the curb face of any public right-ofway
if any trees, lighting standards, or street poles are present
within a two-foot radius of the sign. Otherwise, the maximum
projection of any projecting sign shall not extend within three
feet of the curb face of any public right-of-way.
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:761
(iii) Each projecting sign, including under-canopy signs must
maintain at least the following vertical clearances:
(a) Eight feet, six inches over sidewalks.
(b) Twelve feet within three feet of any parking area or
driveway.
(c) Fourteen feet over parking lots,
(d) Eighteen feet over driveways.
f. Monopole signs. Monopole signs, where permitted, are subject to
the following regulations:
(i) No more than two businesses may be advertised per monopole
sign. Said businesses must be located on the same lot as each
other and the sign.
(ii) Each pole sign must maintain at least the following vertical
clearances:
(a) Twelve feet over sidewalks.
(b) Any overhang within three feet of any parking area or
driveway must maintain a vertical clearance of at least 12
feet.
(c) Fourteen feet over parking lots.
(d) Eighteen feet over driveways.
g. Wall signs and graphics. Wall signs and graphics, where permitted,
are subject to the following regulations:
(i) A wall sign shall not extend more than 12 inches from the wall
to which it is attached, and may not extend within five feet of
the curb face.
(ii) A wall sign must be parallel to the wall to which it is attached.
(iii) A wall sign may not extend beyond the corner of the wall to
which it is attached, except where attached to another wall
sign, it may extend to provide for the attachment.
(iv) A wall sign may not extend beyond its building's roof line.
(v) A wall sign in the Center or Fringe Downtown, as defined by
Exhibit A, attached to a building on its front property line may
encroach upon public right-of-way by no more than 12 inches.
Such a wall sign shall provide minimum clearance of eight feet,
six inches, and must remain at least five feet behind the curb
face.
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:762
(vi) Wall signs may not extend vertically above the highest portion
of the roofline or parapet, whichever is less.
12. Temporary signs. Types of temporary signs are defined in Section
25.G.2.q and 25.G.2.s of this Zoning Ordinance.
a. Temporary commercial signs:
(i) Require a permit from the Planning Director through the
process described above under Permits Required, Section
25.G.4.b.
(ii) Shall not contain any dynamic messaging.
(iii) P, C-1, C-2, C-3, HCC, M-1, M-2, and M-3 Districts may utilize
temporary signs as follows:
(a) May be no larger than 64 square feet.
(b) Individual permits may be granted for eight events per
year of 15 days each.
(c) One permit may cover multiple temporary signs per event;
however, no more than one temporary commercial sign is
allowed per street frontage. If a property has more than
200 feet of frontage, an additional temporary commercial
sign may be allowed every 200 feet, but may not be
allowed within 200 feet of another temporary commercial
sign.
(d) Where a business has ordered a permanent sign to be
installed which has been applied for and permitted by the
Building Department, and for which documentation that
the sign has been ordered has been provided, the business
may apply for a temporary commercial sign as a business
sign until the permanent sign has been installed.
(iv) Balloon Temporary Commercial Signs:
(a) Balloon signs, whether worded or unworded, may only be
used as follows:
(1) Only one balloon is allowed per attachment point.
(2) The total amount of balloon signage may be no more
than 64 square feet.
b. Non-residential, non-commercial uses:
(i) Because certain uses are able to be placed in a multitude of
zones, and such uses are not typically associated with either
residential or commercial uses, these Non-residential, noncommercial
uses (e.g. schools, churches, lodges) in residential
zones may utilize a 64 square foot temporary sign for eight
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:763
events per year, with no more than 15 days per event. These
signs must be permitted.
c. Residential temporary signs:
(i) Do not require a permit.
(ii) Shall be static messaging only.
(iii) Shall not be illuminated.
(iv) Regulation by type of Residential Temporary Signs:
(a) No more than one such sign may be displayed on each
street frontage of the property.
(b) Signs are broken into two categories:
(1) Signs in R-1E, R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-2A R-6 and R-7: no
more than one sign, not exceeding six square feet in
area. However, no more than one temporary sign is
allowed per street frontage. If a property has more
than 200 feet of frontage, an additional temporary
sign may be allowed every 200 feet, but may not be
allowed within 200 feet of another temporary
commercial sign.
(2) Signs in A, R-3, R-4, R-5: no more than one sign per
street frontage, not exceeding 32 square feet. If a
property has more than 200 feet of frontage, an
additional temporary sign may be allowed every 200
feet, but may not be allowed within 200 feet of another
temporary commercial sign.
[a] This may be one banner or wall sign per street
frontage that is firmly affixed to a building facing
the adjoining public right of way and kept in good
repair that is a maximum size of 32 square feet.
[b] If a banner sign is not used, one monument style
sign not exceeding 32 square feet and six feet tall
constructed of finished materials (with no
unpainted wood) that is maintained in good order
may be used. Alternative style signs may be
considered and approved by the Planning Director
if a hardship is demonstrated.
d. Non Worded Advertisement that is primarily designed to draw
attention to a property for the purpose of gaining business:
(i) May be allowed in R-3, R-4, C-1, C-2, C-3, HCC, M-1, M-2
Districts.
(ii) May only be located on private property.
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:764
(iii) Must be kept in good repair, and may not be faded, tattered, or
in disrepair.
13. Off-premises advertisement signs. "Off-premises advertisement sign" is
defined in Section 25.G.2.n.
a. Off-premises signs hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, or moved in the City shall be constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the current version of the Uniform Sign
Code, adopted by the City, the latest edition of the North Dakota
State Building Code and currently adopted National Electrical
Code, except as amended by this ordinance.
b. Existing off-premises signs which are located on property in the
City's jurisdiction may be maintained as built, and are not
considered to be non- conforming.
c. Off-premises signs are allowed in the M-2: Heavy Industrial
Districts as permitted uses only if they conform to the following
provisions:
(i) The owner shall agree, at the time of issuance of the permit, to
place and maintain on such off-premises sign the contact
information for the person owning, in charge of, or in control
of, said off-premises sign.
(ii) No off-premises sign shall be erected, altered, constructed,
reconstructed, or moved until an application and plans have
been filed with and approved by the Building Official as to size,
location, and construction.
(iii) The permitted height for off-premises signs shall be a
maximum of 45 feet in height and up to 60 feet in height as a
special permitted use. The height shall be measured as
indicated in Section 25.G.7.b.
(iv) Off-premises signs shall be constructed on the existing grade of
the site. Upon newly graded land, the off-premises sign shall be
placed upon the final grade of the site as set forth in the
grading plan in the approved final plat.
(v) The owner, lessee, or manager of such off-premises sign, and
the owner of the sign shall maintain and keep the ground area
around the sign free and clean of weeds and debris.
(vi) The maximum area of the sign face shall not exceed 2.5% of the
area of the lot, or 672 square feet, whichever is smaller.
(vii) No off-premise sign shall be constructed within 600 feet of
another off-premise sign with only one off-premises sign being
allowed per lot or parcel of land.
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:765
(viii) No off-premises signs shall be installed within 250 feet in any
direction of any zoning district where off-premise signs are not
permitted.
(ix) All off-premises signs shall be erected using a single steel
monopole design.
(x) No off-premises sign shall be erected within six feet of any
structure.
(xi) The maximum area of a off-premise sign shall not be increased
through the special permitted use (SPU) process.
14. Murals. "Murals" are defined in Section 25.G.2.h.
a. As indicated in Table 25.G.1, murals are permitted only in the
Center Downtown Area, defined by Exhibit A.
b. Murals are required to be submitted to the Renaissance Zone
Board for review and approval. Actions of the Renaissance Zone
Board are appealable to the City Commission.
15. Oversize signs. Specific sign limitations in each district are indicated in
Table 25.G.1. Where proposed signs in these districts exceed the
established size limitations (excluding off-premises advertising signs
per Section 25.G.13) or do not meet other requirements, they may be
reviewed as a special permitted use (SPU) and may be considered for
approval if they conform to the following:
a. No such sign shall be erected, altered, constructed, reconstructed,
or moved until an application and plans shall have been filed with
the Building Official as to size, location, and construction.
b. Neighboring property within 150 feet of the proposed sign shall
receive a notice of the proposed SPU.
c. Other considerations shall be taken such as the size of the lot,
number of existing signs, the size of existing signs, in addition to
the findings for SPU's prescribed in Section 27 of the this
ordinance and listed below:
(i) That special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which
are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the
same district.
(ii) That literal interpretation of the provision of this ordinance
would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by
other properties in the same district under the terms of this
ordinance.
(iii) That the special conditions and circumstances do not result
from the actions of the applicant.
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.G
AO:766
(iv) That granting the oversize sign requested will not confer on
the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this
ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same
district.
16. Sign master plan. An applicant may submit a sign master plan detailing
the size, location and design of all signs on the site. The sign master
plan shall contain specific standards for consistency among all signs on
the lots affected by the plan. Criteria for a common signage designation
include but are not limited to color scheme, lettering or graphic style,
lighting, location of each sign on the buildings or lots, sign material,
sign proportions, and cumulative sign display areas and heights of all
signs. All owners within the sign plan area shall be required to sign a
document waiving any rights to individual freestanding monopole signs
in exchange for signage on the shared business center identification
signs.
Business center identification sign master plans must also show that
the signage is proportional to the buildings/center, and must show the
proposed signage in relation to the street and property. Sign master
plans must show that proposed signage is proportional to the scale of
the development and the street. These requirements must show that
the sign master plan meets modern commercial design standards.
Business center identification signs are only allowed with a sign master
plan, and shall be limited to one per major business center entrance,
located on an arterial or highway, no more than 45 feet high and 400
feet square, and one per minor business center entrance, or business
center entrance on a collector or local street, no more than 25 feet high
and 200 feet square. Sign master plans must be reviewed by Planning
and Zoning Commission.
Sign master plans may also be used for campus properties in residential
zones.
17. Compliance with sign regulations. Conformance Required. Except as
may be hereinafter specified, no sign shall be erected, placed,
maintained, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered
which does not comply with all of the regulations established by this
zoning ordinance.
18. Enforcement.
a. Continuing maintenance obligation. All signs must continue to be
maintained in working condition, as required by Section 25.G.9.a
(iii). All sign faces must remain clearly legible and the sign
mounting must remain structurally sound. All illumination must be
maintained to fully illuminate the sign.
b. Inspection and monitoring. All signs allowed by this ordinance are
subject to inspection and monitoring. Signs not in compliance with
the requirements of this ordinance or not in compliance with the
SECTION 25.G ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.G
AO:767
SECTION 25.H. Off-street parking requirements.
Except in the 2014 Downtown Parking District (Figure 9) of the City of
Williston, no building shall be erected, enlarged to the extent of increasing
the floor area, or changed in use unless there is provided on the lot, space
for parking of automobiles as specified below.
approved sign permit will be subject to enforcement actions
pursuant to Section 26.D of this zoning ordinance. These
enforcement actions include the City hiring a contractor to remove
a non-compliant sign and backcharging the property owner for the
cost of this work.
c. Fines. Temporary signs displayed in violation of this ordinance shall
be fined as indicated in the Fee Schedule, Section 5-321 of the City
of Williston Code of Ordinances.
d. Sunset clause. All commercial temporary signs will need to either
be removed or be properly permitted for an event as allowed above
within 90 days of January 1, 2017. Any commercial temporary sign
that is still in place and not properly permitted will be fined as per
Section 5-321 of the City of Williston Code of Ordinances.
19. Sign table.
Permitted sign types and maximum sizes are indicated in the following
Sign Table 25.G.1.48
1. Modifications of required parking. When the parking requirement for a
use cannot be provided on the same lot as that use, the required
parking may be modified on a case-by-case basis by the Planning and
Zoning Commission to allow parking on a remote lot, shared parking, or
reduction of the parking requirement.
2. Site plan required. In addition to any other application requirements,
the application for a modification of required parking shall include a
site plan depicting:
a. All existing and proposed buildings and all existing and proposed
parking spaces on all lots affected by the proposed modification.
b. A schedule reflecting quantity and dimension of all parking spaces
depicted on the site plan.
c. All areas between the lot containing the principal use and the
remote lot, if applicable.
48.Editor's Note: Table 25.G.1 Agricultural, Residential And Parks Sign Allowances and Table
25.G.2 Commercial And Industrial Sign Allowances are included as attachments to this
chapter.
SECTION 25.G WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.H
AO:768
d. Dimension lines indicating the shortest straight-line route and the
shortest walkable route between the lot the principal use is on and
the remote lot.
3. Parking on a remote parking lot.
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant permission to
accommodate a portion of the required parking on a remote
parking lot consistent with the following findings:
1. There are restrictions of topography, title, lot design, existing
building footprint, or required access that prohibit the parking
requirement from being met on the same lot as the principal
use.
2. The property owner has maximized the space available on the
lot that the principal use is on to accommodate the required
parking.
3. The handicapped parking requirement is met on the lot that
the principal use is on.
4. The parking on a remote parking lot shall not cause a
recognizable impact on traffic or adjacent land uses of either
the lot that the principal use is on nor the remote lot.
5. The parking on a remote parking lot shall not adversely affect
the public health, safety, and welfare.
6. Parking spaces available on the remote parking lot are not
required to satisfy the required parking for any other use.
b. Additional findings for shared parking by two separate uses:
1. The normal peak parking limes of the two uses do not coincide.
2. Only the off-street parking spaces not normally used by the offpeak
use shall be counted as off-street parking for the peak
use.
3. Each use shall have the total required off street parking
available during their respective periods of peak parking use.
c. Parking spaces on a remote parking lot, including shared parking
spaces, shall be:
1. Secured by a lease to be in effect as long as the principal use
exists;
2. Covered by an agreement providing for the maintenance of the
parking spaces; and
3. Posted with permanent signage identifying the principal use
that the parking spaces are reserved for.
SECTION 25.H ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.H
AO:769
4. Reduction of required parking.
a. The Planning and Zoning Commission may grant permission for a
reduction of required parking consistent with the following
findings:
1. There are restrictions of topography, title, lot design, existing
building footprint, or required access on the lot that prohibit
the parking requirement from being met.
2. The applicant has maximized the space available on the lot to
accommodate the required parking.
3. The proposed reduction of required parking meets the
handicapped parking requirement.
4. The reduction of required parking shall not cause a
recognizable impact on traffic or adjacent land uses.
5. The reduced parking shall not adversely affect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
6. Market data provided by the applicant for similar uses in
similar situations justifies a parking demand commensurate
with the proposed reduction of required parking, including the
relationship of the building footprint to the lot size.
b. Reduction of required parking may be granted by the Planning and
Zoning Commission as:
1. Reduction of the required parking ratio, or
2. Reduction in the total number of required spaces.
c. A modification of required parking shall end upon the change or
termination of the use for which the modification was granted.
d. All modifications of the parking requirement shall be memorialized
by recording the decision and findings of the Planning and Zoning
Commission in the County Recorder's Office.
e. Parking area shall be so designed that vehicles may enter,
circulate, park, and exit in a convenient and orderly fashion.
Required off-street parking shall be provided in such a manner that
vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way. The minimum
size of each parking stall shall be, 9.5 feet by 18.5 feet, exclusive of
aisle width. For any parking area of six or more cars, a suitable
means of turnaround must be provided at maximum design
capacity so no vehicle shall back onto public streets or alleys.
Minimal dimensional requirements for the design of parking area
are shown in Table 1 and on Figure 8.
5. 2014 Downtown Parking District.
SECTION 25.H WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.H
AO:770
a. In the 2014 Downtown Parking District, any new construction or reuse
of a building shall meet the following requirements:
(i) Provide the number of spaces required by the uses contained
within the building, as provided below, or
(ii) Pay a set fee in lieu of providing parking, as provided below.
b. 2014 Downtown Parking District requirements.
(i) Residential:
(a) One space per efficiency, studio, and one bedroom
dwelling unit.
(b) One and five tenths spaces per two bedroom dwelling unit
(c) Two spaces per three bedroom dwelling unit
(ii) Commercial:
(a) One space per 500 square feet of office space
(b) Zero spaces for retail space
c. Payment in Lieu.
(i) To exercise the payment in lieu option in order to provide
parking for downtown development and redevelopment
projects, application must be made to the Parking Authority,
who will review the request and make a recommendation to the
Planning and Zoning Commission, who will take final action on
the application.
(ii) For new-build and redevelopment projects, applicant must
provide evidence of the following:
(a) A good faith effort to provide on site parking;
(b) That lot size and shape prevent a project from being built
with all required parking;
(c) The planned parking location of all tenants within the
building;
(d) Lack of project feasibility without reduction in parking
requirements.
(iii) Payment in lieu fee to be determined by separate fee
resolution. Fee is to be paid to the Parking Authority at time of
building permit issue for maintenance and creation of public
parking.
6. Parking requirements: reference, uses.
SECTION 25.H ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.H
AO:771
a. Reference herein to "employee(s) on the largest shift" means the
maximum number of employees employed at the facility regardless
of the time period during which this occurs and regardless of
whether any such person is a full-time employee. The largest shift
may be a particular day of the week or a lunch or dinner period in
the case of a restaurant.
b. The term "capacity," as used herein means the maximum number of
persons which may be accommodated by the use as determined by
its design or by building or fire code regulations, whichever is
greater.
c. Any use not specifically mentioned below shall meet the
requirements for uses most clearly related as determined by the
Building Official.
7. Number of off-street parking spaces required.
a. The number of off-street parking spaces which shall be required
are as follows:
(i) Agricultural support uses. One space per employee on the
largest shift, plus one space per 200 square feet of gross floor
area provided for customer sales and service operations.
(ii) Residential uses:
(a) Single-family and multi-family dwellings: two spaces per
dwelling.
(b) Efficiency apartment units: one space per dwelling unit.
(iii) Institutional, Recreational, and Special Residential Uses:
(a) Camps (day or youth): one space per employee on the
largest shift, plus one space per camp vehicle normally
stored on the premises.
(b) Church. One space per four seats of maximum capacity.
(c) Community and recreation center. One space per 250
square feet of gross floor area, or one space per four
patrons to the maximum capacity, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
(d) Day or nursery school, child care facility: one space per
teacher/employee on the largest shift, plus one space per
10 students for loading and unloading.
(e) Group dwellings, fraternity or sorority, boarding or lodging
houses: One space per bedroom or sleeping room, unless it
can be demonstrated that occupants will not be driving.
SECTION 25.H WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.H
AO:772
(f) Libraries and museums: one space per 350 square feet of
floor area or one space per four seats to the maximum
capacity, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
(g) Monasteries, convents: one space per six residents, plus
one space per employee on the largest shift, plus one
space per five chapel seats if the public may attend.
(h) Nursing homes: one space per six patient beds, plus one
space per employee on largest shift.
(i) Schools:
(1) Elementary and junior high: one space per teacher
and staff member.
(2) Senior high: one space per teacher and staff member
on largest shift, plus one space per five non-bused
students.
(3) College, trade and vocational: one space per staff
member of the largest shift, plus one space per four
students of the largest class attendance period.
(j) Swimming facility: one space per 100 square feet of gross
water area, plus one space per employee on the largest
shift.
(k) Tennis, racquetball, handball courts: two spaces per court,
plus one space per employee on the largest shift.
(l) Bowling alley: three spaces per lane, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift.
(m) Marina: 1 1/2 spaces per berth. At least 10% of the space
must be large enough to accommodate cars with trailers.
(n) Miniature golf: one space per hole, plus one space per
employee on the largest work shift.
(o) Outdoor theater: one space per four patrons to the
maximum capacity of the facility inclusive of both indoor
and outdoor capacity.
(p) Skating rink, ice or roller: one space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area.
(q) Health club: one space per 100 square feet of gross floor
area, plus one space per employee on the largest shift.
(r) Golf courses: five spaces per hole.
SECTION 25.H ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.H
AO:773
(s) Other commercial recreational uses: one space per four
patrons to the maximum capacity of the facility, or one
space per 250 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is
more appropriate.
(iv) Commercial and entertainment uses, except as specifically
designated below: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor
area of customer sales and services, plus one space per 250
square feet of storage and/or office gross floor area.
(a) Banks: one space per 400 square feet gross floor area, plus
five spaces off-street waiting (loading) spaces per drive-in
lane, plus one space per employee on the largest shift.
(b) Eating and drinking establishments: one space per four
patron seats or one space per 100 square feet of gross
floor area, whichever is greater, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
(c) Fast food establishments:
(1) With seating: one space per three patron seats, plus
one space per employee on the largest shift.
(2) Without seating: one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area, plus one space per employee on the
largest shift.
(d) Funeral home: one space per four patron seats or 25
spaces per chapel unit, whichever is greater.
(e) Grocery or supermarket: one space per 200 square feet of
gross floor area or customer sales and service, plus one
space per 200 square feet gross floor area of storage.
(f) Hospital: one space per three patient beds, plus one space
per staff doctor and per employee on the largest shift.
(g) Hotel or motel: one space per room or suite, plus 50% of
the spaces otherwise required for accessory uses, e.g.
restaurants and bars.
(h) Private clubs and lodges. Required parking spaces are to
be determined by the specific uses associated with the
facility.
(i) Repair services. A minimum of three spaces shall be
provided for the first 2,000 square feet of gross floor area,
plus one additional space for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area thereafter, plus one space per employee
one the largest shift.
SECTION 25.H WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.H
AO:774
(j) Furniture and home furnishings stores: one space per
1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(k) Self-service laundry: one space per four machines.
(l) Assembly or exhibition hall, sports arenas, theaters, and
auditoriums: one space per five patrons based on
maximum capacity. This requirement may be satisfied on a
space-by-space basis by a facility's providing written proof
that it has the use of a nearby parking lot available to its
patrons, e.g. by contractual agreement.
(m) Taverns, dance halls, night clubs, and lounges: one space
per 50 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
(n) Vehicle sales: one space per 1,500 square feet of gross
floor area.
(o) Vehicle repair and maintenance services: one space per
400 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space per
employee on the largest shift.
(p) Games of chance operations: one space per three patron
seats.
(v) Professional office uses, except as specifically designated
below: one space per 250 square feet of gross floor area.
(a) Beauty and barbershops. Two spaces per operator, plus
one space per employee on the largest shift.
(b) Medical offices and clinics: five spaces per doctor, plus one
additional space per employee on the largest shift.
(vi) Industrial uses, except as specifically designated below: one
space per employee on the largest shift, plus one space per
company vehicle regularly stored on premises.
(a) Veterinary office: three spaces per doctor, plus one space
per employee on the largest shift.
(b) Adult entertainment center: one space per employee on
the largest shift, plus one space per 150 square feet of
gross floor area.
(c) Warehouse: one space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area used as a warehouse.
(vii) Nursery uses: one space per employee on the largest shift, plus
one space per 500 square feet gross floor area of inside sales
or display.
SECTION 25.H ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.H
AO:775
(viii) Handicapped parking. All parking lots must have a minimum
of one designated handicapped space for each 50 required
parking spaces. Each handicapped parking space shall be a
minimum of 12 feet by 18.6 feet and shall be properly striped,
signed, and posted.
b. Property within R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7, C-1, -C-2 and C-3
zoned areas of the City limits accessing a paved street or alley must
pave with a hard surface all parking areas, whether used for
temporary or long-term vehicle storage, driveways and driving
aisles for all new-construction or any property change in use or
expansion which results in increased parking demand or when
required as a special permitted use or as required by state or
federal law. Property located in M-1, M-2 and M-3 zoned areas of
the City limits accessing a paved street or alley must pave, with a
hard surface, all driveways accessing the building and/or employee
parking lots. Other driveways accessing the property from paved
streets or alleys must be paved with a hard surface from the street
surfacing to the property line and all traffic aisle width into the
property a minimum of 20 feet in length. All long-term vehicle
storage which directly access a public street or hard surface alley
by a driveway or driving aisle shall have an approved surface. All
required lot surfacing shall be done at the time the occupancy
permit is issued unless a letter of credit, certified check, or other
sufficient surety is placed with the City guaranteeing performance
of the paving. All parking spaces and required parking lots must be
individually designated through painting or signing.
c. In order to prevent the establishment of a greater number of
parking spaces than actually needed to meet the particular needs
of those large uses over 250,000 square feet of gross floor area, a
reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces may
be permitted. This reduction shall be permitted subject to the
following conditions:
(i) A maximum reduction of one parking space per every 1,000
square feet of gross floor area or 20% or the total spaces
required can be permitted. The land development plan shall
indicate the location and dimensions of the parking area
provided.
(ii) Sufficient area must be reserved to provide for the total
number of off-street parking spaces required by Section 25.H.
The purpose of this reservation is to insure adequate area to
meet any future need for additional parking spaces. This
reservation shall be provided for by deed-restricting that
portion of the site required to provide for the total number of
parking spaces on the same property as is being proposed for
development. The reserved parking area shall not include
areas for required bufferyards, setbacks, or areas which would
otherwise by unsuitable for parking spaces due to the physical
SECTION 25.H WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.H
AO:776
characteristics of the land or other requirements of this
ordinance. The developer shall provide a landscaping plan for
the reserved area.
(iii) The developer shall enter into written agreement with the City
of Williston that the additional parking spaces, up to the total
spaces required, shall be provided at the owner's expense
should the Building Official determine that the required
parking spaces are necessary to satisfy the needs of the
particular use pursuant to the standards imposed by this
ordinance.
Figure 8. Parking Layout Diagram
SECTION 25.H ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.H
AO:777
FIGURE 9. 2014 DOWNTOWN PARKING DISTRICT
SECTION 25.H WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.H
AO:778
SECTION 25.I. Off-street loading requirements.
No building or structure other than residences shall be erected, nor shall
any existing building or structure be altered in any use district without prior
provision for off-street loading space in conformance with the following
minimum requirements:
Table 1 - Parking Lot Requirements for 9.5 Foot Stalls at
Various Angles
SECTION 25.H ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.I
AO:779
1. Required off-street loading space shall be provided in berths which
conform to the following minimum specifications:
a. Type "A" loading spaces shall be at least 160 feet long by 10 feet
wide by 14 feet six inches high, inside dimensions.
b. Type "B" loading spaces shall be at least 30 feet long by 10 feet
wide by 14 feet six inches high, inside dimensions.
c. Type "C" loading spaces shall be located in the rear of a lot and
utilize part of any adjacent alley. The building setback shall be a
minimum of five feet from the property line along the alley for the
entire width of the lot.
2. The following types of berths shall be provided for the specified uses;
these uses shall include all structures designed, intended, or arranged
for such use:
a. Type "A" loading spaces. Manufacturing or wholesale
establishments, warehouses, freight terminals, department stores,
and food markets.
b. Type "B" loading spaces. Auditoriums, assembly halls, schools,
hospitals, nursing homes, office buildings, hotels, and motels.
c. Type "C" loading spaces. Retail establishments, restaurants,
funeral homes, and commercial establishments not otherwise
specified.
3. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements for offstreet
loading facilities shall be the same as the above-mentioned use
which, in the opinion of the Building Official, is most similar.
4. When any proposed structure will be used concurrently for different
purposes, the larger berth size shall be required.
5. The off-street loading facilities required for the uses mentioned in this
section shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they
are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading
space be part of the area used to satisfy the off-street parking
requirements.
6. No space for loading or unloading of vehicles shall be so located that a
vehicle using such loading space projects into any public street, except
in the case of Type "C" berths. Loading space shall be provided with
access to an alley, or if no alley adjoins the lot, with access to a street.
Any required front, side, or rear yard may be used for loading unless
otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. Design and location of
entrances and exits for required off-street loading areas shall be subject
to the approval of the Building Official.
7. The Building Official may modify the off-street loading requirements as
they apply to any individual case only for good cause, and he shall set
SECTION 25.I WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.I
AO:780
SECTION 25.J. Lots not served by a water supply system and a
waste water treatment plant.
A lot not served by a water supply system and a waste water treatment plant
as defined in this ordinance, shall have a minimum lot area of one-half acre,
except where a more restrictive minimum lot area is set forth in the district
regulations.
SECTION 25.K. Pools.
Any body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or other
container located outdoors which is constructed below grade shall be
required to obtain a building permit and shall be enclosed with a tight fence
of wood or other smooth material, or a chain link fence, not less than elevengauge.
Such fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height. Fences shall
be placed within one-half inch of the ground. Openings into the pool areas
shall be only through a self-closing and self-locking gate. Residential district
swimming pools shall be allowed in side and rear yards only. Side and rear
yard setbacks shall be a minimum of six feet and a minimum setback of
10 feet shall be maintained between the swimming pool and the principal
structure.
Any body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or other
container located outdoors which is constructed in such a manner as to
permit a water depth of more than 18 inches above grade shall be either
enclosed with a fence as required above, or shall be covered with a tight
fitting cover, securely fastened as to prevent entry into the water when not
in use.
SECTION 25.L. Rock crushers, concrete and asphalt mixing plants,
sand and gravel pits, or any other such excavating or surface
mining.
The uses as set forth in this section shall be permitted in an Agricultural
District, providing the following requirements are met:
reasonable safeguards and conditions to insure that any such
modification conforms to the intent of this title. Modification may be
granted if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Building Official
that loading operations of the use or structure in question will not
interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public street.
8. The owners of the property shall provide, locate, and maintain loading
signs as specified by the Building Official. Such signs shall not be
counted against otherwise allowable sign area.
1. When the application is filed, the applicant shall provide a plan showing
the land proposed for excavation. This plan shall show the contours of
the land on at least five-foot contour intervals, any improvements
thereon and to a distance of 300 feet in all directions from the subject.
SECTION 25.I ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.L
AO:781
2. Concurrent with the above, the applicant shall also provide a plan
showing the contemplated changed condition of the land due to the
excavation. This plan must include the contemplated reuse of the land,
what recovery of the land is planned and the contours on at least fivefoot
intervals.
3. No excavation or processing of excavated materials shall be permitted
nearer than 30 feet to the boundary of adjacent property nor nearer
than 125 feet to any existing residence, unless by written agreement
that the owner or owners of such adjacent property consent to a lesser
distance. The Planning and Zoning Commission may set a greater
distance than above mentioned when, in their opinion, it is justified.
4. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall specify the degree of slopes
of banks for all excavation, the depth of and the distance from any
public structure when excavations are made in or near streambeds.
When excavations are near or adjacent to irrigation canals or ditches,
the applicant shall secure a written agreement from the ditch company
or from officials responsible for the canals or ditches indicating their
determination as to setbacks from public right-of-way.
5. Sand gravel shall be excavated in such a manner so as to assure the
convenient restoration of the land and to hold to a minimum any
adverse effects to adjacent land as a result of piling or storing the
overburden materials.
6. The sand and gravel shall be excavated in such a manner so as to leave
an average of two feet of undisturbed sand and gravel, as evenly as
possible, over the entire excavation tract; to provide a water bearing
strata for any existing ground water; and more, if the Planning and
Zoning Commission deems necessary.
7. After an excavation has been completed, the operator shall spread
evenly over the bottom of the excavation the excess waste materials. He
then shall spread evenly the topsoil to a minimum depth of 18 inches.
The topsoil shall be spread last so as to produce a new surface for the
purpose of growing crops, trees, shrubs, etc. Operations shall be
conducted in such a manner that excavated areas will not collect or
permit stagnant water to remain therein.
8. An excavation operation shall maintain haulage roads within the
premises covered by the permit and such roads shall be kept in a
reasonably dust-free condition when said dust would be injurious to
bordering premises. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall specify
the conditions in each instance to insure this requirement. The hours of
operation, unless otherwise specified by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, shall be from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless a national
emergency arises or special permission is granted.
9. Rock crushers, and concrete and asphalt mixing plants may be
permitted, providing the Planning and Zoning Commission finds that
the following facts prevail:
SECTION 25.L WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.L
AO:782
a. The use is accessory to the sand and gravel operation.
b. In the finished product the operator uses the product of the sand
and gravel pit on which the operation is proposed. The Planning
and Zoning Commission may set out additional conditions under
which these operations may be permitted and the said conditions
may vary by location due to abutting land uses.
10. The operator of any excavation shall post a bond in the form prescribed
by the Williston City Commission in a sum equal to the number of acres
covered by the permit, multiplied by $500 to insure full compliance with
all of the terms and conditions of the permit and the rules and
regulations set forth by the Planning and Zoning Commission
pertaining to extraction and processing. The minimum amount of such
bond shall be $1,000 and the maximum amount $25,000. The Williston
City Commission shall have the power and authority to provide for an
alternative method of indemnifying the City in lieu of the posting of the
bond herein mentioned.
11. The operator shall furnish evidence that he is insured to the extent of
not less than $50,000 against liability for any negligent act or omission
arising from the operation or maintenance of an excavation and all
activities connected with or incident thereto.
12. Prior to the granting of a permit, the property shall be posted for a
period of 30 days. This posting shall consist of a sign or signs, the
number of which shall be determined by the Building Official, of a size
three feet by four feet, posted four feet above grade, with lettering not
less than two inches in size, placed in conspicuous locations visible
from the public right-of-way.
13. At least 15 days prior to the hearing, the Building Official shall, by
registered mail, send notice of the hearing to all property owners within
one-half mile of the proposed excavation.
14. To defray the cost of posting the property and determining property
owners to whom notice must be sent, there shall be collected a fee of
$25.
15. Upon the granting of a permit by the Board of City Commissioners, the
following fee schedule shall apply:
One acre or less $200
More than 1 acre to and including 2 acres $300
More than 2 acres to and including 3 acres $400
More than 3 acres to and including 4 acres $500
More than 4 acres to and including 5 acres $600
More than 5 acres to and included 10 acres $1,000
SECTION 25.L ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.L
AO:783
SECTION 25.M. Oil and natural gas drilling.
Oil and natural gas drilling shall be permitted in a M-2: Heavy Industrial or
A: Agricultural District, providing the following requirements are met:
In addition, land in excess of 10 acres (per
acre)
$25
16. The above fee schedule shall apply to each individual ownership of land
which is included in the operation.
17. All permits shall be in full force for a period of five years from the date
of issuance thereof unless a shorter time is set by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Such temporary permits may be renewable by the
Planning and Zoning Commission for the same period of time or less,
without further notice, hearing, or posting of the property involved;
provided, however, that the operator has complied with all the terms
and conditions of the original permit. A renewal of a permit shall be
considered as a new permit with respect to fees.
18. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the power to cancel
permits upon proof of violation of any of these regulations.
19. Rock crushers, concrete and asphalt mixing plants, sand and gravel
operations or any other such excavations which are temporary
operations (six months or less) shall not be subject to any of the
regulations of this section, except they shall be required to obtain a
permit from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
1. The regulations and statutes provided for in Chapter 38-08, North
Dakota Century Code, shall be followed by any person desiring to drill a
well for oil and natural gas within the City of Williston or the one-mile
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
2. An application must be filed with the City Building Official. The
application shall consist of two drill site development plans.
The first plan shall be a drill site development plan covering and
including that phase of the oil well operation including drilling
operations, and shall include the following information:
a. Written legal description.
b. Scale drawing of the property and appropriate dimensions.
c. Scale, north arrow, date, and legend.
d. Name, address, and telephone number of property owner and
applicant.
e. Location and size of existing easements, utilities, and right-of-ways.
SECTION 25.L WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.M
AO:784
f. Location and dimension of all vehicular entrances, exits, and
drives.
g. General drainage system.
h. Size of site.
i. Location of all physical facilities to include proposed wells,
structures, portable toilets, and relationship to all buildings within
a 660-foot radius.
j. The site plan shall contain a statement describing all pollution
prevention equipment to be utilized; it shall be the policy of the City
of Williston to require blowout prevention devices on every drilling
operation covered hereunder.
k. Location of all mud pits. The second plan shall cover the completed
or production well phase and shall contain the following
information:
a. General location of tank batteries and size of tank battery site.
b. Any oil, gas, or water lines to be utilized.
c. Location of ingress and egress to be utilized by applicant and
to include all vehicular entrances, exits and drives.
d. Type of screening devices, or construction to be utilized
around the pumping site, which screening shall be required to
be of such type so as to discourage access, entry, or climbing so
as to endanger life and security; all screening shall be required
to meet the minimum screening standards as specified in
Section 23.N and Section 25.A; the security at gates to any oil
operation at all times during which the oil operation site is
unattended.
e. The sign shall be no more than 24 inches by 30 inches; shall
contain the name, address, and emergency phone number of
the oil producing company; and shall be posted at the drilling
site for use in any emergency notice which might arise.
3. An oil well or natural gas operation shall maintain roads within the
premises covered by the permit and such roads shall be kept in
reasonable dust-free condition.
4. No well or drilling operation shall be located, drilled, or operated within
300 feet of any Residential, Commercial, or Parks and Open Space
District. In any other Districts, no well or drilling operation shall be
located, drilled or operated within 200 feet of any existing structure.
Traffic to and from a well or drilling operation shall not be disruptive to
any residential development.
SECTION 25.M ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.M
AO:785
SECTION 25.N. Adult entertainment.49
5. Any drilling rig within 300 feet of a residence, business, or public
building shall be enclosed on all sides. All storage tanks, wells, and
equipment operated or maintained in connection with such a well shall
be enclosed with a fence. All rigs shall be equipped with adequate fire
extinguishing equipment.
6. Permits for the drilling of all oil and gas wells shall be required. Permits
may be obtained from the City Building Official and will be valid for a
period of one year. A fee schedule shall be established by the City
Commission and shall be posted in the office of the Building Official.
Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken
on any application.
1. Purpose and intent.
a. Purpose. It is the purpose of Subsection N to regulate adult
entertainment establishments, or otherwise referred to herein as
adult establishment or adult use, in order to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Williston,
and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the
negative secondary effects and concentrations of adult
entertainment establishments within the City of Williston.
(i) This ordinance does not have the purpose, intent or effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or
reasonable access to any communicative materials, including
sexually oriented materials.
(ii) Further, it is not the purpose, intent, or effect of this ordinance
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment of the United
States Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended
markets.
(iii) It is not the intent or effect of this ordinance to condone or
legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
b. Findings. Whereas, based on evidence concerning adverse
secondary effects of adult entertainment, adult use, or adult
entertainment establishments, local police reports made available
to the board have generated the following statistics concerning the
secondary effects:
(i) Between mid-2013 and June 2015 there were over 200
reported incidents at the 2 strip clubs located within City limits
that the Williston Police Department responded to.
49.Editor's Note: See City Code Chapter 9.
SECTION 25.M WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.N
AO:786
(ii) The following is a summary of the types of calls and incidents
that the Williston Police Department responded to:
(a) Two homicides; one murder and one death from grave
bodily injury resulting from an assault. In September
2014, there was a fight between overly intoxicated
individuals outside one of the strip clubs. As a result of the
altercation one individual had a serious head injury. The
head injury resulted in permanent brain damage and
subsequent death.
(b) Forty-two fights/assaults, almost all involved intoxicated
individuals.
(c) Eight DUIs/Disorderly Conduct.
(d) Thirty-six unruly and intoxicated patrons.
(e) Three hit and runs.
(f) Ten theft of property calls, including two stolen vehicles.
(g) Six welfare checks.
(h) Fifteen traffic violations.
(i) Two junk ordinance violations.
(j) Multiple dates of minors being admitted to the
establishments while under the age of 18 and/or being
served with alcohol while under the age of 21.
(iii) Additionally, based on evidence concerning the adverse
secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in
studies which were also made available to the Board, and on
findings incorporated in the cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M.,
529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc.,
475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S.
50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. V. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990);
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 US. 560 (1991); Thomas v.
Chicago Park District, 122 S. Ct. 775 (2002); California v.
LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda
Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); ILQ Investments Inc. v. City of
Rochester, 25 F. 3d 1413 (8th Cir. 2003); Holmberg v. City of
Rochester, 12F. 3d 140 (8th Cir. 1993); McCrothers Corp. v.
Mandan, 2007 ND 28, 728 N.E. 2d 124 (2007); Big Dipper
Entertainment, LLC v. City of Warren, 641 F.3d 715 (6th Cir.
2011); Big Dipper Entertainment, LLC v. City of Warren, 658 F.
Supp. 2d 831 (E.D. Mich. 2009); County of Morrison v. Wheeler,
722 N.W. 2d 329 (MN 2006); City of Chicago v. Poo Bah
Enterprises, Inc., 865 N.E. 2d 390 (III. 2006); and other cases;
and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around adult
entertainment establishments, including, but not limited to,
SECTION 25.N ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.N
AO:787
Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove,
California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin,
Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma County, Oklahoma;
Cleveland, Ohio; Dallas, Texas; Tucson, Arizona; St. Croix
County, Wisconsin; Bellevue, Washington; Newport News,
Virginia; New York, New York; Phoenix, Arizona; Mandan,
North Dakota; and from summaries of several of the foregoing
secondary effects report; the Board finds:
(a) The nature of adult establishments is such that they are
recognized as having adverse secondary characteristics,
particularly when they are accessible to minors and
located near residential property or related residential
uses, such as schools, day care centers, libraries, churches
or parks. A 2008 Texas study revealed that "91% of
surveyed property appraisers stated that the existence of a
strip club or sexually oriented retail store within 500 feet
of a single-family home directly impaired the value of those
residences." Report to the TX Legislature: "Sexually
Oriented Businesses and Human Trafficking: Associations,
Challenges and Approaches," Off. Att. Gen., p. 2 (Mar.
2013). Further, 71% of the surveyors found that an adult
establishment's presence within a 1/2 mile distance of a
residential property had a negative impact on market
value.
(b) The concentration of adult establishments has an adverse
effect upon the use and enjoyment of areas adjacent to
such establishments.
(c) The nature of adult establishments requires that they not
be allowed within certain zoning districts, or within
minimum distances from each other or residential or
related residential uses.
(d) Regulation of adult establishments is necessary to ensure
that any adverse secondary effects does not contribute to
or enhance criminal activity in the area of residential uses
or contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the
surrounding property and lessening of its value.
(e) The Planning and Zoning Commission, following
appropriate notice, held a public hearing on the ordinance
from which Subsection N is derived, and has considered
testimony, written comments, and material from the public
by and through said hearing, and has recommended
approval of the zoning changes for adult uses.
(f) Subsection N is consistent with the City of Williston
Comprehensive Plan, purposes, goals and policies in
SECTION 25.N WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.N
AO:788
preserving a vibrant downtown which enhances both
community life and the economy through ensuring it is a
place to work, live, play and shop. Further, when adopting
the Comprehensive Plan the community valued personal
safety and a low crime rate as 2 characteristics in
preserving.
2. Construction and definition. The following words, terms and phrases,
when used in Subsection N., shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context indicates a different meaning:
a. ADULT CABARET ENTERTAINMENT - Means:
(i) Any exhibition, performance, or dance of any type conducted in
any premises where such exhibition, performance or dance
involves a person who performs in such clothing or sheds
clothing to a point where the area below the top to the bottom
of the areola of a female breast or any portion of public area,
anus, buttocks, vulva or genitals are covered by opaque
material, or wearing any device or covering exposed to view
which simulates the appearance of any portion of the female
breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the pubic
region, anus, buttocks, vulva, or genitals, or human male
genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered;
(ii) Any exhibition, performance or dance which includes any of
the following:
(a) The performance of acts, or simulated acts, of sexual
intercourse;
(b) Masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation,
flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law;
(c) The actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of
the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals;
(d) The actual or physical displaying of the pubic hair, anus,
vulva or genitals, or the nipples of the female; or
(e) Appearances, entertainment, or performances of any type
consisting of or containing any nude performer, or topless
female dancer; or
(iii) Any exhibition, performance, or dance which is intended to
sexually stimulate any member of the public and which is
conducted on a regular basis or as a substantial part of the
premises activity. This includes but is not limited to, any such
exhibition, performance, or dance performed for, arranged
with, or engaged in with, fewer than all members of the public
on the premises at that time, with separate consideration paid,
SECTION 25.N ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.N
AO:789
either directly or indirectly, for such performance, exhibition,
or dance and which is commonly referred to as table dancing,
couch dancing, taxi dancing, lap dancing, private dancing, or
straddle dancing.
b. ADULT ESTABLISHMENTS OR ADULT USES, WHICH ALSO MAY
BE KNOWN AS OR REFERRED TO AS ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
ESTABLISHMENTS - Means adult arcades, adult bookstores, adult
cabarets, adult cabaret entertainment, adult companionship
establishments, adult motion picture theaters, adult motion picture
rental, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult massage parlors,
adult bathhouse/steam room/sauna facilities, adult companionship
establishments, adult rap/conservation parlors, adult health/sport
clubs, adult novelty businesses, adult motion picture arcades, adult
modeling studios, adult hotels/motels, adult body painting studios,
and other premises, enterprises, establishments, businesses or
places open to some or all members of the public, at or in which
there is an emphasis on the presentation, display, depiction, or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, which are capable of being seen by members of the public.
c. ADULT USE — ARCADE - Means any place to which the public is
permitted or invited, but from which minors are excluded by reason
of age, wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are
regularly maintained to show images to one person per machine,
located within individual viewing areas, cubicles or booths and
where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis upon matters exhibiting specified sexually
activities or specified anatomical areas.
d. ADULT USE — BODY PAINTING STUDIO - Means an establishment
or business which provides the service of applying paint or other
substance, whether transparent or nontransparent, to or on the
body of a patron when such body is wholly or partially nude in
terms of specified anatomical areas.
e. ADULT USE — BOOKSTORE - Means a building or portion of a
building used for the barter, rental or sale of items of printed
matter, including publications, books, magazines, and other
periodicals, pictures, slides, records, audio tape, CD, DVD,
videotape or motion picture film, if such building or portion of a
building is not open to the public generally but only to one or more
classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age or if
such items are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
f. ADULT USE — CABARET - Means a building or a portion of a
building used for providing dancing or other live entertainment or
SECTION 25.N WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.N
AO:790
activity as defined in adult cabaret entertainment, if such building
or portion of a building excludes minors by virtue of age or if
such dancing, activity or other live entertainment is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on the presentation, display,
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
g. ADULT USE — COMPANIONSHIP ESTABLISHMENT - Means a
companionship establishment which excludes minors by reason of
age, or which provides the service of engaging in or listening to
conversation, talk, or discussion between an employee of the
establishment and a customer or patron, if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
h. ADULT USE — HEALTH/SPORT CLUB - Means a health/sport club
which excludes minors by reason of age, or if such club is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
i. ADULT USE — HOTEL/MOTEL - Means an adult hotel or motel
from which minors are specifically excluded from patronage and
wherein material is present which is distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
j. ADULT USE — MASSAGE PARLOR, HEALTH CLUB - Means a
massage parlor or health club which restricts minors by reason of
age, and which provides the services of massage if such service is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
k. ADULT USE — MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER - Means an
enclosed building or portion of a building with a capacity of less
than 50 persons used for presenting materials or motion pictures, if
such building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice
excludes minors by virtue of age, or if such materials or motion
pictures are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in this section,
for observation by patrons of the theater.
l. ADULT USE — MODELING STUDIO - Means an establishment
whose major business is the provision, to customers, of figure
models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual
stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers or patrons and
who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified
anatomical areas while being observed, painted upon, sketched,
drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such
customers or patrons.
SECTION 25.N ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.N
AO:791
m. ADULT USE — MOTION PICTURE ARCADE - Means any place to
which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slugoperated
or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled
or operated still or motor picture machines, projectors or other
image-producing devised are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, if such place as a
prevailing practice excludes minors by virtue of age or if the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
n. ADULT USE — MOTION PICTURE THEATER - Means an enclosed
building or portion of a building with a capacity of 50 or more
persons used for presenting materials or motion pictures, if such
building or portion of a building as a prevailing practice excludes
minors by virtue of age or if such material or motion pictures are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, for observation by patrons of the theater.
o. ADULT USE — NOVELTY BUSINESS - Means a business which has
as a principal activity the sale of devises which stimulate human
genitals or devices which are designated for sexual stimulation or
the sale of sexually oriented devices.
p. ADULT USE — SAUNA - Means a sauna which excludes minors by
reason of age or which provides a steam bath or heat bathing room
used for the purpose of bathing, relaxing, or reducing, utilizing
steam or hot air as a cleaning, relaxing or reducing agent, if the
service provided by the steam room/bathhouse facility is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
q. ADULT USE — STEAM ROOM/BATHHOUSE FACILITY - Means a
building or portion of a building used for providing a steam bath or
heat bathing room used for the purpose of pleasure, bathing,
relaxation, or reducing, utilizing steam or hot air as a cleaning,
relaxing or reducing agent if such building or portion of a building
restricts minors by reason of age or if the service provided by the
steam room/bathhouse facility is distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
r. MASSAGE - Means the manipulation of a body muscle or tissue by
rubbing, stroking, kneading, or tapping by hand or mechanical
device.
s. MASSAGE BUSINESS - Means any establishment or business
wherein massage is practiced, including establishments known as
health clubs, physical culture studios, massage studios or massage
parlors.
SECTION 25.N WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.N
AO:792
t. NUDE PERFORMER OR NUDE DANCER - Means any person who
performs or appears in attire such that any portion of the pubic
area, anus, vulva or genitals is exposed to view or not covered with
an opaque material.
u. SEXUALLY ORIENTED DEVICES - Means, without limitation, any
artificial or simulate anatomical area or any other device or
paraphernalia that is designed in whole or in part for specified
sexual activities.
v. SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS - Means:
(i) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals
and public regions, buttocks, or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola.
(ii) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
w. SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES - Means:
(i) Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical
stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the
context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory
functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the
following sexually-oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery,
coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia,
pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty.
(ii) Clearly depicted human genitals in the state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence.
(iii) Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus or masturbation.
(iv) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, public region,
buttocks or female breast.
(v) Situations involving a person, any of whom are nude, clad in
undergarments or in sexually revealing costumes, and who are
engaged in activities involving flagellation, torture, fettering,
binding or other physical restraint of any such persons.
(vi) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented
contact with an animal by a human being.
(vii) Human erection, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
x. TOPLESS FEMALE PERFORMER OR TOPLESS FEMALE DANCER
- Means any female who performs or appears in attire such that any
SECTION 25.N ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.N
AO:793
portion of her breasts below the top of the areola is exposed to view
or is not covered with an opaque material.
3. Adult uses or establishments.
a. General provisions. Adult uses or establishments shall be subject to
the following general provisions:
(i) Activities classified as obscene are not permitted and are
prohibited. In no instance shall the application of or
interpretation of Subsection N be construed to allow any
activity otherwise prohibited by state law or City ordinance.
(ii) Adult uses shall be prohibited from locating in any building
which is also utilized for residential purposes.
b. Adult uses or establishments. Adult uses or establishments shall be
a permitted use only in the M-2: Heavy Industrial District, subject
to the regulations, location and separation criteria as outlined in
Subsection N herein and the following:
(i) Adult uses shall not be located within at least 1,250 radial feet,
as measured in a straight line from the closest point of the
property line in which the adult use is located, to the property
line of:
(a) A zoning district in which residential uses are specifically
listed as a permitted or conditional use;
(b) A licensed day care center;
(c) A public or private educational facility, classified as a
kindergarten, elementary, junior high, intermediate, or
senior high;
(d) A public library;
(e) A public park;
(f) Any church or church/religious related organization; or
(g) Another adult use.
(ii) No adult use may be located in the same building or upon the
same property as another adult use.
(iii) No building premises, structure or other facility in which
sexually oriented devices, as defined in this chapter, are
displayed, or offered for sale shall contain any other kind of
adult establishment or adult use.
(iv) Adult uses must adhere to the following signing regulations:
(a) Sign messages shall be generic in nature and shall only
identify the name of the business.
SECTION 25.N WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.N
AO:794
(b) Signs shall comply with the requirements of size and
number for the district in which they are located or as
required by applicable building code.
(v) Adult establishments which offer the following must restrict
from and prohibit access to minors by physical separation of
such items from areas of general public access:
(a) Movie rentals. Display areas shall be restricted from
general view and the access of which shall be in clear view
and under the control of persons responsible for operation.
(b) Magazines. Publications classified or qualifying as adult
uses shall not be physically accessible to minors and shall
be covered with a wrapper or other means to prevent
display of any material other than the publication title.
(c) Other uses. All other adult uses, such as adult use-novelty,
shall comply with the intent of this section.
4. Nonconforming adult uses.
a. Any adult use lawfully operating prior to the adoption of this
ordinance that is in violation of Subsection N.3.b shall be deemed a
nonconforming use. The nonconforming use is permitted to
continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner
terminated for reason or voluntarily discontinued. In no instance
shall a nonconforming use be allowed to structurally expand the
use on the lot on which it is located when the use became a
nonconforming use, or expand the adult use to include another lot
on which the adult use was not located when it became
nonconforming, or in any way be increased, enlarged, extended or
altered, expect that the use may be changed to a conforming use.
b. If the building in which a temporary nonconforming use is located
is destroyed by any means to an extent of greater than 50% of its
market value, or if the building in which the temporary
nonconforming use is vacant for more than six months, an adult use
may not be reestablished.
c. Any adult establishment which is made nonconforming by
Subsection N or which is an existing nonconforming use shall be
terminated within the time period provided in Subsection N.4.a
above. However, such termination date may be extended upon
approval by the Commission of an application filed with the City
Administrator/Auditor within three months of the effective date of
the ordinance from which this Section 25.N is derived, requesting
an extension to such amortization period. The Commission's
decision on whether or not to approve an extension and the length
of time of such period shall be based upon the applicant clearly
demonstrating extreme economic hardship based upon an
irreversible financial investment or commitment made prior to the
SECTION 25.N ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.N
AO:795
SECTION 25.O. Temporary uses and structures.
expiration of the time period provided for in Subsection N.4.a
above which precludes reasonable alternative uses of the subject
property. The applicant must also include with the request for an
extension an amortization schedule demonstrating the financial
investment and time period being requested.
d. An adult establishment business lawfully operating as a conforming
use is not rendered nonconforming by the location, subsequent to
the grant or renewal of an adult entertainment license, of a use
listed in Subsection N.2.b within 1,250 feet of the adult
establishment. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid
license, and does not apply when an application is made for a
license after the applicant's previous license has expired or been
revoked.50
5. Violations; penalties.
a. Any person violating any provision of Subsection N is guilty of a
Class B Misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to the
penalties as prescribed under state law.
b. Any violation of Subsection N related to adult entertainment, adult
uses, or adult entertainment establishments shall be subject to the
provisions of Section 26 and any amendments thereto as well as
shall be a basis for the suspension or revocation of the certificate of
occupancy for the property or building in which the adult use is
located. In the event the Planning and Zoning Commission or Board
of City Commissioners propose to revoke or suspend a certificate of
occupancy, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the
basis for such proposed suspension or revocation. The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall hold a hearing for the purpose of
providing a recommendation to the Board of City Commissioners
regarding whether to revoke or suspend the certificate of
occupancy, and the hearing shall be within 30 days of the date of
the notice. Upon the Planning and Zoning Commission's
recommendation the Board of City Commissioners shall hold a
hearing for the purpose of determining whether to revoke or
suspend the certificate of occupancy, which hearing shall be within
30 days after the Planning and Zoning Commission makes their
recommendation. The Board of City Commissioners decision shall
be final concerning whether or not to revoke or suspend a
certificate of occupancy.
c. The Board of City Commissioners shall determine whether to
revoke or suspend a certificate of occupancy within 30 days after
the close of the hearing and shall notify the property owner of its
decision within that period.
50.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 936 adopted 5-10-2011, Ord. No. 1032 adopted 1-26-2016.
SECTION 25.N WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.O
AO:796
1. Definitions.
GREENHOUSE — A structure enclosed (as by glass or plastic), and
used for the cultivation or protection of tender plants; used in a retail
setting as an establishment engaged in the sale of plants, trees, garden
supplies, garden tools, and related items to the public.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — A unit of government within a state,
including a county, City, township, or village.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT, OR ITINERANT
VENDOR — A person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner agent,
consignee or employee, who temporarily sets up business on private
property, or out of a vehicle, trailer, tent, other portable shelter, or
vacant store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale,
selling or attempting to sell, goods, wares, products, or merchandise.
2. Purpose. The purpose of the regulations in Subsection O. is to allow for
the administrative review for temporary uses and structures, which
have seasonal or temporary durations, which render the display and
transaction of goods or services outside of a building or vacant store
front. These activities shall be regulated to avoid incompatibility
between uses in the surrounding area and control the types of
temporary uses which occur on private property or parking lots
throughout the City.
3. Temporary use permit required. A temporary use permit shall be
required for all temporary uses and structures listed in this Subsection
O. Applications for these permits shall be reviewed and if approved,
filed with the Planning Director in the Planning and Zoning
Department. Temporary uses and structures may be subject to
additional permits, licenses, inspections, and interdepartmental review
as needed.
a. Application requirements:
(i) A completed application form;
(ii) Address, legal description of the property where the temporary
use or structure is to be located;
(iii) A site plan or drawing of the property illustrating the lot, all
existing structures, parking spaces, and where such temporary
use or structure is to be located.
(iv) A complete description of the proposed temporary use or
structure, including hours of operation, proposed method of
merchandise display, proposed signage, list of all goods to be
sold and material and equipment to be used in the proposed
operations;
(v) Permission from the property owner which pertains to the
authorization for the use of the site and other facilities or
SECTION 25.O ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.O
AO:797
services necessary to provide for the safe operation of the
temporary use;
(vi) A copy of the State Sales and Use Tax Permit; or
(vii) A copy of the State Transient Merchants License.
b. Exemptions include the following uses:
(i) Rummage sales, yard sales, and garage sales held at the home
of the vendor;
(ii) Merchants or vendors participating in farmers market, flea
market, fairs, carnivals, circuses, or other similar activity; and
(iii) Mobile businesses or mobile commercial businesses, transient
merchants, itinerant merchants, and itinerant vendors who are
invited to events approved by the City, that are organized, and
managed by a fair association, convention bureau, or other
political subdivision including the City itself. Such events
include but are not limited to the Chokecherry Festival, Band
Day, Holiday Lights, and Clean City.
(iv) Mobile business operations recognized by the City to have
been operating and in existence at the time of the City's
adoption of Ordinance Nos. 974 and 990, an ordinance
establishing a temporary moratorium prohibiting the use of
future mobile commercial businesses, which was approved by
the City Commission on 9-24-2013 and up until the adoption of
this Ordinance No. 1065 shall be exempt from Ordinance No.
999 until January 1, 2016, at which time the exemption
described herein shall sunset.
(a) After January 1, 2016, all mobile commercial businesses,
whether previously exempt in accordance with Subsection
O.3.b(iv) shall be brought into compliance by January 1,
2016.
(b) Any mobile commercial business not in compliance with
Ordinance No. 999 by January 1, 2016 shall be deemed to
have violated Ordinance No. 999 and subject to
enforcement described in Subsection O.10 Enforcement.
(v) Seasonal greenhouses which are erected only during the
period of time from May 1 through August 31, providing the
following conditions are met:
(a) The greenhouse is owned and operated by either the
property or building lease holder or owner.
(b) The greenhouse is located on an existing developed lot
with an existing, current primary use.
SECTION 25.O WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.O
AO:798
(c) The greenhouse may only be utilized as an accessory use.
(d) A temporary structure permit is obtained.
(e) No required parking is utilized for the placement of the
greenhouse or surrounding outdoor sales.
(f) The greenhouse shall only be located on commercial (C-1,
C-2, C-3), Highway Corridor Commercial (HCC), Light
Industrial (M-1), Heavy Industrial (M-2), or Agricultural
(A) zoned properties.
4. Permitted uses. A temporary use permit may be issued for the following
uses:
a. Halloween pumpkin patches, and Christmas trees lots;
b. Mobile businesses or mobile commercial businesses operating
under temporary provisions and performing public service
operation only; and
c. Transient merchants, itinerant merchants, and itinerant vendors.
5. Findings. The Planning Director may approve a temporary use permit
application only when all of the following findings of facts can be made
in a positive manner:
a. That the operation of the requested temporary use or structure at
the location proposed will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise
constitute a nuisance to the public health, safety or general welfare
or be injurious or detrimental to properties served, adjacent to, or
in the vicinity of the nearby area with respect to the existing land
use and zoning designation;
b. That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to
accommodate the temporary use or structure;
c. That adequate parking to accommodate vehicular traffic to be
generated by such use will be available on site and not take away
from the minimum parking requirement established for the existing
uses.
d. That the proposed egress and ingress for the site is adequately
served by unobstructed fire lanes, driveway aisles, streets, or
highways having sufficient width and improvements to
accommodate the kind and quantity of traffic that such temporary
use or structure could reasonably generate;
e. That the proposed location of setup and operation shall not be
located in the public right-of-way.
f. That the proposed signage for the temporary use or structure is
limited to one sign, not to exceed 32 square feet. The sign shall be
SECTION 25.O ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.O
AO:799
attached to the vehicle or structure associated with the temporary
use. No off-premises signs or dynamic messaging signs are allowed;
g. That the proposed temporary use or structure is limited to one
temporary use or structure per site;
h. That the proposed temporary use or structure is limited to one
event consisting of up to 14 days and three events per calendar
year, not to exceed 42 days. Days not utilized in a single event will
not be carried over to the next event;
i. That the property owner of the site is restricted to host no more
than one event consisting of up to 14 days and three events per
calendar year, not to exceed 42 days. Days not utilized in a single
event will not be carried over to the next event; and
j. In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the
Planning Director may impose such conditions as are deemed
necessary to insure that the permit will be in accord with the intent
and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance.
6. Zoning. Such permitted uses shall only be located on commercial (C-1,
C-2, C-3), Highway Corridor Commercial (HCC), Light Industrial (M-1),
Heavy Industrial (M-2), or Agricultural (A) zoned properties.
7. Fees. The fee for such permit under shall be established by resolution
and adopted by the City Commission.
8. Expiration of permit. Temporary use permits allow for a period of up to
14 days and three events per calendar year, not to exceed 42 days. Days
not utilized in a single event will not be carried over to the next event.
Upon expiration of the permit, all associated materials and equipment
shall be promptly removed from the property.
9. Revocation. A temporary use permit may be revoked if the Planning
Director finds that one or more of the following conditions exists:
a. Circumstances have changed to such a degree that one or more of
the findings of fact contained in Subsection O.5 can no longer be
made in a positive manner;
b. The temporary use permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner;
c. One or more conditions of the temporary use permit have not been
complied with.
10. Enforcement. Any use which is established, operated erected, moved,
altered, enlarged or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
Zoning Ordinance or any condition of approval, is hereby declared to be
unlawful and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties set forth in
Section 26.F of the City of Williston Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 25.O WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.O
AO:800
SECTION 25.P. Workforce, temporary housing.51
11. Effective date. The effective date of this Ordinance No. 1065 is August
8, 2017.
1. Employee housing may or may not be located on the principal heavy
industrial parcel. Such housing may only be occupied by employees of a
requesting business. The use is temporary, with a specified review
period of no more than five years from date of approval, as conditioned
by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City
Commission. Consideration for further extension would be finally
determined by the City Commission with recommendation for the
continuation or discontinuation of the use by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
2. Application requirements. The application process shall follow the
Special Permitted Use criteria outlined in Section 27.D.1 through 9. The
following additional items shall be provided with the application and
site plan to include:
a. Evidence that the applicant owns the land.
b. Description of the precise nature of the use including the following
information:
(i) Total number of projected workforce.
(ii) Estimated duration of use.
(iii) Total number and type of housing to be used.
(iv) Total number of beds.
c. Site Plan, drawn to scale, including the following:
(i) Location of housing units.
(ii) Location of existing structures.
(iii) Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures.
(iv) Required off-street parking.
(v) Refuse and service areas.
(vi) Utilities, with reference to location, availability and
compatibility.
(vii) Proposed areas to be screened or buffered- and indication of
type to be used.
(viii) Location of any proposed signs.
51.Editor's Note: Ord. Nos. 925 and 981 currently inapplicable based on Ord. No. 1050. See
Section 8.O.
SECTION 25.O ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.P
AO:801
(ix) Required yards or open space.
d. Method for sewage disposal and water supply with approvals from
regulating authority.
e. Building permit required and must follow State Building Code
Guidelines.
f. Approved fire protection and emergency response measures.
g. Impact fees and or permit fees as amended and determined by the
City Officials. Fees assessed would require review and approval by
the City Commission.
3. Prohibited housing types.
a. M-2: Heavy industrial district. Recreational camping trailers are
prohibited unless compatible with the area and rest of work camp
and as approved by the City Commission.
4. Prohibited activities. Sites are to be maintained free of garbage and
junk and subject to compliance with applicable City codes and
ordinances (e.g. as nuisance and junk). Recreational vehicles are not to
be operated on site. Only permitted outdoor storage per the zoning
district is allowed. No outdoor storage of personal vehicles, campers or
personal items for occupants of temporary housing are permitted on the
site.
5. Permitting requirement. Workforce, temporary housing proposals will
be submitted and reviewed as Special Permitted Uses following the
stated criteria in Section 27 and additional application requirements as
stated in this ordinance. Due to the nature of workforce, temporary
housing as an unconventional land use and potential community-wide
concerns additional processing steps are required as follows:
a. Public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission will hold a
public hearing in regard to the application and make a
recommendation to the City Commission.
b. Public hearing notice requirements. Notice of the public hearing
must be published once a week for two successive weeks before the
time set for the hearing in the official newspaper of the City. The
notice must contain the following items:
(i) The time and place of the hearing.
(ii) A description of any property involved, by street address if
streets have been platted or designated in the area affected.
(iii) A description of the nature and scope of the proposal.
(iv) A statement of the times at which it will be available to the
public for inspection and copying at the office of the City
Auditor.
SECTION 25.P WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.P
AO:802
SECTION 25.Q. Mobile food trucks.52
c. City commission. Upon review and recommendation by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Commission shall
review and give a final decision.
6. Taxation, fees. Workforce, temporary housing may be subject to real
property taxation or crew housing permit fees as set forth by the City of
Williston.
1. Mobile food trucks.
a. For purposes of this Subsection Q., a "mobile food truck" is defined
as a licensed mobile food unit, as licensed through the NDDOH.
b. No person may set up or operate a mobile food truck without first
obtaining a license and meet the requirements and conditions laid
out in this Subsection Q. The City Auditor is authorized to issue a
license for a mobile food truck, with approval from the Building
Official, Planning and Zoning Director, Chief of Police, Director of
Public Works, Fire Chief, and City Engineer. This license may only
be obtained if the Health Department has licensed the food truck.
c. Mobile food trucks may only operate in a designated "food truck
area" as noted in this Subsection.
d. Licenses are issued annually and are only valid for a twelve-month
period. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year
regardless of when a person obtains a license. License fee shall be
set by City Commission approved Resolution.
e. Any violations of this Subsection shall be subject to the removal of
the mobile food truck license for the remainder of the license
issuance period, as follows:
(i) If a mobile food truck is in violation of any provision of this
Subsection, a ticket for $500 may be issued by the Williston
Police Department during the violation.
(ii) Any person having information that the mobile food truck
license holder has violated any provisions of this Subsection
may submit a complaint to the Director of Development
Services setting forth such violation.
(iii) If any mobile food truck receives three tickets, or receives
three complaints from independent and separate business or
property owners within a six-month period, the following shall
apply:
(a) Upon receipt of such complaint, or confirmation that the
mobile food truck has received three tickets from the
52.Editor's Note: See City Code Chapter 20)
SECTION 25.P ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.Q
AO:803
Williston Police Department, the matter shall be set for
hearing in a reasonable period of time at the regular
meeting of the Board of City Commissioners. A copy of the
complaint and notice of the hearing will be mailed to the
mobile food truck license holder by registered or certified
mail not less than 10 days before such hearing.
(b) Upon the Board of City Commissioners making a written
finding that a violation of this Subsection occurred it shall
immediately revoke the mobile food truck license.
(iv) Any act or the failure to do any act which creates a public
nuisance, or in the event of repeated violations which may or
may not meet the requirements listed above, the City retains
the ability to immediately revoke the food truck license.
(v) Such causes as hereinbefore described shall not be deemed to
be exclusive and such license may be terminated at any time by
the Board of City Commissioners for any cause deemed by the
Board to be sufficient cause and justified by reason of public
health or public morals.
f. License holders, for mobile food trucks and their employees shall
meet the following requirements.
2. Health and safety regulations.
a. The license holder shall comply with all North Dakota Department
of Health (NDDOH) and other applicable regulatory agency
requirements, including, but not limited to, the requirements for
food service. The license holder shall display in a conspicuous
location all such required licenses and/or licenses and shall provide
copies of those licenses and/or licenses to the City prior to issuance
of a license for a food truck by the City. The license holder shall
continuously maintain the required approvals, licenses and/or
licenses and provide evidence to the City of the continuous
maintenance of them.
b. The license holder shall obtain and display a certificate of
insurance from a company licensed to do business in North Dakota,
evidencing that the license holder has general liability insurance
policies in effect with limits of at least $250,000 per individual and
$1,000,000 per occurrence. The City of Williston must be named as
an additional insured.
c. Copy of a criminal record check for owner of the food truck.
d. At time of application, applicant must provide a copy of a notarized
statement signed by the applicant holding the City harmless
against claims and litigation for issuing a license.
e. Any food trucks must be registered in North Dakota.
SECTION 25.Q WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.Q
AO:804
f. Food trucks must be a dedicated truck for this purpose and must be
approved by the NDDOH.
g. The license holder shall provide with their application the number
of vehicles they intend to operate as a food truck, a description of
all food trucks, they intend to operate, license plate information for
each food trucks, VIN for each food truck, proof of insurance
coverage for each food truck, and proof of fire and safety inspection
for each food truck.
h. A separate application and fee is required for each food truck
applied for by the applicant.
i. If anything changes, the license holder shall deliver updated and
current information to the Williston Police Department and
Williston Auditor's office within 10 days.
j. All food, oil, and organic waste must be disposed of at licensed food
establishment. Arrangements for such must be shown at time of
application via a signed contract with a licensed food
establishment.
k. There must be a designated Person in Charge of food safety with
the food truck at all times, as per NDDOH requirements.
3. Maintenance regulations.
a. The license holder shall provide proper containers or some other
means for the collection of waste and trash from the food truck. The
license holder shall keep the immediate area around the food truck
and the food truck clean of garbage, trash, paper, cups, cans or
litter associated with the operation of the food truck. All waste and
trash shall be properly disposed of by the license holder.
b. The license holder is responsible to remove any garbage, spills, or
stains or repair any damage to the designated area resulting from
operations of the food truck.
c. The license holder shall be responsible for the maintenance,
upkeep and security of the food truck. Skirting of the food truck is
not allowed.
d. The food truck must be kept in good operating condition, with no
rust or peeling paint.
e. Advertising decals are limited to the name of the licensed vendor,
the types of food for sale, and the price lists of those items.
4. Noise regulations.
a. The license holder shall comply with all noise regulations set forth
in the Williston City Code of Ordinances.
SECTION 25.Q ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.Q
AO:805
b. The license holder shall not have on the premises any bell, siren,
horn, loudspeaker or any similar device to attract the attention of
possible customers nor shall the license holder use any such device
to attract attention.
5. Parking and traffic regulations.
a. A food truck may not utilize a drive through window.
b. A food truck may only be parked on a paved area, with paved
parking for customer cars.
c. A food truck may not park on a sidewalk.
d. A food truck may only be parked on a developed lot, which has a
permanent business and structure on the property.
e. A food truck may not interfere with the needed parking for the
permanent business and building on the property.
f. A food truck or its customers may not interfere with public access
to adjacent parking stalls or to driveways or entrances of existing
buildings or uses.
g. A food truck must locate the vending window to ensure pedestrian
safety and may not make sales to anyone within a roadway.
h. Customers may not use the right-of-way or landscaped area for
queueing.
i. A food truck may not operate in a congested area where such
operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such
streets or public way. For the purpose of this item, the judgement of
a police officer or license inspector, exercised in good faith, shall be
deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the
public impeded or inconvenienced.
j. A food truck must obey all state and local parking and traffic
regulation.
k. No more than one food truck is allowed per private lot, unless the
lot owner has a license for a food truck park, as noted below.
l. Written approval must be granted by the owner and tenant of any
lot which a food truck wishes to park on prior to parking. In the
case of a corporate entity, this letter must be accompanied by proof
that signatory is an authorized agent. This letter must be kept in
the food truck. This provision expressly applies to all Williston Park
Recreational District property.
6. Mobile food truck general regulations.
a. A food truck must be parked at least 200 feet from entrance of a
restaurant five feet from a driveway, ADA ramp, emergency call
SECTION 25.Q WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.Q
AO:806
box, building entrance or utility box; and 15 feet from a fire
hydrant.
b. A food truck may not be left unattended.
c. All power must be self-contained, or food truck must have written
approval by property owner to hook up to power in a safe manner.
d. A food truck must be moved from operating location and parked in
a storage area each night.
e. A food truck must provide portable lighting adequate to illuminate
the vicinity of the mobile food truck.
f. A food truck may place chairs, tables, umbrellas, etc. on the private
lot, as long as they do not impede parking and traffic. These must
be removed at the end of the day.
g. A six square foot menu board may be placed on the sidewalk
directly in front of the food truck. Said menu board may not impede
required ADA spacing.
h. A food truck may only be parked in the following zones, subject to
all regulations in this section: M-1: Light Industrial: C-2: General
Commercial; C-3: Restricted Commercial; HCC: Highway Corridor
Commercial; P: Parks and Open Space.
i. A food truck may only operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m., it is within 150 feet of a residentially zoned area, in
which case a food truck may only operate between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. In addition, a 30 minute allowance for setup
and tear-down is allowed. Before and after such times, a food
truck may not be parked on the property from which it intends to
sell food. The food truck must be returned to a storage area when it
is not in operation.
7. Clearance regulations.
a. Furniture, canopies, fencing and/or other accessories used for the
food truck shall be located so that a minimum clearance required
by the Williston Building Code or the Americans with Disabilities
Act, whichever is more restrictive, shall be provided at all times.
b. No outdoor patio area equipment, fencing or furniture may be
placed in such a manner as to obstruct a building exit, nor may it be
left up overnight.
8. Food truck park.
a. A property owner may apply for a Special Use Permit for a food
truck park, otherwise known as a congregation area. Said property
must meet the following:
(i) Fully developed and paved lot.
SECTION 25.Q ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.Q
AO:807
(ii) Parking to accommodate all customers, of both the permanent
business and the food truck park. A determination on adequate
parking may be made by the Planning Director and Chief of
Police. A license may be revoked if congestion of surrounding
parking areas or street right-of-ways becomes a concern.
(iii) In the absence of adequate on-site parking, public parking
must be available nearby.
(iv) Intent to operate as a food court, with more than one vendor at
all times.
b. No person may set up or operate a mobile food truck park without
first obtaining a license and meet the requirements and conditions
laid out in this Subsection.
c. Licenses are issued annually and are only valid for a twelve-month
period. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year
regardless of when a person obtains a license. License shall be set
by fee resolution.
d. Any violations of this Subsection shall be subject to the removal of
the mobile food truck park license for the remainder of the license
issuance period, as follows:
(i) If a mobile food truck park is in violation of any provision of
this Subsection, a ticket for $500 may be issued by the
Williston Police Department during the violation.
(ii) Any person having information that the mobile food truck park
license holder has violated any provisions of this Subsection
may submit a complaint to the Planning Director setting forth
such violation.
(iii) If any mobile food truck park receives three tickets, or receives
three complaints from independent and separate business or
property owners within a six-month period, the following shall
apply:
(a) Upon receipt of such complaint, or confirmation that the
mobile food truck park has received three tickets from the
Williston Police Department, the matter shall be set for
hearing in a reasonable period of time at the regular
meeting of the Board of City Commissioners. A copy of the
complaint and notice of the hearing will be mailed to the
mobile food truck park license holder by registered or
certified mail not less than 10 days before such hearing.
(b) Upon the Board of City Commissioners making a written
finding that a violation of this Subsection occurred it shall
immediately revoke the mobile food truck park license.
SECTION 25.Q WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.Q
AO:808
SECTION 25.R. Landscaping.
The purpose of this Subsection R. is to maintain the City of Williston's
quality and character by enhancing its visual appearance through the use
of landscaping. Benefits of landscaping include providing shade, air
purification, reducing dust and storm water run-off, dampening noise, and
buffering residential properties from the impacts of activities on adjacent
land. These benefits coincide with the main goals of Williston's adopted
comprehensive plan, which is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the community.
e. Food trucks operating within the park must follow all regulations
laid out within this Subsection, with the exception of the following
items:
(i) Food trucks may stay in place overnight. However, NDDOH
requirements require that food trucks must change location
every 14 days. Regardless, skirting is not allowed.
(ii) Furniture may stay out overnight.
(iii) Power may be provided by food truck park operator.
1. Commercial, industrial, institutional, government, and multifamily
landscaping.
a. Applicability. The landscaping requirements of this Subsection R.1
shall apply within the City of Williston and within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston to any of the
following:
(i) The construction of any new principal commercial, industrial,
institutional, government or multi-family buildings, or an
accessory building for any of the above uses.
(ii) Expansions of existing buildings mentioned in (i) above that
occur after the effective date of this ordinance amendment and
which increase the floor area by more than 1,000 square feet
or 10% of the existing building footprint area, whichever is
greater; or two or more expansions of square footage on the
site that, in total, exceed 1,000 square feet or 10% of the
existing building footprint area, whichever is greater.
(iii) The installation of any new parking area or the expansion of
any existing parking area by six or more off-street parking
spaces.
(iv) A rezoning to a higher intensity use or approval of a special
permitted use to a higher intensity.
(v) Preliminary plat. A conceptual landscape plan shall be made a
part of any development agreement associated with a
preliminary plat.
SECTION 25.Q ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.R
AO:809
(vi) Planned Unit Development (PUD). A conceptual landscape plan
shall be made a part of any PUD master plan.
(vii) Modifications of existing lots shall be subject to the General
Requirements identified in Subsection R.1.b(i) Minimum
Landscape Area and Subsection R.1.b(vi) Maintenance.
b. General requirements.
(i) Minimum landscaped area. All ground areas, excluding areas
required for off-street parking, access, public improvements,
or any area within any public right-of-way, shall be landscaped
with grass, vegetative ground cover, shrubs, trees or other
landscape materials in conjunction with site development.
Other landscape materials, including stepping stones and
ponds, may also be allowed in areas for employee or customer
enjoyment or near the building's main entrance, as an
enhancement to property appearance and as a visually
interesting open space.
(ii) Planting requirements. For every 1,000 square feet of
landscaped area or portion thereof, minimum planting
requirements are five plant units. Plant units are defined in
Table 1 of this Subsection.
Table 1: Plant Units
Type of Material
Minimum Size at Time of
Planting
Minimum Height at
Maturity
Unit
Equivalency
Shade Trees Caliper of 1 inch measured
4 1/2 feet above grade
20 feet 10
Ornamental Trees Caliper of 1 inch measured
4 1/2 feet above grade
12 feet 5
Small Upright
Evergreen Trees
Height 2 feet above grade
or container size of 5
gallons
6 feet 5
Large Upright
Evergreen Trees
Height 4 feet above grade 20 feet 10
Shrubs Height 2 feet above grade
or container size of 2
gallons
3 feet 1
(iii) Plant quality. Plants installed to satisfy the requirements of this
section must meet or exceed the plant quality standards of the
most recent edition of American Standards for Nursery Stock,
published by the American Nursery & Landscape Association;
be nursery grown; and be adapted to Climate Zone 3.
SECTION 25.R WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.R
AO:810
(iv) Plant lists. Plants must be selected from lists maintained by the
City of Williston. The City Forester may, at his discretion,
modify these plant lists.
(v) Installation. All trees and landscaping must be installed
according to Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of
Practice of the City of Williston.
(vi) Maintenance. Landscaping must be maintained as described in
Subsection R.7 below. Maintenance of the landscaping is the
responsibility of the property owner.
(vii) Existing plants. Plants that exist on a site that will remain after
site development may be used to satisfy the landscaping
standards of this Subsection provided that they meet all size,
variety and locational requirements; are determined by the
City Forester to be in good health; and are adequately
protected to ensure survival during and after site development.
(viii) Soils. Soil in landscaped areas shall consist of loose, friable,
loamy topsoil that is free of excess acid and alkali. Soil shall be
free from chunks of sod, hard lumps, gravel, subsoil or other
undesirable material, to a depth of 18 to 24 inches.
(ix) Visibility. Visibility Triangles shall be consistent with Section
25.A.1 and associated Figure 2. Figure 2 is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
(x) Overhead utility line interference. Trees shall not be planted
under utility lines when their mature height may interfere with
the lowest lines.
(xi) Underground utility interference. Trees shall not be planted
over, or within seven horizontal feet of, any underground water
or sewer line.
(xii) Fire hydrants. No tree shall be planted within 10 feet of any
fire hydrant.
(xiii) Diversity. A variety of tree and shrub species shall be utilized
to provide year around visual interest. Except for continuous
hedges and street trees, not more than 50% of the required
number of trees or shrubs may be comprised of any one
species.
(xiv) Installation timeline. All required landscaping shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(a) The installation of landscaping shall be determined by a
cut-off date established as July 31st.
SECTION 25.R ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.R
AO:811
(b) A project with a Conditional Certificate of Occupancy
issued by the Building Official prior to July 31st shall
install the required landscaping by July 31st.
(c) A project with a Conditional Certificate of Occupancy
issued on or after July 31st shall install the required
landscaping by July 31st of the following calendar year.
(d) Failure to install the required landscaping as required by
this Subsection shall be deemed a violation of any validly
issued Conditional Certificate of Occupancy.
(e) The Building Official shall have the right to revoke a
Certificate of Occupancy and/or seek alternate
enforcement measures as outlined in City Code of
Ordinance Chapter 5, Section 5-321 Penalties.
c. Landscaping plan required. A landscape plan shall be required for
all development subject to the provisions of this subsection.
Landscape plans submitted for approval shall contain the following
information:
(i) The square footage of the site and the square footage and
percentage of the site designated as planting areas, exclusive
of parking lot perimeter landscaping and buffer yards;
(ii) The common and scientific name of each plant to be used;
(iii) The number, height and caliper of trees to be used;
(iv) The pounds of lawn seed mix per square foot to be used;
(v) The number of ground cover plants per unit area to be used;
(vi) The locations where different plant types will be used;
(vii) The locations, size and type of existing trees to be preserved in
their natural state;
(viii) Planting details;
(ix) Location of any retaining walls and fences;
(x) Location of any utility easements;
(xi) Location of any existing or proposed structures or parking
areas;
(xii) North arrow and scale; and
(xiii) Drainage patterns.
2. Single-family and two-family residential landscaping.
SECTION 25.R WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.R
AO:812
a. Applicability. The landscaping requirements of this Subsection R.2
shall apply within the City of Williston and within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston to any of the
following:
(i) The construction of any new single-family residence, including
townhouses, twinhomes, and detached condominiums, or any
two-family residence.
(ii) Preliminary plat. A conceptual landscape plan shall be made a
part of any development agreement associated with a
preliminary plat.
(iii) Planned Unit Development (PUD). A conceptual landscape plan
shall be made a part of any PUD Master Plan.
(iv) Lots with existing landscaping shall be subject to the General
Requirements identified Subsection R.2.b(i) Minimum
Landscape Area and Subsection R.2.b(vi) Maintenance.
b. General requirements.
(i) Minimum landscaped area. The area of all yards bounded by
the front property line, side property lines, and the boundary of
the required rear yard closest to the residence, excluding
areas required for off-street parking, access, public
improvements, or any area within any public right-of-way, shall
be landscaped with grass, vegetative ground cover, or
xeriscape landscaping (a style of landscape design requiring
little or no irrigation or other maintenance) in conjunction with
site development.
(ii) Planting requirements. Turf, vegetative ground cover, or
xeriscape.
(iii) Plant quality. Plants installed to satisfy the requirements of this
Subsection must be adapted to Climate Zone 3.
(iv) Installation. All trees and landscaping must be installed in a
manner designed to encourage vigorous growth.
(v) Existing plants. Plants that exist on a site that will remain after
site development may be used to satisfy the landscaping
standards of this section provided that they meet all size,
variety and locational requirements, are determined by the
City Forester to be in good health, and are adequately
protected to ensure survival during and after site development.
(vi) Maintenance. Landscaping must be maintained as described in
Subsection R.7 below. Maintenance of the landscaping is the
responsibility of the property owner.
SECTION 25.R ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.R
AO:813
(vii) Installation timeline. All required landscaping shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
(a) The installation of landscaping shall be determined by a
cut-off date established as July 31st.
(b) A project with a Conditional Certificate of Occupancy
issued by the Building Official prior to July 31st shall
install the required landscaping by July 31st of that year.
(c) A project with a Conditional Certificate of Occupancy
issued on or after July 31st shall install the required
landscaping by July 31st of the following calendar year.
(d) Failure to install the required landscaping as required by
this Subsection shall be deemed a violation of the
Conditional Certificate of Occupancy.
(e) The Building Official shall have the right to revoke a
Certificate of Occupancy and seek alternate enforcement
measures as outlined in City Code of Ordinances Chapter
5, Section 5-321.
3. Parking lot perimeter screening. Off-street parking areas in any zone
shall be screened from adjacent street rights-of-way by landscaping in
planting strips in accordance with Table 2 of this Subsection R. No
screening shall be installed in any area of any public right of way. Street
tree installations shall not be counted towards meeting the Parking Lot
Perimeter Landscaping Screening requirements:
Table 2: Parking Lot Perimeter Screening Requirements
Number of Spaces in
Parking Lot
Minimum Required
Planter Width Minimum Planting Requirements
1 to 50 4 feet 1 shrub every 3 feet plus turf, mulch,
woodchips, or decorative rock
51 to 250 6 feet 1 ornamental tree plus 6 shrubs
every 25 feet
251+ 10 feet 1 shade tree plus 12 shrubs every 50
feet
4. Screening of trash containers and outdoor storage.
a. In commercial and industrial districts, all dumpster-style trash
containers shall be placed within a trash enclosure constructed to
the standard for such enclosures prescribed by the Williston
Department of Public Works. All round-style trash containers shall
be screened with shrubbery in such a manner as to allow the
containers to be handled by trash trucks. The mature height of the
shrubbery shall be the height of the trash containers.
SECTION 25.R WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.R
AO:814
b. No trash containers, trash container enclosures, or trash container
screening shall be placed or installed within any public right-ofway.
c. Screening of outdoor equipment installations, pipe yards, and
industrial and commercial storage areas which are visible from
adjoining streets shall be screened from view by evergreen trees,
tall shrubs and ground cover which will provide a 100% sightobscuring
screen; or a combination of 75% evergreen and 25%
deciduous trees with large shrubs and ground cover backed by a
100% sight-obscuring fence. Tree, shrub, and groundcover spacing
shall be appropriate for the species type and consistent with the
intent of this Subsection R.
d. No such screening shall be installed within any public right-of-way.
5. Street trees.
a. Applicability.
(i) Street trees shall be installed on streets at the time of
construction of any building on an existing property by the
builder/contractor.
(ii) With regards to new subdivisions and Development
Agreements, boulevard trees shall be installed on arterial
streets and perimeter subdivision streets at the time of street
construction or completion of the curb and gutter by the
developer.
b. General requirements.
(i) Street trees shall be installed in accordance with:
(a) Section 14(3) of the Williston Subdivision Regulations;
(b) Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice of
the City of Williston; and
(c) Authorized Boulevard trees list.
(ii) Street trees shall be installed within the public right-of-way or
within 10 feet of the public right-of-way in the event that
boulevard width or utilities make it infeasible to place trees
within the public right-of-way.
(iii) Unless the City Forester determines that it is necessary to
address specific site conditions, at least one street tree is
required for every 35 linear feet of local street frontage and at
least one street tree is required for every 50 linear feet of
collector and arterial street frontage.
(iv) Organic mulch (woodchips) shall be installed to a minimum
coverage thickness of two inches around street tree plantings
SECTION 25.R ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.R
AO:815
within a radius of three feet of the trunk base for the first five
years after the tree is planted.
(v) Trees at the time of planting shall be one inch or larger in
diameter, measured at a point located 4 1/2 feet above ground
level.
(vi) A planting permit must be obtained from the City Forester
prior to planting any trees within the public right-of-way.
6. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this
Subsection R:
a. Agricultural land uses as defined in Sections 8.C, 8.D.2, 8.E.3, 4
and 5;
b. Repair or remodeling of single-family or duplex dwelling units.
c. Improvements or repairs to existing development other than those
mentioned in Subsection R.2 above, that do not increase the
existing floor area by more than 1,000 square feet or 10% of the
existing building footprint area, whichever is greater; or two or
more expansions of square footage on the site that do not, in total,
exceed 1,000 square feet or 10% of the existing building footprint
area, whichever is greater.
d. When pre-existing construction is built in such a way as to preclude
any ability to provide landscaping on the property. The Planning
and Zoning Department may make this determination.
e. If an applicant demonstrates through written request and
confirmed planning that strict adherence to these guidelines will
cause an unreasonable hardship to occur to future development of
the property, or if current development is so as to preclude
installation, the Planning Director may review and modify these
requirements.
7. Enforcement.
a. Continuing maintenance obligation. All landscape plants must
continue to be cared for and maintained in a healthy condition, free
of diseases, pests, weeds and litter. This maintenance must include
weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning, mowing, edging, mulching
and other maintenance as needed and in accordance with
acceptable horticultural practices. Dead plants shall be removed
and replaced. Plant replacements must occur in a timely manner
and no later than the beginning of the next growing season.
b. Inspection and monitoring. All areas required to be landscaped by
this ordinance are subject to inspection and monitoring.
Landscaped areas not in compliance with the requirements of this
ordinance or not in compliance with the approved landscaping plan
will be subject to enforcement actions pursuant to Section 26 of
SECTION 25.R WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.R
AO:816
SECTION 25.S. Buffer yards.
this zoning ordinance. These enforcement actions include the City
hiring a contractor to do the required landscape work and
backcharging the property owner for the cost of this work.
1. Applicability.
a. Buffer yards are required for all preliminary plats, administrative
lot splits, sublots, planned unit developments (PUD's), and zone
changes within the City of Williston and within the extra-territorial
jurisdiction of the City of Williston.
b. Buffer yards are required for all new multi-family, commercial, and
industrial development.
c. Buffer yards are required between abutting lots of different zones
in accordance with Table 1 of this Subsection S.
d. For this Subsection S., lots are considered to abut pursuant to the
definition of "abut" in Section 31 of the zoning ordinance. Lots are
also considered to abut if they are separated by an alley or
driveway of 20 feet in width or less.
2. Exemptions.
a. Developed lots with vertical construction existing at the time of
approval of this Subsection S. are exempt from the requirements of
this Subsection, until such time that such lots are rezoned.
b. For lots less than 10,000 square feet, the buffer yard need not
exceed more than 10% of the total area of the site or more than
10% of the width of the site.
c. Individual single-family residences.
3. General requirements.
a. Lots required to install a buffer yard must install the yard at the
time of development, on their property.
b. On undeveloped lots with different zoning designations, the more
intensively zoned lot shall be required to install the required buffer
when it develops.
c. Maintenance of the buffer yards is the responsibility of the property
owner of the lot being developed.
d. Requirements for buffer yards separating mixed uses in a planned
unit development may be modified by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
e. Buffer yards shall be used solely for landscaping. No proposed
building, building addition, parking area, trash enclosure, or any
SECTION 25.R ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.S
AO:817
other type of physical land improvement (other than landscape
features, walls, fences, or pedestrian connections) may be located
in a required buffer yard.
f. Buffer yards are not included in the lot coverage calculation.
g. In situations where a buffer yard may already exist but does not
meet the current buffer yard requirements, the existing buffer yard
may be used to satisfy a portion of the current buffer yard
requirement with the approval of the Planning Director.
h. The width of an alley or driveway may be considered within the
distance requirement of the buffer yard with the approval of the
Planning Director.
i. The width of a watercourse or similar natural separation may be
included within the distance requirement of the buffer yard with
the approval of the Planning Director.
j. Each buffer yard shall contain one sign visible to the public
indicating that the property owner is responsible for maintenance
of the buffer yard and displaying the property owner's name and
contact information. This sign must be between one and two square
feet in area with dark, legible lettering upon a light background
and containing no advertising.
k. Buffer yards shall not include any part of any public right-of-way,
and no buffering wall, fence, or landscaping shall in be installed
within any public right of way.
l. Enforcement. All areas required to be landscaped by this
Subsection S. are subject to inspection and monitoring. This
maintenance includes weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning,
mowing, edging, mulching, painting, and other maintenance as
needed. Areas not in compliance with the requirements of this
ordinance or not in compliance with the approved buffering and
landscaping site plan will be subject to enforcement actions
pursuant to Section 26 of this zoning ordinance. These actions
include the City hiring a contractor to do the required landscape or
painting work and backcharging the property owner for the cost of
this work.
4. Site plan required. A site plan must be submitted to the Planning
Department for review and approval as part of the development
proposal. The site plan may be included as part of an overall
development plan for the lot. The site plan must depict the following:
a. The entire lot to be developed and at least portions of all abutting
lots.
b. All streets and alleys, whether public or private, adjacent to the lot.
c. Any natural barriers, such as watercourses or grade changes.
SECTION 25.S WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.S
AO:818
d. (Reserved)
e. (Reserved)
f. Zoning of the lot to be developed and all adjacent lots.
g. Location and dimensions of the buffer yard.
h. Profile drawing of any walls or fences included in the buffer yard.
i. Identification and location of any landscaping included in the buffer
yard.
j. Identification of materials used in any fence or wall included in the
buffer yard.
5. Applicability to non-conforming uses. Proposed modifications to a
required buffer yard adjacent to any non-conforming use, based on
zoning, may be considered by the Planning Director and the City
Forester.
6. Irregularly-shaped lots. Consideration will be given for required buffer
yards on irregular, narrow or shallow lots. Modifications to the required
buffer yard may be considered by the Planning Director and the City
Forester with the submittal of drawings depicting how the design will
meet the intent of Subsection S.
7. Grade differential. Consideration will be given for required buffer yards
that are significantly above or below the finished grade of the adjacent
property. Modifications to the required buffer yard may be considered
by the Planning Director and the City Forester with the submittal of
drawings depicting how the design will meet the intent of the
ordinance.
8. Determination of buffer requirement. The buffer requirements for
development on individual lots will be determined by the Planning
Director, in accordance with Table 1 of this Subsection S.
9. Site plan approval. Assessment of the amount of screening required will
be based upon the treatment of height, bulk, and density at the edge of
the proposed development. The following criteria should be considered
in site design:
a. Open space setbacks. By providing an open space buffer between
conflicting land uses, conflicts can often be avoided. The width of
the buffer required will depend on the extent of other measures
applied. To work effectively, the purpose, use and maintenance of
the open space buffer must be clearly defined.
b. Orientation. The orientation of buildings and activities in the two
land uses can be effective in creating more natural and less abrupt
or artificial buffers. The buildings can create an effective buffer if
constructed back to back, thus orienting views, access, and
SECTION 25.S ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.S
AO:819
principal activities away from the other land use. However, a
hazardous and unaesthetic "no man's land" must not be created in
the process. Some appropriate use must be given to the intervening
space. An entire site plan can be oriented so least compatible
activities and functions are placed furthest from the common
boundary between land uses, and those most compatible, near that
boundary.
c. Architectural compatibility. In addition to the architectural
considerations involved in mitigation through orientation, the
materials, colors, scale and prominence of buildings in adjacent
land uses can be coordinated so there is a gradual transition from
one land use to another, rather than a sharp and displeasing
contrast. The architectural compatibility should rise from a total
consideration of the function of each land use and the function of
the space between them.
d. Circulation. Streets and parking areas can often serve to reduce
certain types of land use conflicts.
e. Nuisance factors. Loading and traffic areas, noise, dust, lighting,
and such activities that may be disruptive to adjacent uses should
result in a site plan and buffer that take those nuisances into
consideration by locating away from less intense land uses and
adding greater buffering to the site. A site plan needs to be
provided indicating buffering that mitigates these nuisances.
Table 1: Buffer Yard Requirements
SECTION 25.S WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.S
AO:820
Buffered Zones Description of Buffer
Between R-3/R-4/R-5/R-7 and R-1/ Buffering shall consist of 1 of the following:
R-2/R-6 and between any C and
any A, R, or P
1. A 6-foot solid wood or vinyl fence or a masonry or
concrete wall, of commercial grade that is high quality,
decorative, and weather-proof. 10% of the total screening
surface may be composed of (a) openings, each having a
maximum area of 24 square inches, or (b) materials other
than masonry or concrete which may contain openings
having a maximum dimension of 9 inches in height or
width;
2. A hedgerow of various evergreen shrubs which will
normally grow to a height required to adequately buffer
developments. All plants should have a minimum height
at the time of planting of 1/2 the required screening
height;
3. A 6-foot solid wood or vinyl fence or a masonry or
concrete wall, as specified in alternative 1, and evergreen
trees. Such trees should be a minimum of 2 inches in
trunk diameter, at least 6 feet in height and planted 10
feet to 12 feet on center;
4. Landscaped earthen berms of a minimum height as
needed to buffer developments. Side slopes of berms
should have a minimum of 4 feet of horizontal distance for
each 1 foot of height. Berms should contain necessary
drainage provisions as required by the City;
5. Large deciduous or coniferous trees. Such trees should
be a minimum of 2 inches in trunk diameter, 15 feet in
height, and planted 15 feet to 20 feet on center;
6. Any combination of Alternatives 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 so as to
provide screening adequate to buffer developments.
Between R-5 and any other Zone Exterior yard pursuant to the existing exterior yard
requirements for R-5: Mobile Home Court Districts in
Section 15.N.4.b(v)(b) (1) and (2) of this ordinance, plus a
4-foot to 6-foot high opaque fence of weatherproof
material, with pilasters, must separate any driveway/
access road and uncovered parking areas of R-5 from any
abutting P, A, or R, lot.
Between M-1 or M-3 and any C 5-foot to 7-foot high opaque fence of weatherproof
material, with pilasters; continuous line of shrubs;
distance between fence and property line less than 6 feet
or 5-foot to 7-foot high hurricane fence; continuous line of
shrubs, distance between fence and property line 12 feet
or greater.
SECTION 25.S ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.S
AO:821
SECTION 25.T. Beverage kiosks.
Buffered Zones Description of Buffer
Between M-2 and any C 6-foot to 8-foot high masonry wall; a line of trees spaced
to break up the massive look of the wall; distance
between wall and property line 10 feet or less OR 6-foot
to 8-foot high hurricane fence; continuous line of
evergreen trees; distance between fence and property
line greater than 20 feet
Between any M and any R Pursuant to existing buffer requirements for M1: Light
Industrial; M-2: Heavy Industrial; and M-3: Industrial
Park Districts in Sections 22.N, 23.N and 24.N of this
ordinance.
NOTE 1: A "continuous line of shrubs" means shrubs spaced so that their crowns at mature
height touch. Mature shrub height should not exceed 75% of the height of the buffering wall
or fence.
NOTE 2: A "continuous line of trees" means trees spaced so that trees are separated by no
more than the average crown diameter at maturity.
NOTE 3: A "continuous line of evergreen trees" means evergreen trees spaced so that the
widest portions of the trees at maturity touch.
NOTE 4: The material in an "opaque fence of weatherproof material" must be approved by the
Planning Director.
10. Enforcement.
a. Continuing maintenance obligation. All buffer yard elements must
be maintained. Plants must be cared for and maintained in a
healthy condition, free of diseases, pests, weeds and litter. This
maintenance must include weeding, watering, fertilizing, pruning,
mowing, edging, mulching and other maintenance as needed and in
accordance with acceptable horticultural practices. Dead plants
shall be removed and replaced. Plant replacements must occur in a
timely manner and no later than the beginning of the next growing
season. Structural elements must be maintained as structurally
sound and aesthetically appropriate.
b. Inspection and monitoring. All buffer yards by this ordinance are
subject to inspection and monitoring. Buffer yards not in
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance will be subject
to enforcement actions pursuant to Section 26 of this zoning
ordinance. These enforcement actions include the City hiring a
contractor to do the required buffer yard work and backcharging
the property owner for the cost of this work.
1. Definition.
a. Beverage Kiosk: Kiosk selling beverages and associated items as
noted below, which is an accessory use on a previously developed
SECTION 25.S WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.T
AO:822
lot with a primary use, which meets all requirements as noted
below.
2. Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership,
or similar entity, to operate a beverage kiosk within any lands within the
City of Williston and/or the extraterritorial jurisdiction without
obtaining a beverage kiosk permit and otherwise complying with the
provisions provided herein.
3. Requirements.
a. Bond.
1. A $10,000 site bond must be secured and maintained on the
property.
b. Structure.
1. Structures shall not exceed 200 square feet in size. All
structures must be located on improved asphalt or concrete
surface, be anchored to resist accidental movement and be
placed upon secured footings as per Building Department
requirements. No structure shall have an axle. Enclosed
trailers must remove the axle, be secured to resist accidental
movement, with all related supports cosmetically covered with
an approved skirting material.
c. Access and parking.
1. Drive-thru facilities need room for a minimum of two vehicles
to stack behind a vehicle at the window. Walk up window
service requires two parking spaces per window. One parking
spaces is required for each employee.
2. All access, stacking space, and associated parking must be
paved with concrete or hot mix asphalt.
d. Placement.
1. Structures shall be placed in a manner so as not to interfere
with normal vehicle and pedestrian circulation patterns or
required emergency access. Nor shall such structures be
placed in manner that eliminates or interferes with the use of
required parking spaces, driveways, or accesses.
e. Building permit.
1. Building permit and site plan review required through the
Building Department.
f. Standards of operation.
1. Skirting. Units are required to be skirted and winterized.
SECTION 25.T ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.T
AO:823
2. Waste handling. Sites must be kept clean of trash and litter.
Wastewater, including all liquid wastes, gray water and mop
water must be discharged into an Upper Missouri District
Health Unit or North Dakota Department of Health approved
on-site sewage disposal or holding system, or other Upper
Missouri District Health Unit or North Dakota Department of
Health approved disposal site. Dumping or disposal of waste at
other than approved specific sites shall result in fines or
removal of the facility.
3. Fire suppression. All vending facilities must include an
appropriate fire suppression mechanism. Fire extinguishers
and/or other suppression system components must be checked
and certified annually by a license service provider. All vending
facilities permitted under this Subsection shall be subject to
inspection at any time during hours of vending facility
operation by the City Fire Department and other City
Departments charged with enforcement or administration of
this Subsection.
4. Condition and maintenance. The kiosk must at all times
maintain an orderly appearance and be free of debris. All
exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a clean and sound
condition in both material and finish and free of nonpermanent
attachments.
Vendors shall maintain their facility by allowing only articles
necessary for operation and maintenance of the facility to be
stored there and shall prohibit use of any portion of the facility
as living or sleeping quarters.
Any new kiosks permitted after January 23, 2018, must
conform to the style or decor of the principal building.
5. Beverages permitted to be sold: coffee, tea, other non-alcoholic
beverages.
6. Food permitted to be sold: individually pre-packaged items.
7. Items prohibited from being sold: tobacco products, alcoholic
beverages, any food item that requires on-site preparation, any
non-food or non-beverage item.
g. Utilities.
1. All facilities shall be self-contained and will not be permitted to
connect to any municipal utilities. Electric generators are not
permitted other than for emergency backup power. Any
electric service must meet state requirements. All facilities
must provide a plan detailing utilities, disposal of sewage,
wastewater, gray or black water, and a plan for employee
SECTION 25.T WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.T
AO:824
SECTION 25.U. Mobile businesses.
restroom breaks. This plan must be received and approved by
the City Building Department before the permit is issued.
h. State health code compliance.
1. All facilities must adhere to the current North Dakota
Requirements for Food and Beverage Establishments in the
preparation and service of the beverages.
i. Zoning.
1. Coffee beverage kiosks described in Subsection T.1 above shall
be permitted in C-1: Neighborhood Commercial, C-2 (General
Commercial), C-3 (Restricted Commercial), and M-1 (Light
Industrial) zones only.
j. Yearly Inspection.
1. Each permitted kiosk shall undergo a yearly inspection by the
Building Department to ensure all items above are in
compliance.
4. License and renewal fees.
a. Use permit fees.
1. The following fees are established for each type of operation:
Beverage Kiosk: $1,000 per year.
5. Exceptions. Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed so as to be
retroactive to any existing beverage kiosks as of the effective date of
this Subsection.
6. Penalty. The City of Williston reserves the right to revoke or terminate
any permit for beverage kiosks at any time by giving 30 days' written
notice of such revocation or termination, except that the City may, at its
election, revoke or terminate the permit at any time without giving any
notice if the owner fails to comply with or abide by each and all of the
terms and conditions of the permit. This Subsection shall become
effective upon final passage and approval. Any violation of this
Subsection shall result in a civil penalty of $1,000 per week.
7. Effective date. This Subsection shall be in full force and effect upon its
final passage and approval.53
1. Definitions.
a. Mobile business or mobile commercial business. A mobile
motorized or non-motorized vehicle or trailer, not being operated
as an accessory component to an existing permanent business
53.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 958 adopted 10-9-2012, Ord. No. 1073 adopted 1-23-2018.
SECTION 25.T ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.U
AO:825
establishment, whose business operation is conducted outside of
a permanent building and entirely within the mobile unit, for the
sales of merchandise or other professional services for public
service only. Mobile business or mobile commercial business does
not include mobile food vendors.
b. Service, private. The transaction of goods or other professional
services rendered or made available to private clients, through
previously arranged service transactions and not made available
for the general public.
c. Service, professional. A business operation which provides services
related to a specific occupational trade, which requires state
certification or licensing.
d. Service, public. The transaction of goods or other professional
services rendered or made available to the general public.
2. Purpose. The intent of this Subsection U. is to preserve and improve the
quality of life within the City of Williston by providing permanent
infrastructure developments as prescribed in the City's Comprehensive
Plan. Furthermore this Subsection seeks to prohibit those mobile
businesses that do not have a permanent site and physical address to
base their business operation out of and who intend to operate beyond
the parameters of the allowable uses, home occupations, or temporary
uses as identified in the City of Williston's Zoning Code.
3. Violations.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership,
or similar entity to operate a mobile commercial business/mobile
business within the City limits and the extra-territorial jurisdiction.
b. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or similar entity who
disobeys, neglects, omits, tries willfully to circumvent the intent of
this Subsection, refuses to comply with this Subsection, or resists
enforcement of any of its provisions shall be guilty of a Class B
Misdemeanor.
c. Class B Misdemeanors shall consist of a fine not exceeding $1,500
or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day in violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
4. Exemptions.
a. Mobile businesses operating under the provisions of an approved
Temporary Use Permit.
b. Mobile businesses operations participating in events organized and
managed by a fair association, convention bureau, or other political
subdivision approved by the City of Williston in which mobile
SECTION 25.U WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.U
AO:826
SECTION 25.V. Fabric structures.
In M-1: Light Industrial and M-2: Heavy Industrial, fabric structures
(industrial tent structures) may be utilized for inert industrial storage. If a
property is located along the Highway 1804 or Highway 2/85 corridor, such
fabric structures must be located at least 300 feet from the right-of-way.
Such structures to be utilized as permanent storage must meet all building
and fire codes for permanent buildings. The fabric must be maintained in
good condition. Such structures regardless of use are not permitted in any
other zone.
SECTION 25.W. Wireless communication facilities.
businesses are invited such as but not limited to the Chokecherry
Festival, Band Day, Holiday Lights, and Clean City.
c. Mobile business operations recognized by the City to have been
operating and in existence at the time of the City's adoption of
Ordinance Nos. 974 and 990, an ordinance establishing a
temporary moratorium prohibiting the use of future mobile
commercial businesses, which was approved by the City
Commission on September 24, 2013 and up until the adoption of
this Ordinance No. 982, shall be exempt from Ordinance No. 982
until January 1, 2016, at which time the exemption described
herein shall sunset.
(i) After January 1, 2016, all mobile commercial businesses,
whether previously exempt in accordance with Subsection
U.4.c shall be brought into compliance by January 1, 2016.
(ii) Any mobile commercial business not in compliance with
Ordinance No. 982 by January 1, 2016 shall be deemed to have
violated Ordinance No. 982 and subject to enforcement
described in Subsection U.3 Violations.
5. Effective date. The effective date of this Subsection U. is September 24,
2014.
1. Purpose.
a. To protect the community's visual quality and safety while
facilitating the reasonable and balanced provision of wireless
communication services. More specifically, it is the City's goal to
minimize the visual impact of wireless communication facilities on
the community, particularly in and near residential zones;
b. To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare,
preserve the aesthetic character of the Williston community, and to
reasonably regulate the development and operation of wireless
communication facilities within the City to the extent permitted
under State and federal law;
SECTION 25.U ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:827
c. To minimize the impact of wireless communication facilities by
establishing standards for siting design and screening;
d. To preserve the opportunity for continued and growing service
from the wireless industry;
e. To accommodate the growing need and demand for wireless
communication services;
f. To establish clear guidelines and standards and an orderly process
for review intended to facilitate the deployment of wireless
transmission equipment, to provide advanced communication
services to the City, its residents, businesses and community at
large;
g. To ensure City zoning regulations are applied consistently with
federal and State telecommunications laws, rules, regulations and
controlling court decisions;
h. To provide regulations which are specifically not intended to, and
shall not be interpreted or applied to, (1) prohibit or effectively
prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, (2)
unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent service
providers, or (3) regulate wireless communication facilities and
wireless transmission equipment on the basis of the environmental
effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such
emissions comply with the standards established by the Federal
Communications Commission; and
i. To create an administrative review committee to review all
applicable applications.
2. Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
a. Administrative review committee. A committee consisting of the
City Administrator, City Engineer, City Director of Planning and
Zoning, City Public Works Director, City Auditor, City Attorney, two
members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, two members of
the City Commission and any other representatives of the City
which the City Commission deems appropriate to review all
administrative permits.
b. Alternative tower structure. Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
c. Antenna. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that
send or receive electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog
signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:828
telecommunications signals or other communication signal.
"Antenna" also means one or more rods, panels, discs or similar
devices used for wireless communication, which may include, but is
not limited to, omni-directional antenna (whip), directional antenna
(panel), and parabolic antenna (dish).
d. Antenna array. A single or group of antenna elements and
associated mounting hardware, transmission lines, or other
appurtenances which share a common attachment device such as a
mounting frame or mounting support structure for the sole purpose
of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic waves.
e. Applicant. Any person engaged in the business of providing
wireless telecommunications services or the wireless
telecommunications infrastructure required for wireless
telecommunications services and who submits an application.
f. Backhaul network. The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or
long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
g. Base station. A structure or equipment at a fixed location that
enables Commission-licensed or authorized wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications
network. The term does not encompass a tower as defined in this
ordinance or any equipment associated with a tower.
(i) The term includes, but is not limited to, equipment associated
with wireless communications services such as private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed
wireless services and fixed wireless services such as
microwave backhaul.
(ii) The term includes, but is not limited to, radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup
power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration (including Distributed Antenna
Systems and small cell networks).
(iii) The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the
time the relevant application is filed with the City under this
Section 25.W, supports or houses equipment described in this
section that has been reviewed and approved under the
applicable zoning or siting process, or under North Dakota or
local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not
built for the sole or primary purpose of providing such support.
(iv) The term does not include any structure that, at the time the
relevant application is filed with the state or the City under this
section, does not support or house equipment described in this
section.
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:829
h. Collocation. The mounting or installation of transmission
equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of
transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for
communications purposes.
i. Distributed antenna systems or DAS. A network consisting of
transceiver equipment at a central hub site to support multiple
antenna locations throughout the desired coverage area.
j. Eligible facilities request. Any request for modification of an
existing tower or base station that does not substantially change
the physical dimensions of such tower or base station, involving:
(i) Collocation of new transmission equipment;
(ii) Removal of transmission equipment; or
(iii) Replacement of transmission equipment.
k. Eligible support structure. Any tower or base station as defined in
this section, provided that it is existing at the time the relevant
application is filed with the City under this section.
l. Existing. A tower or base station that has been reviewed and
approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under
another state or local regulatory review process, provided that a
tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not
in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is
existing for purposes of this definition.
m. FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration.
n. FCC: The Federal Communications Commission.
o. Macrocell. An antenna or antennas mounted on a tower, groundbased
mast, rooftops and other existing structures, at a height that
provides a clear view over the surrounding buildings and terrain.
p. Preexisting towers and preexisting antennas. Any tower or antenna
for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance, including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so
long as such approval is current and not expired.
q. Site. In relation to a tower that is not in the public right-of-way, the
current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding
the tower and any access or utility easements currently related to
the site. In relation to support structures other than towers, site
means an area in proximity to the structure and to other
transmission equipment already deployed on the ground.
r. Small cells. Compact wireless antennas and equipment containing
their own transceiver equipment and function like cells in a mobile
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:830
network but provide a smaller coverage area than traditional
macrocells.
s. Stealth design. Technology that minimizes the visual impact of
wireless communication facilities by camouflaging, disguising,
screening or blending into the surrounding environment. Examples
of stealth design include but are not limited to facilities disguised
as trees, flagpoles, bell towers, everyday items such as light poles,
and architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas. All stealth
designs should be substantially similar to the design of the
surrounding area.
t. Substantial change. A modification that substantially changes the
physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it meets any
of the following criteria:
(i) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it
increases the height of the tower by more than 10% or by the
height of one additional antenna array with separation from
the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet, whichever
is greater; for other eligible support structures, it increases the
height of the structure by more than 10% or more than 10 feet,
whichever is greater. Changes in height should be measured
from the original support structure in cases where
deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on
buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height
should be measured from the dimensions of the tower or base
station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances and any
modifications that were approved prior to the passage of the
Spectrum Act;
(ii) For towers other than towers in the public rights-of-way, it
involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the tower that
would protrude from the edge of the tower more than 20 feet,
or more than the width of the tower structure at the level of the
appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support
structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of
the structure that would protrude from the edge of the
structure by more than six feet;
(iii) For any eligible support structure, it involves installation of
more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for
the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for
towers in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves
installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if
there are no preexisting ground cabinets associated with the
structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that
are more than 10% larger in height or overall volume than any
other ground cabinets associated with the structure;
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:831
(iv) It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current
site;
(v) It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible
support structure; or
(vi) It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting
approval of the construction or modification of the eligible
support structure or base station equipment, provided
however that this limitation does not apply to any modification
that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed
the thresholds identified in paragraphs t(i) through (iv) above.
u. Tower. Any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of
supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their
associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for
wireless communications services including, but not limited to,
private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed
wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave
backhaul, and the associated site.
v. Tower height: The vertical distance measured from the base of the
tower structure at grade to the highest point of the structure
including the antenna.
w. Transmission equipment. Equipment that facilitates transmission
for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication
service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply.
The term includes equipment associated with wireless
communications services including, but not limited to, private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed
wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave
backhaul.
x. Utility support structure. Utility poles or utility towers supporting
electrical, telephone, cable or other similar facilities; street light
standards; pedestrian light standards; traffic light structures;
traffic sign structures; or water towers.
y. Wireless communication facilities or WCF. A staffed or unstaffed
facility or location for the transmission and/or reception of radio
frequency (RF) signals or other wireless communications or other
signals for commercial communications purposes, typically
consisting of one or more antennas or group of antennas, a tower or
attachment support structure, transmission cables and other
transmission equipment, and an equipment enclosure or cabinets.
z. Wireless support structure. A structure that exists at the time an
application is submitted and is capable of supporting the
attachment or installation of transmission equipment in compliance
with applicable codes, including but not limited to water towers,
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:832
buildings, and other structures, whether within or outside the
public right-of-way. Wireless support structure does not include a
tower or existing base station.
3. Applicability.
a. New Towers, Antennas, DAS, and Small Cells. All new towers,
antennas, DAS, and small cells in the City shall be subject to these
regulations, except as otherwise provided herein.
b. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
ordinance, except as otherwise provided herein.
c. AM or FM Array. For purposes of implementing this ordinance, an
AM or FM array, consisting of one or more tower units and
supporting ground system which functions as one AM or FM
broadcasting antenna, shall be considered one tower.
Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall be
measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the
AM or FM array. Additional tower units may be added within the
perimeter of the AM array or FM by right.
d. Exempt facilities. The following are exempt from this Section 25.W:
(i) FCC licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities;
(ii) Satellite earth stations, dishes and/or antennas used for
private television reception not exceeding one meter in
diameter;
(iii) A government-owned WCF installed upon the declaration of a
state of emergency by the federal, state or local government,
or a written determination of public necessity by the City;
except that such facility must comply with all federal and state
requirements. The WCF shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section for up to one month after the duration of the state
of emergency;
(iv) A temporary, commercial WCF installed for providing coverage
of a special event such as news coverage or sporting event,
subject to administrative approval by the City. The WCF shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section for up to one
week before and after the duration of the special event.
4. Distributed Antenna Systems and Small Cells.
a. Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS) and small cells are allowed in
all zones provided the applicant complies with all federal laws
(such as the Americans with Disabilities Act) and state laws and
requirements, and provided the applicant complies with this
section.
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:833
b. DAS and small cells in all zones are subject to approval via
administrative review by the Administrative Review Committee if
either of the following conditions are met:
(i) Proposed DAS or small cell is to be placed on an existing or
replacement structure in the right-of-way or on an existing
structure or replacement on private property. A replacement
structure shall not be considered to be a new structure, as long
as the structure is in the same location and of the same design
as the existing structure that is being replaced.
(ii) Proposed DAS or small cell is in the right-of-way on a new
tower or structure in a spot where there was no previous
structure and which incorporates stealth design.
c. DAS and small cells in all zones are subject to approval via the
special use permit if the conditions above are not met, or the
following conditions are met:
(i) Proposed DAS or small cell is to be placed on a new tower on
private property;
(ii) Proposed DAS or small cell incorporates a new pole in the
right-of-way without stealth design.
d. Multiple Site DAS and Small Cells.
(i) A single permit may be used for multiple distributed antennas
and small cells that are part of a larger overall DAS network.
(ii) A single permit may be used for multiple small cells spaced to
provide wireless coverage in a contiguous area.
5. General Requirements for DAS/Small Cell and Macrocell Towers,
Including Those with Administrative Approval.
a. Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an
existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation
of an antenna or tower on such lot.
b. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with district development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, lot-coverage
requirements, and the other such requirements, the dimensions of
the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers
may be located on leased parcels within such lot.
c. Inventory of existing sites. Upon request, any new applicant for an
antenna and/or tower shall provide to the City Planner an inventory
of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or
antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the City or
within one mile of the border thereof, including specific
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:834
information about the location, height, and design of each tower.
The City Planner may share such information with other applicants
applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under
this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas
within the jurisdiction of the City, provided, however that the City
Planner is not, by sharing such information, in any way
representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable.
d. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(i) Macrocell towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish
or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness to the extent
possible to the reasonable satisfaction of the Administrative
Review Committee.
(ii) Small cells and DAS shall maintain a finish that is substantially
similar to the pole or surrounding poles and which contributes
to the stealth design of such poles.
(iii) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
(iv) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment
must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely
compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to
make the antenna and related equipment as visually
unobtrusive as possible.
(v) Landscaping should be provided in a similar fashion to
Subsection W.8.
e. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the
lighting alternatives and design chosen must cause the least
disturbance to the surrounding views.
f. State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any
other agency of the state or federal government with the authority
to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations
are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed
by this Section 25.W shall bring such towers and antennas into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six
months of the effective date of such standards and regulations,
unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by the
controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:835
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
g. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity
of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable industry standards for towers. If,
upon inspection, the City concludes that a tower fails to comply
with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons
or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the
tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
h. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities
located in the City irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
i. Notice. For purposes of this Section 25.W, any special use request,
variance request, or appeal of a special use shall require notice to
all abutting property owners and all property owners of properties
that are located within the corresponding separation distance
listed in Subsection W.8., Table 2, in addition to any notice
otherwise required by the zoning ordinance.
j. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower, unless
required under generally applicable health, safety and welfare
regulations.
k. Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply with
the requirements of this Section.
l. Multiple antenna/tower plan. The City encourages the users of
towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval of
multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
m. Visual impact. All WCF shall be sited and designed to minimize
adverse visual impacts on surrounding properties and the traveling
public to the greatest extent reasonably possible, consistent with
the proper functioning of the WCF. Such WCFs and equipment
enclosures shall be integrated through location and design to blend
in with the existing characteristics of the site. Such WCFs shall also
be designed to either resemble the surrounding landscape and
other natural features where located in proximity to natural
surroundings, or be compatible with the built environment,
through matching and complimentary existing structures and
specific design considerations such as architectural designs,
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:836
height, scale, color and texture or be consistent with other uses and
improvements permitted in the relevant zone.
n. Use of stealth design/technology. The applicant shall make an
affirmative showing as to why it is not employing stealth
technology. More specifically: Stealth design is required in
residential, commercial, and corridor zones, and concealment
techniques must be appropriate given the proposed location,
design, visual environment, and nearby uses, structures, and
natural features. Stealth design shall be designed and constructed
to substantially conform to surrounding building designs or natural
settings, so as to be visually unobtrusive. Stealth design that relies
on screening wireless communication facilities in order to reduce
visual impact must screen all substantial portions of the facility
from view as needed as determined by the administrative review
committee. Stealth and concealment techniques do not include
incorporating faux-tree designs of a kind that are not native to the
State.
o. Building-mounted WCFs.
(i) In residential, commercial, and corridor zones, all transmission
equipment shall be concealed within existing architectural
features to the maximum extent feasible. Any new
architectural features proposed to conceal the transmission
equipment shall be designed to mimic the existing underlying
structure, shall be proportional to the existing underlying
structure or conform to the underlying use and shall use
materials in similar quality, finish, color and texture as the
existing underlying structure.
(ii) In residential zones, all roof-mounted transmission equipment
shall be set back from all roof edges to the maximum extent
feasible consistent with the need for "line-of-sight"
transmission and reception of signals.
(iii) In all other zones, antenna arrays and supporting transmission
equipment shall be installed so as to camouflage, disguise or
conceal them to make them closely compatible with and blend
into the setting and/or host structure.
p. WCFs in the public rights-of-way.
(i) Preferred locations. Facilities shall be located as far from
residential uses as feasible, and on main corridors and
arterials to the extent feasible. See Subsection W.6.b for
preferred tower locations.
(ii) Pole-mounted or tower-mounted equipment. All pole-mounted
or tower-mounted transmission equipment shall be mounted as
close as possible to the tower so as to reduce the overall visual
profile to the maximum extent feasible. All tower-mounted
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:837
transmission equipment shall be painted with flat, nonreflective
colors that blend with the visual environment to the
extent possible to the reasonable satisfaction of the committee.
(iii) For all WCFs to be located within the right-of-way, prior to
submitting for a permit, the applicant must have a valid
franchise or right-of-way agreement.
q. Accessory uses.
(i) Accessory uses shall be limited to such structures and
equipment that are necessary for transmission functions, and
shall not include broadcast studios, offices, vehicles or
equipment storage, or other uses not essential to the
transmission function.
(ii) All accessory buildings shall be constructed of building
materials equal to or better than those of the primary building
on the site and shall be subject to site plan approval.
(iii) No equipment shall be stored or parked on the site of the
tower, unless used in direct support of the antennas or the
tower or antennas are being repaired.
(iv) All equipment buildings shall be submitted as part of a WCF
permit application and shall include a dimensioned site plan.
Such buildings must follow all applicable codes, including
obtainment of a building permit if required.
r. Accessory equipment. In residential and commercial zones, all
accessory equipment located at the base of a WCF shall be located
or placed (at the applicant's choice) in an existing building,
underground, or in an equipment shelter that is (a) designed to
blend in with existing surroundings, using architecturally
compatible construction and colors; and (b) located so as to be
unobtrusive as possible consistent with the proper functioning of
the WCF. All accessory equipment shall be submitted as part of a
WCF permit application and shall include a dimensioned site plan.
s. Site design flexibility. Individual WCF sites vary in the location of
adjacent buildings, existing trees, topography and other local
variables. By mandating certain design standards, there may result
a project that could have been less intrusive if the location of the
various elements of the project could have been placed in more
appropriate locations within a given site. Therefore, the WCF and
supporting equipment may be installed so as to best camouflage,
disguise them, or conceal them, to make the WCF more closely
compatible with and blend into the setting and/or host structure,
upon approval by the City.
t. Structural assessment. The owner of a proposed tower shall have a
structural assessment of the tower conducted by a professional
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:838
engineer, licensed in the State of North Dakota, which shall be
submitted with the application for a permit.
6. Tower sharing, collocation and preferred tower locations.
a. Tower sharing and collocation. New WCF facilities must, to the
maximum extent feasible, collocate on existing towers or other
structures of a similar height to avoid construction of new towers,
unless precluded by zoning constraints such as height, structural
limitations, inability to obtain authorization by the owner of an
alternative location, or where an alternative location will not meet
the service coverage objectives of the applicant. Applications for a
new tower must address all existing towers or structures of a
similar height within 1/2 mile of the proposed site as follows: (a) by
providing evidence that a request was made to locate on the
existing tower or other structure, with no success; or (b) by
showing that locating on the existing tower or other structure is
infeasible.
b. Preferred DAS/small cell tower locations. All proposed new small
cell and DAS towers are permitted only after application of the
following siting priorities, ordered from most-preferred (1) leastpreferred
(8):
(1) On an existing structure in a commercial or industrial zone;
(2) On City-owned or operated property and facilities not in the
downtown or residential zones and not including right-of-way
and right-of-way facilities;
(3) In an alley;
(4) On an existing structure in a public right-of-way in a
commercial or industrial zone;
(5) On the property or structure of an education facility, regardless
of zoning;
(6) On a new stealth designed structure in a public right-of-way in
a commercial or industrial zone;
(7) On an existing building in a residential zone;
(8) On an new stealth designed structure in a public right-of-way
in a residential zone;
For small cell and DAS, the applicant must address the City's
preferred tower locations with a detailed explanation justifying
why a site of higher priority was not selected. If reasonably
requested, the applicant for a tower shall address these
preferences in an alternative sites analysis.
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:839
c. Gap in coverage or capacity. If reasonably requested by the City,
the applicant shall demonstrate the following with a new tower
application:
(i) A significant gap in the coverage, capacity, or technologies of
the service network exists such that users are regularly unable
to connect to the service network, or are regularly unable to
maintain a connection, or are unable to achieve reliable
wireless coverage within a building;
(ii) The gap can only be filled through an exception to one or more
of the standards in this Section 25.W; and
(iii) The exception is narrowly tailored to fill the service gap such
that the wireless communication facility conforms to this
chapter's standards to the greatest extent possible.
d. Residential zones. For a new tower proposed to be located in a
residential zone or within 200 feet of a residential zone, unless the
proposal qualifies as a preferred location on City-owned or
operated property or facilities, the applicant must also demonstrate
that the manner in which it proposes to fill the significant gap in
coverage, capacity, or technologies of the service network is the
least intrusive on the values that this Section 25.W seeks to protect.
e. DAS/small cell alternative sites analysis.
(i) For small cell and DAS, the applicant must address the City's
preferred tower locations with a detailed explanation justifying
why a site of higher priority was not selected. If reasonably
requested by the City, the City's tower location preferences
must be addressed in a clear and complete written alternative
site analysis that shows at least two higher ranked, alternative
sites considered that are in the geographic range of the service
coverage objectives of the applicant, together with a factually
detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between each
alternative candidate and the proposed site that explains the
substantive reasons why the applicant rejected the alternative
candidate.
(ii) A complete alternative sites analysis provided under this
subsection may include less than two alternative sites so long
as the applicant provides a factually detailed written rationale
for why it could not identify at least two potentially available
higher ranked, alternative sites.
(iii) Required description of coverage objectives. For purposes of
disqualifying potential collocations and/or alternative sites for
the failure to meet the applicant's service coverage objectives
the applicant will provide (a) a description of its objective,
whether it be to close a gap or address a deficiency in
coverage, capacity, frequency and/or technology; (b) detailed
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:840
technical maps or other exhibits with clear and concise RF data
to illustrate that the objective is not met using the alternative
(whether it be collocation or a more preferred location); and
(c) a description of why the alternative (collocation or a more
preferred location) does not meet the objective.
f. DAS and small cells. The City encourages but it does not require
the use of DAS and small cells.
g. Radio frequency emissions compliance report. A written report will
be prepared, signed and sealed by a North Dakota-licensed
professional engineer or a competent employee of the applicant,
which assesses whether the proposed WCF demonstrates
compliance with the exposure limits established by the FCC.
h. Collocation consent. A written statement will be signed by a person
with the legal authority to bind the applicant and the project owner,
which indicates whether the applicant is willing to allow other
transmission equipment owned by others to collocate with the
proposed wireless communication facility whenever technically and
economically feasible and aesthetically desirable.
7. Permitted uses.
a. General. The uses listed in this Subsection W.7 are deemed to be
permitted uses and shall require administrative approval by the
Administrative Review Committee.
b. Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
(i) Antennas or towers located on fee simple property owned,
leased, or otherwise controlled by the City, not including
rights-of-way, provided a license or lease authorizing such
antenna or tower has been approved by the City, are subject to
approval via administrative review by the Administrative
Review Committee.
(a) Said uses must comply with stealth, screening and
landscaping requirements contained within this Section
25.W.
(ii) DAS and small cells in all zones are subject to approval via
administrative review by the Administrative Review Committee
if either of the following conditions are met:
(a) Proposed DAS of small cell is to be placed on an existing or
replacement structure in the right-of-way or on an existing
structure or replacement on private property. A
replacement structure shall not be considered to be a new
structure, as long as the replacement structure is in the
same location and of the same design as the existing
structure that is being replaced.
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:841
(b) Proposed DAS or small cell is in the right-of-way on a new
tower or structure in a spot where there was no previous
structure and which incorporates stealth design.
8. Special use permit requirements for small cell, DAS, and macrocell
towers.
a. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
special use permits for towers or antennas by the Planning and
Zoning Commission:
(i) If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under Subsection
W.7 of this Section, then a special use permit shall be required
for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna
in all areas that allow such construction or placement as a
special permitted use.
(ii) DAS and small cells in all zones are subject to approval via the
special use permit if the conditions above are not met, or the
following conditions are met:
(a) Proposed DAS or small cell is to be placed on a new tower
on private property.
(b) Proposed DAS or small cell incorporates a new pole in the
right-of-way without stealth design.
(iii) Applications for special use permits under this Subsection W.
shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of Section
27 of the zoning ordinance, except as modified in this
Subsection W.8.
(iv) In granting a special use permit, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may impose conditions to the extent the Planning
and Zoning Commission concludes such conditions are
necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower or facilities on adjoining properties.
(v) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be
certified by a licensed professional engineer in North Dakota.
(vi) An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the
information described in this Subsection and a non-refundable
fee as established by resolution of the City Commission to
reimburse the City for the costs of reviewing the application.
b. Documentation. Applications submitted under this Subsection for
towers and other WCF transmission equipment shall include the
following materials:
(i) Requirements for FCC documentation. The applicant shall
provide a copy of the applicant's FCC license or registration.
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:842
(ii) Visual analysis. A color visual analysis that includes to-scale
visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after
construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least
four angles, together with a map that shows the location of
each view.
(iii) Design justification. A clear and complete written analysis that
explains how the proposed design complies with the applicable
design standards under this Subsection to the maximum extent
feasible. A complete design justification must identify all
applicable design standards under this Subsection and provide
a factually detailed reason why the proposed design either
complies or cannot feasibly comply.
(iv) Noise study. A noise study, if requested by the City, for the
proposed WCF and all associated equipment.
(v) Other published materials. All other information or materials
that the City may reasonably require, from time to time, make
publicly available and designate as part of the application
requirements.
(vi) Information required. In addition to any information required
for applications for special use permits pursuant to Section 27
of the zoning ordinance, applicants for a special use permit for
a tower shall also submit the following information:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type,
height and width of the proposed tower, on-site land uses
and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when
adjacent to other municipalities), Master Plan
classification of the site and all properties within the
applicable separation distances set forth in Subsection
W.8, adjacent roadways, a depiction of all proposed
transmission equipment, proposed means of access,
setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the
proposed tower and any other structures, topography,
parking, utility runs and other information deemed by the
City Planner to be necessary to assess compliance with
this Section.
(b) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(d) Upon request, new applicants should provide the
separation distance from other towers which shall be
shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:843
also identify the type of construction of the existing
tower(s).
(e) For macrocell towers, a landscape plan showing specific
landscape materials.
(f) For macrocell towers, method of fencing, and finished
color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and
illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with all applicable federal,
state and local laws.
(h) A description of the suitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
new tower.
(i) A clear and complete written statement of purpose which
shall minimally include: (1) a description of the technical
objective to be achieved; (2) a to-scale map that identifies
the proposed site location and the targeted service area to
be benefited by the proposed project; and (3) full-color
signal propagation maps with objective units of signal
strength measurement that show the applicant's current
service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the
proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from
the proposed site without all adjacent sites. These
materials shall be reviewed and signed by a North Dakotalicensed
professional engineer or a qualified employee of
the applicant. The qualified employee of the applicant shall
submit his or her qualifications with the application.
c. Factors considered in granting special use permits for macrocell
towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of special use
permit applications pursuant to Section 27 of the zoning ordinance
the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the following
factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit,
although the Planning and Zoning Commission may waive or
reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria
if the Planning and Zoning Commission concludes that the goals of
this Section are better served thereby:
(i) Height of the proposed tower. Towers exceeding a height of 75
feet shall be able to accommodate collocation of one additional
provider at roughly equal or better capacity and position as the
applicant's antennas. Additional height to accommodate
additional collocation may be approved if the applicant submits
information certifying the tower has capacity for at least two
additional providers, at least one of which shall provide
roughly equal or better capacity and position as the applicant's
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:844
antennas for a like user. The applicant shall provide a letter
indicating their good faith intent to encourage collocation on
the tower. A lightning rod, not to exceed 10 feet in height, shall
not be included within the height limitations;
(ii) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(iii) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(iv) Surrounding topography;
(v) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(vi) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(vii) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(viii) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in this Section.
d. Availability of suitable existing macrocell, other structures, or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning and Zoning Commission that no existing tower, structure
or alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or
structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An
applicant shall submit information requested by the Planning and
Zoning Commission related to the availability of suitable existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology. Evidence
submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower, structure or
alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed
antenna may consist of any of the following:
(i) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(ii) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(iii) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(iv) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or
structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:845
(v) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are
presumed to be unreasonable.
(vi) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(vii) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a
small cell network using multiple low-powered transmitters/
receivers attached to a wireline system, is unsuitable. Cost of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
e. Macrocell setbacks. The following setback requirement shall apply
to all towers for which a special use permit is required; provided,
however, that the Planning and Zoning Commission may reduce the
standard setback requirement if the goals of this Section would be
better served thereby:
(i) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
f. Macrocell separation. The following separation requirements shall
apply to all towers and antennas for which a special use permit is
required; provided, however, that the Planning and Zoning
Commission may reduce the standard separation requirements if
the goals of this Section 25.W would be better served thereby.
(i) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the
tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated
areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided
in Table 1.
(b) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:846
Table 1:
Off-Site Use/Designated
Area Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex
residential units1
200 feet or 300% height of
tower whichever is greater
Vacant single-family or
duplex residentially zoned
land which is either platted
or has preliminary
subdivision plan approval
which is not expired
200 feet or 300% height of
tower2 whichever is greater
Vacant unplatted
residentially zoned lands3
100 feet or 100% height of
tower whichever is greater
Existing multi-family
residential units greater
than duplex units
100 feet or 100% height of
tower whichever is greater
Non-residentially zoned
lands or non-residential
uses
None; only setbacks apply
1Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for
living purposes.
2Separation measured from base of tower to closest
building setback line.
3Includes any unplatted residential use properties without
a valid preliminary subdivision plan or valid development
plan approval and any multi-family residentially zoned
land greater than duplex.
(ii) Separation distances between towers.
(a) Separation distances between towers shall be applicable
for and measured between the proposed tower and
preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be
measured by drawing or following a straight line between
the base of the existing tower and the proposed base,
pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The
separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as
shown in Table 2.
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:847
Table 2: Existing Towers - Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole 75
Feet in Height
or Greater
Monopole Less
Than 75 Feet in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole 75 Feet in
Height or Greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole Less than
75 Feet in height
750 750 750 750
g. Macrocell security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security
fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped
with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided however, that
the Planning Commission may waive such requirements, as it
deems appropriate.
h. Macrocell landscaping. The following requirements shall govern
the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special use permit
is required; provided, however, that the Planning Commission may
waive such requirements if the goals of this ordinance would be
better served thereby.
(i) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences.
(ii) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or
waived.
(iii) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
9. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any antenna or tower that
is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be
considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall
remove and reclaim the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from
the City notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove an
abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds to
remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense, including all costs
and attorneys' fees. Irrespective of any agreement between them to the
contrary, the owner of such unused facility and the owner of a building
or land upon which the WCF is located, shall be jointly and severally
responsible for the removal of abandoned WCFs. If there are two or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the tower.
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:848
10. Independent technical review. Although the City intends for City staff to
review administrative matters to the extent feasible, the City may retain
the services of independent experts of its choice to provide technical
and legal evaluation of permit applications for WCFs, including
administrative and special use permits. The experts' review may
include, but is not limited to (a) the accuracy and completeness of the
items submitted with the application; (b) the applicability of analysis
and techniques and methodologies proposed by the applicant; (c) the
validity of conclusions reached by the applicant; and (d) whether the
proposed WCF complies with the applicable approval criteria set forth
in this Section. The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent
consultant fees so long as the fees are reasonable and were incurred
completing work within the parameters set forth above, through a
deposit, estimated by the City, paid within 10 days of the City's request.
When the City requests such payment, the application shall be deemed
incomplete for purposes of application processing timelines until the
deposit is received. In the event that such costs and fees do not exceed
the deposit amount, the City shall refund any unused portion within 30
days after the final permit is released or, if no final permit is released,
within 30 days after the City receives a written request from the
applicant.
11. Nonconforming uses. Section 6 of the zoning ordinance shall apply to
nonconformities.
12. Final inspection.
a. A written statement of completion will only be granted upon
satisfactory evidence that the WCF was installed in substantial
compliance with the approved plans and photo simulations.
b. Failure to comply. If it is found that the WCF installation does not
substantially comply with the approved plans and photo
simulations, the applicant shall make any and all such changes
required to bring the WCF installation into compliance promptly
and in any event prior to putting the WCF in operation.
13. Compliance.
a. All wireless communication facilities must comply with all
standards and regulations of the FCC and any other State or
federal government agency with the authority to regulate wireless
communication facilities.
b. The site and wireless communication facilities, including all
landscaping, fencing and related transmission equipment must be
maintained at all times in a neat and clean manner and in
accordance with all approved plans.
c. All graffiti on wireless communications facilities must be removed
at the sole expense of the permittee after notification by the City to
the owner/operator of the WCF.
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:849
d. If any FCC, State or other governmental license or any other
governmental approval to provide communication services is ever
revoked as to any site permitted or authorized by the City, the
permittee must inform the City of the revocation within 30 days of
receiving notice of such revocation.
14. Indemnification. Each permit issued shall have as a condition of the
permit a requirement that the applicant defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the City and its officers, agents, employees, volunteers, and
contractors from any and all liability, damages, or charges (including
attorneys' fees and expenses) arising out of claims, suits, demands, or
causes of action as a result of, granting permit, construction, erection,
location, performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation,
replacement, removal, or restoration of the WCF.
15. Eligible facilities request applications.
a. Purpose. This Subsection W.15 implements Section 6409(a) of the
Spectrum Act, as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order
No. 14153, which requires a state or local government to approve
any Eligible Facilities Request for a modification of an existing
tower or base station that does not result in a substantial change to
the physical dimensions of such tower or base station. Eligible
Facilities Requests shall be governed solely by the provisions in this
Subsection W.15 and federal law.
b. Application review.
(i) Application. The City shall prepare and make publicly available
an application form which shall be limited to the information
necessary for the City to consider whether an application is an
Eligible Facilities Request. The City may not require an
applicant to submit any other documentation intended to
illustrate the need for any such wireless facilities or to justify
the business decision to modify such wireless facilities.
(ii) Review. Upon receipt of a complete application for an Eligible
Facilities Request pursuant to this Subsection, the City shall
review such application, make its final decision to approve or
disapprove the application, and advise the applicant in writing
of its final decision.
(iii) Timeframe for review. Within 60 days of the date on which an
applicant submits a complete application seeking approval of
an Eligible Facilities Request under this Subsection W.15, the
City shall review and act upon the application, subject to the
tolling provisions below.
(iv) Tolling of the timeframe for review. The sixty-day review period
begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled
only by mutual agreement between the City and the applicant,
or in cases where the City determines that the application is
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:850
incomplete. The timeframe for review is not tolled by a
moratorium on the review of applications.
(a) To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must
provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of
receipt of the application, specifically delineating all
missing documents or information required in the
application.
(b) The timeframe for review begins running again when the
applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to
the City's notice of incompleteness.
(c) Following a supplemental submission, the City shall notify
the applicant within 10 days that the supplemental
submission did not provide the information identified in
the original notice delineating missing information. The
timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this
Subsection. Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that were not delineated in the original notice
of incompleteness.
(v) Failure to act. In the event the City fails to approve or deny a
complete application under this Subsection within the
timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request
shall be deemed granted provided the applicant notifies the
City in writing after the review period has expired.
16. Collocation applications.
a. Purpose. This Subsection W.16 implements, in part, 47 U.S.C.
332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14153.
b. Application review.
(i) Application. The City shall prepare and make publicly available
an application form which shall be limited to the information
necessary for the City to consider whether an application is a
collocation request.
(ii) Review. Upon receipt of a complete application for a
collocation request pursuant to this Subsection, the City shall
review such application, make its final decision to approve or
disapprove the application, and advise the applicant in writing
of its final decision.
(iii) Timeframe for review-excluding small cells. Within 90 days of
the date on which an applicant submits a complete application
seeking approval of a collocation request under this
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:851
Subsection, the City shall review and act upon the application,
subject to the tolling provisions below.
(iv) Timeframe for review-small cells. Within 60 days of the date on
which an applicant submits a complete application seeking
approval of a collocation request under this Subsection, the
City shall review and act upon the application, subject to the
tolling provisions below.
(v) Tolling of the timeframe for review. The ninety-day review
period begins to run when the application is filed, and may be
tolled only by mutual agreement between the City and the
applicant, or in cases where the City determines that the
application is incomplete.
(a) To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must
provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of
receipt of the application, specifically delineating all
missing documents or information required in the
application.
(1) For small cells, the review timeframe is reset, not just
tolled, if the applicant is notified within 10 days after
submission that the application is incomplete.
(b) The timeframe for review begins running again, or in the
case of small cells, the timeframe for review resets, when
the applicant makes a supplemental submission in
response to the City's notice of incompleteness.
(c) Following a supplemental submission, the City shall notify
the applicant within 10 days that the supplemental
submission did not provide the information identified in
the original notice delineating missing information. The
timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this
Subsection. Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that were not delineated in the original notice
of incompleteness.
(vi) Failure to act. In the event the City fails to approve or deny a
complete application under this Subsection within the
timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the applicant
shall be entitled to pursue all remedies under applicable law.
17. New site or tower applications.
a. Purpose. This Subsection W.17 implements, in part, 47 U.S.C.
332(c)(7) of the Federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended,
as interpreted by the FCC in its Report and Order No. 14153.
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 25.W
AO:852
b. Application review.
(i) Application. The City shall prepare and make publicly available
an application form which shall be limited to the information
necessary for the City to consider whether an application is a
request for a new site or tower.
(ii) Review. Upon receipt of a complete application for a request
for a new site or tower pursuant to this Subsection, the City
shall review such application, make its final decision to
approve or disapprove the application, and advise the
applicant in writing of its final decision.
(iii) Timeframe for review-excluding small cells. Within 150 days of
the date on which an applicant submits a complete application
seeking approval of a request for a new site or tower under this
Subsection, the City shall review and act upon the application,
subject to the tolling provisions below.
(iv) Timeframe for review-small cells. Within 90 days of the date on
which an applicant submits a complete application seeking
approval of a request for a new structure under this
Subsection, the City shall review and act upon the application
subject to the tolling provisions below.
(v) Tolling of the timeframe for review. The 150-day review period
begins to run when the application is filed, and may be tolled
only by mutual agreement between the City and the applicant,
or in cases where the City determines that the application is
incomplete.
(a) To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the City must
provide written notice to the applicant within 30 days of
receipt of the application, specifically delineating all
missing documents or information required in the
application.
(1) For small cells, the review timeframe is reset, not just
tolled, if the applicant is notified within 10 days after
submission that the application is incomplete.
(b) The timeframe for review begins running again or in the
case of small cells the timeframe for review resets, when
the applicant makes a supplemental submission in
response to the City's notice of incompleteness.
(c) Following a supplemental submission, the City shall notify
the applicant within 10 days that the supplemental
submission did not provide the information identified in
the original notice delineating missing information. The
timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent
notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this
SECTION 25.W ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 25.W
AO:853
SECTION 26. Administration and enforcement. [Ord. No. 613, Ord.
No. 629, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 839, Ord. No. 850, Ord. No. 864,
Ord. No. 959, Ord. No. 1007, Ord. No. 1018]
Subsection. Second or subsequent notices of
incompleteness may not specify missing documents or
information that were not delineated in the original notice
of incompleteness.
(vi) Failure to act. In the event the City fails to approve or deny a
complete application under this Subsection within the
timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the applicant
shall be entitled to pursue all remedies under applicable law.
18. Application fees. In connection with the filing of an application, the
applicant shall pay a fee as determined by the fee schedule set by
Resolution 17-030.
19. Administrative review committee.
An Administrative Review Committee is hereby authorized to carry
out its responsibilities under this Section. The Administrative Review
Committee shall review all applications described under Subsection
W.4.b. As part of said review, notice shall be sent to all property owners
within 300 feet if inside City Limits, and within 1,000 feet if inside
the City's Extra Territorial Jurisdiction, of the proposed location. Said
property owners will have 14 days from the time of the notice to reply
with any comments. The applicant shall have an additional 14 days
to respond to any comments from the public to the Administrative
Review Committee. The Administrative Review Committee shall make a
determination in keeping with the timelines noted in Subsections W.15
through W.17 and based on all applicable Subsections of this Section
25.W.
20. Laws, rules and regulations. This Section 25.W shall be subject to all
applicable laws, rules and regulations.
21. Severability. The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections and
clauses of this Section 25.W are hereby declared to be severable. If any
part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
remainder of the Section shall not be affected thereby.
22. Conflicts. Any ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions
of this Section are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
23. Effective date. This Section shall take effect June 13, 2017.
A. Administrative official. The Building Official is designated by the City
Commission to enforce this ordinance. The City Planner is designated
by the City Commission to administer this ordinance. They may be
SECTION 25.W WILLISTON CODE SECTION 26
AO:854
provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City
Commission may direct.
If the Building Official shall find that any of the provisions of this
ordinance are being violated, the Building Official shall notify in writing
the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. The Building
Official shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings,
or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal
additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any
illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by
this ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provision.
B. Extension of code to extraterritorial jurisdiction. All Building and Fire
Codes, Ordinances, and Regulations, provisions or chapters and any
and all amendments thereto; Ordinance No. 574, also known as the
Subdivision Regulations of the City of Williston and any and all
amendments thereto which has been incorporated as Appendix C to the
Williston Code of Ordinances;
Ordinance No. 972, also known as the Stormwater Ordinance, and any
and all amendments thereto; and Resolution #13-127 and any and all
amendments or modifications thereto, are hereby made applicable to
all construction and development within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
of the City of Williston for the purpose of promoting health, safety and
welfare and to ensure proper and adequate planning and development
is completed to coincide with the goals of the City within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City, which shall specifically include,
but not be limited to, the following Ordinances:
1. Chapter 5 Art. I-XVI of the Williston Code of Ordinances, and any
and all amendments thereto;
2. Chapter 8 Art. I-III of the Williston Code of Ordinances, and any
and all amendments thereto;
3. Ordinance No. 574, also known as the Subdivision Regulations of
the City of Williston and any and all amendments thereto; and
4. Ordinance No, 972, also known as the Stormwater Ordinance, and
any and all amendments thereto; and
5. Resolution #13-127, also known as Policy for Workforce Housing
Facilities, and any and all amendments or modifications thereto.
C. (Reserved)
D. Building permits required. No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit,
issued by the Building Official. Except as exempted below, no building
or structure regulated by this ordinance or the State Building Code
SECTION 26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 26
AO:855
shall be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved,
improved, removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit
for each building or structure has first been obtained from the Building
Official. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official
except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance unless the
Building Official has received a written order from the Board of
Adjustments in the form of an administrative review, special permitted
use, or variance as provided by this ordinance. (See generally Section
27 and 28). In accordance to the State Building Code, a building permit
shall not required for the following:
1. One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage
sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the projected roof
area does not exceed 120 square feet.
2. Fences not over seven feet high.
3. Movable cases, counters, and partitions not over five feet nine
inches high.
4. Retaining walls which are not over four feet in height measured
from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless
supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II, and III-A liquids.
5. Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not
exceed 5,000 gallons and the ratio of height to diameter or width
does not exceed two to one.
6. Platforms, walks and driveways not more than 30 inches above
grade and not over any basement or story below.
7. Painting, papering, and similar finish work.
8. Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and
scenery.
9. Window awnings supported by an exterior wall of Group R, Division
3, and Group M occupancies when projecting not more than 54
inches.
10. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R, Division 3
Occupancy in which the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent
grade and if the capacity does not exceed 5,000 gallons.
Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and
mechanical permits will be required for the above exempted items.
Exemption from the permit requirements of this code shall not
be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any
manner in violation of the provisions of this code or any other laws
or ordinances of this jurisdiction.
SECTION 26 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 26
AO:856
Building permits or Certificates of Occupancy issued on the basis of
plans and applications approved by the Building Official authorize
only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such
approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement,
or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance
with that authorized shall be a violation of this ordinance, and
punishable as provided by Section 26.E hereof.
E. Certificate of occupancy. It shall be unlawful to use, occupy, or permit
the use or occupancy of any building, land, water, or combination, or
part thereof, hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly
or partly altered, or enlarged in its use or structure, until a Certificate
of Occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Official stating that
the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements
of this ordinance.
The Building Official shall maintain a record of all Certificates of
Occupancy, and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person.
Failure to obtain a Certificate of Occupancy shall be a violation of this
ordinance and punishable under Section 26.E of this ordinance.
F. Penalties for violations. Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs,
or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a verbal or written
complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the cause and basis thereof,
shall be filed with the Building Official. He shall record properly such
complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as
provided by this ordinance.
If any building or structure is erected, reconstructed, repaired, altered,
enlarged, converted, maintained, or moved; or if any building,
structure, or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Building
Official shall order in writing, the correction of such violation.
The Building Official, City Attorney, or other official designated by the
City Commission may institute appropriate action or proceedings for
the purpose of:
1. Prosecuting any violation.
2. Restraining, correcting, or abating such violation.
3. Preventing the occupancy of any building, structure, or land in
violation of this ordinance.
4. Preventing any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about any
buildings, structure or land in violation of this ordinance.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this
ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine or penalty not to exceed $1,500
or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. The Court shall have the power to suspend said
SECTION 26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 26
AO:857
SECTION 27. Special permitted uses. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 716,
Ord. No. 820, Ord. No. 838]
Certain uses, while generally not suitable in a particular zoning district,
may under certain circumstances, be acceptable. When such circumstances
exist, a Special Use Permit may be granted. Special permitted uses shall
be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission for its suitability in
the area in which it is proposed. Once granted, and any conditions met,
special permitted uses shall be considered as permitted use and shall not
be subject to periodic review or cancellation, unless otherwise specified
in the order. The permit shall be granted for a particular use and not for
a particular person or firm. Special permitted uses shall expire on their
own if the property ceases to be used for the special permitted use for a
continuous three-year period.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hear and decide all special
permitted uses specifically authorized by the terms of this ordinance, decide
such questions as are involved in determining whether special permitted
uses should be granted, and grant special permitted uses with such
conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this ordinance, or deny
special permitted uses when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of
this ordinance. A special permitted use shall not be granted by the Planning
and Zoning Commission unless and until:
sentence and to revoke suspension thereof. Each day any violation
shall exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
G. Schedule of fees. The City Commission shall establish a schedule of
fees, pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted
in the office of the Building Official, and may be altered or amended
only by the City Commission.
Until all applicable fees have been paid in full, no action shall be taken
on any application.
A. A written application for a special permitted use is submitted indicating
the section of this ordinance under which the special permitted use is
sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested.
B. A recommendation regarding the special permitted use is received
prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting from the
appropriate township board if the special permitted use is located in the
extraterritorial area.
C. Any party may appear before the Planning and Zoning Commission in
person, by agent, or attorney to provide testimony regarding the special
permitted use application.
SECTION 26 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 27
AO:858
SECTION 28. Board of adjustments/appeals. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No.
840, Ord. No. 850]
D. The Planning and Zoning Commission, following the meeting at which
the special permitted use was considered, shall make written findings
certifying compliance with the specific rules governing individual
special permitted uses, that the special permitted use will not adversely
affect the public interest, and that satisfactory provision and
arrangement has been made concerning the following, where
applicable:
1. Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon
with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and
convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or
catastrophe.
2. Off-street parking and loading areas where required, with
particular attention to the items in "1" above and the economic,
noise, glare, or odor effects of the special permitted use on
adjoining properties and properties generally in the district.
3. Refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in
Subsections D.1 and D.2 above.
4. Utilities, with reference to locations, availability, and compatibility.
5. Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and
character.
6. Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare,
traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with
properties in the district.
7. Required yards and other open space.
8. General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property
in the district.
9. Use shall not impose a hazard to health or property.
In the event of the failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission
to grant or deny the special permitted use within 90 days after
receipt of the written application for the special permitted use or
upon appeal of the decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission
by any party, the Board of Adjustments shall decide the special
permitted use. If the decision of the Board of Adjustments should
differ from the findings of the Planning and Zoning Commission,
the Board shall prepare a written report stating the findings on
which their decisions were made.
A. Establishment. The City Commission may establish a Board of
Adjustments which shall consist of five members to be appointed by the
City Commission, each for a term of three years. Members of the Board
SECTION 27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 28
AO:859
of Adjustments may be removed from office by the City Commission for
cause upon written charges and after public hearing. Vacancies shall
be filled by resolution of the City Commission for the unexpired term
of the member affected. The City Commission shall sit as the Board
of Adjustments if the City Commission does not establish a Board of
Adjustments.
It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and
enforcement shall be first presented to the Building Official concerning
enforcement issues and to the City Planner for administration issues,
and that such questions shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning
Board only on appeal from the decision of the Building Official or City
Planner and after review and written findings are first made by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, and that recourse from the decisions
of the Board of Adjustments shall be to the courts as provided by law
and particularly by Chapter 40-47, North Dakota Century Code.
It is further the intent of this ordinance, that if the City Commission
appoints a separate Board of Adjustments, the duties of the City
Commission in connection with this ordinance shall not include
hearings and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that
may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated
in this section and this ordinance. If a separate Board of Adjustments is
appointed, the City Commission shall have only the duties of:
1. Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or
the repeal of this ordinance, as provided by law.
2. Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in Section
26.G.
B. Powers and duties. The Board of Adjustments shall adopt rules
necessary to the conduct of its affairs and in keeping with the
provisions of this ordinance. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The
chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to
the public. The Board of Adjustments shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or
if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep record of
its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public
record and be immediately filed in the office of the Board.
The Board of Adjustments shall have the following powers and duties:
1. Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is an error in any order, requirements, decision, or
determination made by the Building Official or City Planner or the
Planning and Zoning Commission in the administration or
enforcement of this ordinance.
SECTION 28 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 28
AO:860
2. Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance
from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the
public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship.
a. A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be
granted by the Board of Adjustments unless and until a written
application for a variance is submitted demonstrating:
(i) The special conditions and circumstances exist which are
peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and
which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district.
(ii) That literal interpretation of the provision of this
ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly
enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the
terms of this ordinance.
(iii) That the special conditions and circumstances do not
result from the actions of the applicant.
(iv) That granting the variance requested will not confer on
the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this
ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the
same district.
b. No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district, and no permitted or
nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other
districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a
variance. The procedure by which a variance shall be
considered is as follows:
(i) Notice of Public Hearing shall be given by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Notice of said Public Hearing
shall be published once a week for two successive weeks
prior to the time set for said hearing in the official paper of
the City of Williston.
(ii) The Public Hearing shall be held by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Any part may appear in person, or by
agent, or by attorney.
(iii) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make written
findings that the requirements of Section 28.B.2 have been
met by the applicant for a variance.
(iv) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall further make a
written finding that the reasons set forth in the application
justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance
SECTION 28 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 28
AO:861
is the minimum variance that will make possible the
reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
(v) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall further make
written findings that the granting of the variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood,
or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
(vi) Upon receipt of the written findings of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, or in the event of the failure of the
Planning and Zoning Commission to so report within 90
days after receipt of the written application for the
variance, the Board of Adjustments shall hold a hearing to
decide the variance. Any party may appear at the hearing
in person, by agent, or by attorney. If the decision of the
Board should differ from the findings of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, the Board of Adjustments shall
prepare a written report stating the findings on which
their decision was made.
c. In granting any variance, the Board of Adjustments may
prescribe the appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions
and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which
the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this
ordinance and punishable under Section 26.F of this
ordinance. Under no circumstances shall the Board of
Adjustments grant a variance to allow a use not permissible
under the terms of this ordinance in the district involved, or
any use expressly or by implications prohibited by the terms of
this ordinance in said district.
3. Board of adjustments having powers of the planning and zoning
commission on appeals. In exercising the above-mentioned powers,
the Board of Adjustments may, so long as such action is in
conformity with the terms of this ordinance, reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the
powers of the Planning and Zoning Commission from whom the
appeal is taken.
The concurring vote of 4 members of the Board of Adjustments
shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision,
or determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is
required to pass under this ordinance, or to affect any variation in
the application of this ordinance.
C. Remedies.
SECTION 28 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 28
AO:862
1. Hearings, appeal, and notices. Appeals to the Board of Adjustments
concerning interpretation or administration of this ordinance may
be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer or bureau of the
Governing Body of the City affected by any decision of the Building
Official or City Planner or Planning and Zoning Commission. Such
appeals shall first be reviewed by the City of Williston Planning and
Zoning Commission unless they made the decision being appealed.
The City Planner shall present to the Planning and Zoning
Commission all papers constituting the record upon which the
appealed action was taken. Written findings on the appeal shall be
forwarded to the Board of Adjustments within a reasonable time,
not to exceed 30 days after the receipt of the appeal. The City
Planner shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustments the
final report of the Planning and Zoning Commission and all other
papers constituting the record upon which the appealed action was
taken. The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
appeals, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the
parties in interest and decide the same in reasonable time. At the
hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney.
2. Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from, unless the City Planner certifies to the
Board of Adjustments, within 10 days after the notice of appeal is
filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would,
in the Planner's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.
In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Board of
Adjustments or by a court of record on application, on notice to the
City Planner or Planning and Zoning Commission from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown. Upon satisfactory proof
that delay caused by the appeal will result in financial loss to any
person, the Board of Adjustments shall fix a bond or cash deposit in
an amount to be determined by the Board of Adjustments but no
less than the amount shown by the party harmed by the delay. This
provision shall not apply to the City, its department heads,
employees, or representatives. Should appellant not prevail, the
bond or cash deposit may be used to offset financial losses caused
by the appeal as directed by the Board of Adjustments.
3. Appeals from the Board of adjustments. Any person or persons, or
any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the City who
has a legal interest which is immediately, directly and adversely
affected by any decision of the Board of Adjustment may seek
review by the court of record of such decision, in the manner
provided by the laws of the State of North Dakota and particularly
by Chapter 40-47, North Dakota Century Code.
4. An appeal must be filed with the City Auditor within 15 days of the
date the order or decision being appealed is served upon an
aggrieved party. If no service is made, the aggrieved party shall
SECTION 28 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 28
AO:863
SECTION 29. Amendments. [Ord. No. 613]
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance
may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed.
A proposed amendment may be initiated by the City Commission upon its
own motion, or upon receipt of a request from the Planning and Zoning
Commission, or upon receipt of a petition from any interested person or
persons or their agent.
have 30 days from the date such order or decision is signed to file a
written notice of appeal. The Auditor shall deliver the appeal notice
to the chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission and a copy
of such appeal to the City Planner.
5. Notice of appeal shall describe the order being appealed; the basis
of such appeal; the name, address and telephone number of the
appealing party; and the right or interest which has been adversely
affected.
A. Public hearings. The City Commission shall require a report from the
Planning and Zoning Commission on any proposed amendment before
taking final action thereon. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
thereupon make a preliminary report and hold a Public Hearing
thereon. Notice of said Public Hearing shall be published once a week
for two successive weeks prior to the time set for said hearing in the
official paper of the City of Williston. Such notice shall contain the
following items:
1. The time and place of the hearing.
2. A description of any property involved in any zoning change, by
address if streets have been platted or designated in the area
affected.
3. A description of the nature, scope, and purpose of the proposed
change, restriction, or boundary.
4. A statement of the times at which it will be available to the public
for inspection and copying at the office of the City Auditor. Any
party may appear at the public hearing in person, or by agent or
attorney.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall prepare final written
findings which shall be submitted to the City Commission within
90 days after the time of referral of the proposed amendment to
the Planning and Zoning Commission. If the zoning amendment
is for an area located in the extraterritorial area of the City, the
final written findings shall include a recommendation from the
appropriate township board.
B. Governing body. Upon receipt of the required final written findings from
the Planning and Zoning Commission on any amendment, or in the
SECTION 28 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 29
AO:864
SECTION 30. Legal status provisions. [Ord. No. 613]
event of the failure of the Planning and Zoning Commission to so report
after 90 days after the time of referral of the proposed amendment to
the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Commission shall hold
a public hearing with same public notice as required above by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. Protests. Any party may appear at the Planning and Zoning Commission
Public Hearing or the City Commission Public Hearing in person or by
agent or attorney. If a protest against a change, supplement,
modification, amendment, or repeal is signed by the owners of 20% or
more:
1. Of the area of the lots included in such proposed change; or
2. Of the area adjacent, extending 150 feet from the area to be
changed, excluding the width of streets.
The amendment shall not become effective except by the favorable
vote of three-fourths of all members of the City Commission.
A. Conflict with other laws. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum
requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Wherever the
requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances, deed
restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing the
higher standards, shall govern.
B. Separability. Should any section or provision of this ordinance be
declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision
shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part
thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
C. Repeal of conflicting ordinances. This ordinance, upon its effective
date, shall supersede Ordinance No. 352, entitled "Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Williston" and all amendments thereto, which shall
thereupon be repealed.
D. Effective date. This ordinance shall be in full force and effective from
and after its passage and approval.
SECTION 29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:865
SECTION 31. Definitions. [Ord. No. 613, Ord. No. 639, Ord. No. 662,
Ord. No. 703, Ord. No. 716, Ord. No. 728, Ord. No. 749, Ord. No.
809, Ord. No. 811, Ord. No. 864, Ord. No. 867, Ord. No. 884, Ord.
No. 887, Ord. No. 912, Ord. No. 922, Ord. No. 936, Ord. No. 959,
Ord. No. 960, Ord. No. 962, Ord. No. 963, Ord. No. 964, Ord. No.
968, Ord. No. 985-B, Ord. No. 1000, Ord. No. 1009, Ord. No. 1032,
Ord. No. 1092]
The following words, terms, and phrases are hereby defined and shall
be interpreted in the same fashion throughout this ordinance. The word
"including" shall mean including but not limited to. The word "shall" is
always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. Words used in the present
tense shall include the future tense and words used in the singular shall
include the plural. Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning
customarily assigned to them, first by the definition found in the State
Building Code and thereafter as found in Webster's Dictionary.
ABUT — To physically touch or border upon; to share a common property
line.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to
property.
ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USES — A subordinate building or portion
of the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main
building or to the main use of the premises. An accessory use is one which
is incidental to the main use of the premises.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — See Section 25.N Adult Entertainment.
ADULT CINEMA — See Section 25.N Adult Entertainment.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — See Section 25.N Adult Entertainment.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping, or maintenance, for sale, lease,
or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man.
AIRPORT — A place where aircraft can land and take off, usually equipped
with hangers, facilities for refueling and repair and various
accommodations for passengers.
ALLEY — A way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting
property.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members
of an existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, or
interior partitions; any change in doors, windows, or any enlargement to or
diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically; or
the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.
AMUSEMENT PARK — An outdoor facility, which may include structures
and buildings, where there are various devices for entertainment, including
rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, and buildings for
shows and entertainment.
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:866
AMUSEMENT PLACES — Establishments engaged in providing amusement
or entertainment for a fee or admission charge and include such activities
as dance halls, studios, theatrical producers; bands, orchestras, and other
musical entertainment; bowling alleys and billiard and pool establishments;
commercial sports such as arenas, rings, and coin-operated devices;
membership sports and recreation clubs; swimming pools; expositions and
game parlors.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are given medical or
surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care
incidental to the hospital use.
ANIMAL UNIT — Each animal unit shall consist of the number of animals of
each kind as listed below, plus its young:
One mature beef or dairy animal.
One horse.
One and one-half feeder cattle.
Two swine.
ANNEXATION — The incorporation of land area into the City with a
resulting change in the boundaries of the City.
ANTENNA — See Section 25.W. Wireless Communication Facilities.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms in a multiple dwelling used or
designed for occupancy by a single family.
APPROVED SURFACE — Durable, dust-free, non-tracking surface approved
by the Building Official.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
AUTOMOBILE SALES — The use of any building, land area, or other
premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks
or vans, trailers or recreation vehicles, and including any warranty repair
work and other repair service conducted as an accessory use.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS — Any building, land area, or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels, and including as an accessory use the
sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries, and similar accessories.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any floor level below the first story in a building.
BED AND BREAKFAST INN — An owner-occupied house, or portion thereof,
where short-term lodging rooms with or without meals, are provided for
compensation. The operator of the inn shall live on the premises or in
adjacent premises. The unit shall contain no more than seven guest rooms
for lodging.
BEVERAGE KIOSK — See Section 25.T Beverage Kiosks.
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:867
BLOCK — That property abutting one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or nearest intersecting or
intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, waterway or other barrier to
or gap in the continuity of development along such street.
BOARDING HOUSE — See Lodging House.
BUFFER ZONE — Land area used to visibly separate one use from another
or to shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances.
BUILDING — A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
BUILDING ACCESSORY — A subordinate structure on the same lot as the
principal or main building or use occupied or devoted to a use incidental to
the principal use.
BUILDING AREA — That portion of the lot that can be occupied by the
principal use, excluding the front and side yards.
BUILDING LINE — That edge of a building nearest a lot line.
BUILDING OFFICIAL (INSPECTOR) — The Building Official of Williston,
North Dakota.
BUILDING PERMIT — Written permission issued by the Building Official for
the construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the grade to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or the deck line of a mansard roof
or to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and
gambrel roofs.
CARWASH — Any building or premises or portions thereof used for washing
automobiles.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the proper
authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the
structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all
the applicable municipal codes and ordinances.
CHILD CARE CENTER — A child care facility where supplemental care is
regularly provided to 19 or more children which is subject to requirements
as set forth in Chapter 50-11.1 of the North Dakota Century Code.
CHILD CARE FACILITY (PUBLIC OR PRIVATE) — Any facility where
supplemental parental care is regularly provided, whether the facility is
known as a day care home, day care center, day nursery, nursery school,
kindergarten, child play school, progressive school, child development
center, preschool, or known by any other name.
CLINIC — An establishment where patients are admitted for examination
and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, psychologists, or social
workers and where patients are not usually lodged overnight.
COMMERCIAL FEED LOT — Any building, structure, enclosure, or
premises used, designed, or intended for the commercial feeding of two or
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:868
more animals which is operated as a separate pursuit and not incidental to
farming.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION USE — A commercialized recreational or
entertainment use including but not limited to the following: bowling alley,
miniature golf, skating rink, tennis club, handball or racquetball club, health
club, pool hall, and arcade.
CONDOMINIUM — An estate in real property consisting of an undivided
interest or interests in common in a portion of a parcel of real property
together with a separate interest or interests in space in a structure on such
real property.
COURT — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building and
bound on two or more sides by such building, or the open space provided
for access to a dwelling group.
DECK, ENCLOSED — A patio or platform with a watertight cover. Enclosed
decks may have the capability of being screened at a later date. Enclosed
decks shall be considered in maximum lot coverage. Enclosed decks shall
not be habitable for year around use.
DECK, OPEN — A patio or platform with or without railings, more than
12 inches above grade and not over any basement or story below which is
not being obstructed from the platform upward, therefore, being open to
the sky. Open decks shall not be considered as part of the maximum lot
coverage, if the floor is so constructed as to allow the percolation of water.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations located
within the area of special flood hazard.
DISPLAY SURFACE — The area made available by the sign structure for the
purpose of displaying the advertising message.
DISTRICT — A section or sections of the City of Williston for which
regulations governing the use of buildings and premises, the height of
buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform.
DORMITORY — A building used as group living quarters for a student body
or religious order as an accessory use for a college, university, boarding
school, orphanage, convent, monastery, or other similar institutional use.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOTS — These lots which extend continuously
between two parallel (or approximately parallel) streets bounding a block.
A block containing double frontage lots is composed of one rather than two
tiers of lots.
DRIVEWAY — A private roadway providing access for vehicles to a parking
space, garage, dwelling, or other structure.
DRIVING AISLE — In a parking lot that portion of a lot which allows ingress
and egress of vehicles from a public or private right-of-way to the parking
stall.
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:869
DWELLING — Any building or portion thereof which is designed and used
exclusively for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — Any building or portion thereof which contains living
facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — A dwelling comprised of two single-family dwelling
units, separated horizontally or vertically, within a single building on a
single lot.
DWELLING, GROUP QUARTERS — A dwelling such as dormitories,
fraternities, sororities, and the like which house unrelated individuals.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY — A single building designed for and
occupied by more than two families.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling which is designed
for and occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space
or yards and which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and
meets the following requirements:
Is designed to be located on a permanent continuous frost-protected
perimeter foundation that meets applicable local City building code
requirements, such that the floor elevation of the proposed dwelling is
reasonably compatible with the floor elevations of surrounding dwelling
units;
1.
If dwelling is site-built or built off site and moved to the building site it
shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of all state and
local building codes;
2.
If dwelling is factory built off site and moved to the building site
and defined as a Modular or Prefabricated Living Unit, it shall be
constructed in accordance with all state and local building codes
governing construction.
3.
If dwelling unit is fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for
installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying
that it is built in compliance with the HUD Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (24 CFR 3280),
the HUD approved housing unit must have the hitch, axles and wheels
removed; the roof shall be double-pitched and covered with material
that is residential in appearance, including, but not limited to: wood,
asphalt shingles or fiberglass; the exterior siding cannot have a highgloss
finish and must be covered with an exterior material customarily
used on conventional dwellings, including but not limited to vinyl or
metal siding, wood or similar material; units located within the R-1 and
R-2 Districts shall have no less than a twenty-foot width; units located
within the R-3 District shall have no less than an eighteen-foot width;
units shall be no more than 15 years old at the time of placement.
4.
All single-family dwellings shall be considered and taxed as real
property pursuant to 57-02-04 NDCC.
5.
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:870
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling in a row of at least
two such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the
outside, no unit is located over another unit, each dwelling is located on a
separate lot, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more
common fire resistant walls.
DWELLING, TWINHOME — A dwelling comprising two single-family
dwelling units on individual, fee-ownership lots, joined vertically by a party
wall at the common property line, with each unit having its own front and
rear entrances, front and rear yards, and a side yard on one side of the lot,
and with attached garages facing a public street.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A one-family dwelling attached to one other
one-family dwelling by a common vertical wall, with each dwelling located
on a separate lot. This also includes a building containing two single-family
dwelling units located on the same lot. A two-family dwelling must comply
with the following requirements:
Is designed to be located on a permanent continuous frost-protected
perimeter foundation that meets applicable local City building code
requirements, such that the floor elevation of the proposed dwelling is
reasonably compatible with the floor elevations of surrounding dwelling
units;
1.
If dwelling is site-built or built off site and moved to the building site it
shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of all state and
local building codes;
2.
If dwelling is factory built off site and moved to the building site
and defined as a Modular or Prefabricated Living Unit, it shall be
constructed in accordance with all state and local building codes
governing construction.
3.
If dwelling unit is fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility for
installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying
that it is built in compliance with the HUD Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (24 CFR 3280),
the HUD approved housing unit must have the hitch, axles and wheels
removed; the roof shall be double-pitched and covered with material
that is residential in appearance, including, but not limited to: wood,
asphalt shingles or fiberglass; the exterior siding cannot have a highgloss
finish and must be covered with an exterior material customarily
used on conventional dwellings, including but not limited to: vinyl or
metal siding, wood or similar material; units located within the R-1 and
R-2 Districts shall have no less than a twenty-foot width; units located
within the R-3 District shall have no less than an eighteen-foot width;
units shall be no less than 10 years old at the time of placement.
4.
All two-family dwellings shall be considered and taxed as real property
pursuant to 57-02-04 NDCC.
5.
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:871
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS — Establishments selling food
and drink prepared on the premises for take out or consumption on the
premises.
EGRESS — An exit.
ENLARGEMENT — An increase in the size of an existing structure.
EXISTING USE — The use of a lot or structure at the time of enactment of
this ordinance.
FACADE — The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or the wall
viewed by persons not within the building.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as members of a
single housekeeping organization. A family may include not more than four
persons not related by blood, marriage, or adoption.
FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME — An occupied private residence in which
supplemental parental care is regularly provided for no more than seven
children from more than one family or no more than four children ages two
and under.
FARM — A parcel of land used for agricultural purposes.
FARM RESIDENCE — A residential dwelling located on and directly
associated with a farm.
FARMERS MARKET — An indoor or outdoor event for merchants or vendors
who sell local agricultural products or crafts directly from the farmer to the
consumer.
FLEA MARKET OR SWAP MEET — An indoor or outdoor event for a group
of merchants or vendors organized and managed by the owner of the
property or flea market association, who conducts the display, trade, and
sale of used products or merchandise.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP — Deleted.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) where areas of special
flood hazard are designated as Zone A.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOR AREA — The total number of square feet of floor space within the
exterior walls of a building, not including space in basements, carports, or
garages.
FRONTAGE — All property on one side of a street between the intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the property line of the
1. The overflow of waters, and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any
source.
2.
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:872
street, or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property abutting on
one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
GAMES OF CHANCE — Those gaming operations as defined under
53-06.1-07 of the North Dakota Century Code which include bingo, raffles,
pull tabs, jars, punchboards, 21, and sports pools for professional sports
only.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or portion of main building
on the same lot and used for the storage only of private passenger motor
vehicles, not more than two of which are owned by others than the
occupants of the main building.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or portion of a building, except any herein
defined as a private garage or as a repair garage, used for the storage of
motor vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building for space for the repair or maintenance of
motor vehicles. Garage repair does not include factory assembly of motor
vehicles, auto wrecking establishments, or junkyards.
GREENHOUSE — See Section 25.O. Temporary Uses and Structures.
GROUP CHILD CARE HOME (FACILITY) — A child care facility where
supplemental care is regularly provided for eight to eighteen children,
which is subject to requirements as set forth in Chapter 50-11.1 of the North
Dakota Century Code.
GUEST ROOM — A room occupied by one or more guests for compensation
and in which no provision is made for cooking, but not including rooms in a
dormitory for sleeping purposes primarily.
HARD SURFACE — To consist of concrete asphalt.
HOME OCCUPATIONS — An occupation or activity carried on in the
principal building or accessory building of a residential zoned property,
which meets all the following conditions:
The occupation is carried on by a member or members of the immediate
family residing on the premises, and up to one additional person who is
not a member of the immediate family.
1.
The occupation is incidental to the use of the premises. The main
activity of the dwelling place remains a dwelling and such home
occupation does not alter the character or appearance of the existing
residence.
2.
Not more than one non-illuminated nameplate is used. The nameplate
shall be attached flush against the building and shall not exceed four
square feet in area.
3.
The occupation does not occupy more than 25% of the floor area of
the principal or accessory building. The occupation may be conducted
within the garage provided the operation does not interfere with the
minimum off-street parking requirements.
4.
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:873
No outdoor storage or display of products is allowed to be located from
the exterior of the building indicating that the premises is being used
in part for any purpose other than a dwelling.
5.
Occupation or trade vehicles used in conjunction with a home
occupation shall be restricted to two vehicles per residence. The
parking of such vehicle shall not interfere with the minimum off-street
parking requirements for the property. Heavy commercial vehicles are
prohibited.
6.
No mechanical equipment is used except of a type that is normally used
for purely domestic or household purposes.
7.
The operation of the occupation does not emit loud noise, foul odors,
or bright lights in a manner which disturbs or interferes with the peace
and comfort of a nearby residence.
8.
No alteration of the principal building changes the character thereof as
a dwelling.
9.
The following are hereby declared to be customary home occupations
as intended by this ordinance:
Office for the emergency consultation and treatment including the
general practice of a doctor, chiropractor, dentist, lawyer,
clergyman, and other recognized professions.
a.
Other state licensed personal services such as, but not limited to
masseuses, beauticians, estheticians, etc.
b.
Dressmaking, sewing, millinery, and similar occupations; artist,
sculptor, and similar occupations.
c.
d. The giving of voice, piano, or other musical instrument lessons.
Hobbies such as growing of tropical fishes, collection of articles,
and loading of shot shells, provided that all safety requirements
have been met.
e.
10.
Mobile commercial businesses/mobile businesses are not a permitted
home occupation unless conducting private service only.
11.
The determination as to whether or not a particular profession or
occupation is similar to those enumerated here in and is permissible
as a home occupation shall be made by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, after notification by the individual requesting such
determination to all property owners located within 300 feet of the
property where the home occupation will be conducted. Evidence of
such notification shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning
Commission prior to consideration of the request for determination of
home occupation.
12.
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:874
HOTEL OR MOTEL — A building used as a transient abiding place for
persons who are lodged for compensation.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A material which reduces and prevents
absorption of storm water into the ground.
IMPROVEMENT — Any man-made, immovable item which becomes part of,
placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.
INGRESS — Access or entry.
INSTITUTIONS — A building occupied by a nonprofit corporation or
nonprofit establishment for public use.
JUNK YARD — An area of more than 200 square feet, or any area not more
than 50 feet from any street, used for the storage, keeping, or abandonment
of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials or goods, used for
dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles
or machinery, or parts thereof.
KENNEL — An establishment in which more than two dogs or domesticated
animals more than one year old are housed, groomed, bred, boarded,
trained, or sold. The keeping and selling of one litter or offspring per year
of a family pet shall not be deemed to be a kennel.
LAND USE — A description of how land is occupied or utilized.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space or berth used for the loading or
unloading of commercial vehicles.
LODGE — A building or portion thereof or premises owned or operated
by any corporation or association organized for civic, fraternal, social, or
business purposes, or for the promotion of sports.
LODGING HOUSE — A building or place where lodging or lodging and
boarding is provided (or equipped to provide lodging regularly) by
prearrangement for definite periods of time, for compensation, for three or
more persons in contradistinction to hotels open to transients.
LOT AREA — The legal area within the lot lines.
LOT OR PARCEL — A piece, plot, or area of land, of contiguous assemblage
as established by survey, plat or deed, occupied or to be occupied by a
building, or a unit group of buildings, and/or accessory buildings thereto or
for other use, together with such open spaces as may be required under
these regulations and having its frontage on a street or officially approved
place.
LOT WIDTH — The distance as measured by a straight line, between side
lot lines, at the points of intersection with the building line.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection.
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential
neighborhood.
13.
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:875
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having a frontage of two nonintersecting
streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, OR RECORD — A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Williams County,
North Dakota, or a parcel of land, the deed to which was recorded in the
Office of the Register of Deeds of Williams County, North Dakota prior to
the adoption of these regulations.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of a structure including the basement.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site
manufacturing facility for installation or assembly at the building site and
to be used with or without a permanent foundation and is bearing a label
certifying that it was built in compliance with the Federal Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standard Act of 1974 (24 CFR 3280)
which became effective June 15, 1976, promulgated by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development.
MANUFACTURED HOME CONDOMINIUM — A manufactured home
designed and/or intended to be for residential condominium occupancy.
MANUFACTURED HOME DEVELOPMENT — Intended to be generic, it
includes mobile home courts, manufactured home subdivisions, and
manufactured home condominiums.
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — A subdivision designed and/or
intended for the sale of lots for residential occupancy by manufactured
homes.
MEDICAL COMPLEX — A general hospital including related health services
such as clinics and residential facilities, dormitories, group quarters or
apartments, for medical personnel and trainees employed at the medical
complex.
MERCHANT OR VENDOR — A person, firm, or corporation, whether as
owner agent, consignee or employee who is registered to conduct business
in the State of North Dakota.
MINI-STORAGE — A building containing small compartments to be used for
the storage of personal property.
MOBILE BUSINESS OR MOBILE COMMERCIAL BUSINESS — A mobile
motorized or non-motorized vehicle or trailer, not being operated as an
accessory component to an existing permanent business establishment,
whose business operation is conducted outside of a permanent building
and entirely within the mobile unit, for the sales of merchandise or other
professional services for public service only. Mobile business or mobile
commercial business does not include mobile food vendors.
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK — See Section 25.Q Mobile Food Trucks.
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:876
MOBILE HOME — A factory built home that is transportable in one or more
sections, and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, and built prior to enactment of
the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974 (24CFR 3280) which became effective June 15, 1976.
MOBILE HOME COURT — A mobile home development with two or more
mobile homes and/or manufactured homes located on rental pads with
continuing local general management, and with special facilities for
common use by the occupants, including such items as common
recreational building and areas, common open space, laundries, and the
like.
MOBILE HOME OR MANUFACTURED HOME LOT — A parcel of land
rented or sold for exclusive use of occupants of a single mobile home or
manufactured home.
MODULAR OR PREFABRICATED LIVING UNIT — Factory-built housing
certified as meeting the State and Local Building Code as applicable to
modular housing or prefabricated housing. All must conform to local and
state codes and are subject to the same standards as site-built homes.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the "start of construction"
commended on or after the effective dated of this ordinance.
NONCONFORMING USES — Use of a building or of land that does not
conform to the regulations as to use for the district in which it is situated.
NURSING HOME — An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or
approved to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals
who by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity, are unable to
care for themselves.
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved
and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land
adjoining or neighboring such open space.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unroofed area of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24
hours.
OVERLAY DISTRICT — A district superimposed upon an underlying district
and which establishes special requirements in addition to those of the
underlying district. Development or use of land or structures must conform
to the requirements of both districts, or the most restrictive of the two if in
conflict.
PARCEL — A lot or tract of land.
PARK — A tract of land, designated and used by the public for active and
passive recreation.
PARKING LOT — An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be
stored for the purpose of temporary, daily, or overnight off-street parking.
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:877
PARKING ON A REMOTE LOT — A modification of required parking that
allows a principal use to meet its parking requirement on a remote parking
lot.
PARKING SPACE — An area 9.5 feet by 18.5 feet, or greater which is
sufficient in size to store one automobile, together with a driveway
connecting the parking space with a street or alley and permitting ingress
and egress of an automobile. Required off-street parking shall be provided
in a manner that vehicles do not encroach on a public right-of-way.
PERMITTED USE — Any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the
restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
PET SHOP — An establishment for the selling of dogs, cats, birds, mice,
rats, aquarium fish or other similar small animals or reptiles.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum contiguous size,
as specified by ordinance, to be planned and developed as a single entity
containing one or more residential clusters or planned unit residential
developments and one or more public, quasi-public, commercial, or
industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential uses to residential
uses as shall be specified.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT — The Planned Unit
Development(PUD) Overlay District is a type of overlay zoning district and
a type of development plan. PUD overlay districts are linked to PUD plans
in that no rights of development apply to a PUD overlay district other than
those of the approved PUD plan.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning and Zoning Commission of
Williston, ND.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — A unit of government within a state, including
a county, City, township, or village.
PORCH — A covered entrance to the principle structure which is considered
part of the principle structure and must meet all structural requirements.
Porches, however, may project into a required front yard as described in
Section 25.F.5.
PREMISES — A lot, together with all buildings and structures thereon.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use of any lot.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — An office wherein the business carried on
therein is by licensed professionals, or wherein the principal activity is the
conduct of commercial, governmental, financial or management activities
including but not limited to banks, government offices, insurance, personal
loan agencies, real estate, telephone exchange or utility office.
PROHIBITED USE — A use that is not permitted in a zone district.
PUBLIC HEARING — A meeting announced and advertised in advance
and open to the public, with the public given an opportunity to talk and
participate.
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:878
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or
board duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under public regulations,
to the public: electricity, gas, heat, power, steam, telephone, telegraph,
transportation, or water.
QUASI-INSTITUTIONAL — A profit or nonprofit boarding home, rest home,
or other home for the sheltered care of juvenile or adult persons, which in
addition to providing food and shelter to four or more persons unrelated
to the proprietor also provides any personal care or service beyond food,
shelter, and laundry.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular-type portable structure without
permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled, or driven and primarily
designated as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping,
and travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, truck
campers, camping trailers, and self-propelled motor homes.
REDUCTION OF REQUIRED PARKING — A modification of required
parking that allows a principal use to have either a reduced parking ratio or
a reduction in the overall number of required parking spaces.
REMOTE PARKING LOT — An area not within a building where motor
vehicles may be stored for the purpose of temporary, daily, or overnight offstreet
parking used to meet the parking requirement of a principal use that
is located on a lot other than the lot on which the principal use is located.
RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION — A subdivision
designed and/or intended to allow for manufactured homes as single-family
dwellings, and to allow use of recreational vehicles (RV's), subject to
meeting health department standards and approved by the Building Official.
Lots and manufactured homes would be owned as in other residential
districts.
SCHOOL — Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or
used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
SERVICE PROFESSIONAL — A business operation which provides services
related to a specific occupational trade, which requires state certification or
licensing.
SERVICE, PRIVATE — The transaction of goods or other professional
services rendered or made available to private clients, through previously
arranged service transactions and not made available for the general public.
SERVICE, PUBLIC — The transaction of goods or other professional
services rendered or made available to the general public.
SHARED PARKING — A modification of required parking that allows two
separate principal uses whose normal peak parking times do not coincide
to meet their individual parking requirements by sharing parking spaces on
one or more parking lots.
SIGN — See Section 25.G General Sign Regulations.
SPECIAL INDUSTRIAL EXPLOSIVE DEVICE(S) — Any explosive powerpack
containing an explosive charge in the form of a cartridge or construction
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:879
device. The term includes but is not limited to explosive rivets, explosive
bolts, explosive charges for driving pins or studs, cartridges for explosiveactuated
power tools and charges of explosives used in jet tapping of openhearth
furnaces and jet perforation of oil well casings.
SPECIAL PERMITTED USE — A use which generally would not be suitable
in a particular zoning district, which would be acceptable under certain
circumstances. The permit shall be granted for a particular use and not for
a particular person or firm.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — See Section 25.N Adult
Entertainment.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — See Section 25.N Adult Entertainment.
STORY — That portion of a building, other than a basement, included
between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it;
or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it.
STORY, HALF — A space under a sloping roof which has the line of
intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above
the top floor level, and in which space not more than 60% of the floor area
is or may be finished off for use.
STREET — Any thoroughfare or public space which has been dedicated to,
and accepted by, the public use and includes all the right-of-way sidelines.
STREET LINE — A dividing line, such as the right-of-way line, between a
lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for
tennis courts, arbors or breeze-ways, mobile homes (manufactured homes),
and gas or liquid storage tanks above ground, but excepting utility poles,
fences, retaining walls, and ornamental light fixtures.
STRUCTURE ALTERATIONS — Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girder, or
any complete rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure,
Either:
a. Before the improvement or repair is started.
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alternation
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building
b.
1.
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:880
SUPPLEMENTAL PARENTAL CARE — The care, supervision, education,
or guidance of a child or children, unaccompanied by the child's parent,
guardian, or custodian, which is, or is anticipated to be, ongoing for periods
of four or more hours per day for three or more days per week.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DISH — Satellite earth stations, dishes and/or
antennas used for private television reception not exceeding one meter in
diameter.
TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use established for a fixed period
of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the
time period.
TOWER — See Section 25.W. Wireless Communication Facilities.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT, OR ITINERANT
VENDOR — A person, firm, or corporation, whether as owner agent,
consignee or employee, who temporarily sets up business on private
property, or out of a vehicle, trailer, tent, other portable shelter, or vacant
store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or
attempting to sell, goods, wares, products, or merchandise.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building or structure thereon is
designed, arranged, intended, or maintained or for which it is or may be
used or occupied.
VARIANCE — The relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Regulations in
relation to height, area, size, and open spaces where specific physical
conditions, unique to the site, would create an unreasonable hardship in the
development of the site for permitted uses.
VEHICLE STORAGE (LONG TERM) — Outdoor storage or anything other
than temporary storage.
VEHICLE STORAGE (TEMPORARY) — Customer and employee parking for
less than a twenty-four-hour period.
VEHICLE, FLEET — More than two vehicles owned, leased, or operated by
a business or government entity.
VEHICLE, HEAVY COMMERCIAL — A vehicle with a gross vehicle weight
greater than 10,000 lbs. Personal vehicles such as boats, RV's, and campers
are exempt from this weight requirement.
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structures.
The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions.
a.
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.
b.
2.
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE SECTION 31
AO:881
VEHICLE, OCCUPATION OR TRADE — A vehicle that is designed
specifically to perform a type of function or service associated with an
occupation or trade.
VEHICLE, PERSONAL — A vehicle that is owned by an individual and used
for commuting purposes.
VEHICLE, WORK — A vehicle that is owned by a business entity, which is
used by an affiliated employee for commuting purposes.
WALL — The vertical exterior surface of a building or the vertical interior
surfaces which divide a building's space into rooms.
WAREHOUSE —
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — The facility or group of units used
for the treatment of wastewater from public sewer systems and for the
reduction in handling of solids removed from such wastes and which serves
10 or more families or an industry employing 10 or more persons.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — The system of pipes, structures, and facilities
through which a public water supply is obtained, treated, and sold or
distributed for human consumption or household use. Such system shall
serve at least 10 or more families or shall serve an industry employing 10
or more persons.
XERISCAPE — Landscaping in which the plants require minimal water.
YARD — An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
obstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except
as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of
determining the width of side yard, the depth of a front yard, or the depth of
a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the
main building shall be used.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending across the front of a lot between the
side lot lines and extending from the front lot line to the front of the main
building or any projections thereof. The front yard shall be on the side of the
lot which has been established as frontage by the house numbering system.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the rear of a lot, measured between
the side lot lines, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
rear lot line and the rear of the main building including any projections. On
interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot
That portion of a commercial or industrial building occupied by a
service-oriented use that is used exclusively for storage of products or
materials used or sold by that use.
1.
A commercial or industrial building with the majority of the square
footage used exclusively for the storage of products or materials sold or
distributed by the principal use in that building. Area used for storage
of products or materials within a building in which the principal use is
retail sales is not included in this definition.
2.
SECTION 31 WILLISTON CODE SECTION 31
AO:882
from the front yard. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be
no rear yards, but only front and side yards.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and
being the space between the side lot line and the side of the main building
including any projections.
ZONING MAP — The map or maps, which are a part of the zoning
ordinance, and delineate the boundaries of the zoning districts.
Appendices
Appendix A
ZONING GENERALLY
Editor's Note: The City of Williston Zoning Ordinance is codified in a
separate volume and may be found on file in the city offices.
Appendix B
AIRPORT ZONING

APPENDIX B - AIRPORT ZONING
Appendix B
AIRPORT ZONING
Editor’s Note: Appendix B sets forth the airport zoning regulations of the City of
Williston, enacted on October 24, 1950. The nature of a zoning ordinance and the requirements
of state law as to the procedures for enactment, amendment, appeals and the like preclude its
physical incorporation as an integral part of the Code; therefore, it has been included in the
appendix as enacted, for the information and convenience of the user.
Unless otherwise indicated by a history note following a particular section, the
ordinance is set out as originally enacted, the section headings and numbers having been
retained. Any material in brackets [ ] has been added by the editor for purposes of clarity.]
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING AND GOVERNING THE HEIGHT OF
STRUCTURES AND TREES AND THE USE OF PROPERTY IN THE VICINITY OF THE
WILLISTON MUNICIPAL (SLOULIN) AIRPORT, WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA
In pursuance of the authority conferred by North Dakota Code (1943, Volume 4;
Chapter 40-47 and 40-48 and 1947 Supplement of the North Dakota Revised Code of 1943,
Chapter 2-04) Airport Zoning [N.D.C.C. §§ 2-04-01 et seq., 40-47-01 et seq. [;] and 40-48-01
et seq.] and for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience and
general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Williston, North Dakota and vicinity, by
preventing the creation or establishment of airport hazards, thereby protecting the lives and
property of the users of the Williston Municipal Airport and of the owners and occupants of
land in its vicinity and preventing destruction or impairment of the utility of the airport and the
public investment therein:
The Joint Airport Zoning Board of Williston, North Dakota, do ordain as follows:
Sec. 1. Title.
This regulation shall be known and may be cited as the Williston Airport Zoning
Regulation.
Sec. 2. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, unless the context otherwise requires:
Airport means the Williston Municipal (Sloulin) Airport.
Airport hazard means any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace
required for the flight of air-craft in landing or taking off at the airport or is otherwise
hazardous to such landing or take [taking] off of aircraft.
Landing area means the area of the airport used for the landing, take [taking] off or
taxiing of aircraft.
Nonconforming use means any structure or tree or use of land which does not conform
to the requirements prescribed in this regulation or an amendment thereto, as of the effective
date of such regulations.
Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or body politic, and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee or other
similar representative thereof.
B:1 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
Structure means any object constructed or installed by man, including, but without
limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks and overhead transmission lines.
Tree means any object of natural growth.
Sec. 3. Zones established; map.
(a) For the purpose of this regulation, the following zones are established:
1. “L” — Landing Zones.
2. “IAZ” — Instrument Approach Zones.
3. “NIAZ” — Noninstrument Approach Zones.
4. “TS” — Transition Slope.
5. “TZ” — Turning Zones.
6. “CS” — Conical Surface.
(b) The boundaries of these zones are hereby established as shown on a map
entitled “Williston Municipal Airport Zoning Map,” dated December 2, 1949, which
accompanies and is hereby made a part of this regulation and as the same may be amended and
supplemented.1
Sec. 4. Height limits.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this regulation, no structure or tree shall be
erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone created by this regulation to a
height in excess of the height limit hereby established for such zone.
(b) The height limit for each type of zone is hereby established as follows:
1. “L” (Landing Zone) — Nothing above the ground surface except as required
and as necessary and incidental to airport operations or recommended by or in
accord with the rules of the Civil Aeronautics Administration.
2. “IAZ” (Instrument Approach Zone) — One foot of height above the center line
of the end of the nearest runway extended horizontally 200 feet for every 50
feet of the shortest distance of the structure or tree is from the inner boundary
of the approach zone or the line of such boundary extended.
3. “NIAZ” (Non Instrument Approach Zone) — One foot of height above the
center line of the nearest runway extended horizontally 200 feet for every 40
feet of the shortest distance the structure or tree is from the inner boundary of
the approach zone or the line of such boundary extended.
4. “TS” (Transition Slope) — One foot of height for every seven feet of the
shortest distance the structure or tree is from the boundary of the nearest
approach zone.
5. “TZ” (Turning Zone) — Elevation 2,092 feet.
6. “CS” (Conical Surface) — One foot of height above the elevation permitted in
the turning zone for each 20 feet of the shortest distance the tree or structure is
1 Editor’s Note: The map referred to in the above section is on file in the office of the city engineer.
B:2 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX B - AIRPORT ZONING
from the outer boundary of the turning zone for a longitude distance of 5,000
feet.
Sec. 5. Use restrictions.
(a) Except as otherwise provided in this regulation, it shall be unlawful to put any
land located within any zone hereby created to any of the following prohibited uses:
1. Transformer stations.
2. High power transmission lines.
3. Manufacturing establishments or other uses which produce smoke interfering
with the safe use of the airport.
4. All plants and businesses of every kind which omit [emit] or discharge gases
and odors that would interfere with the health and safety of the public in the
use of the airport.
5. Businesses or structures of any kind that may be detrimental or injurious to the
health, safety and general welfare of the public in the use of the airport.
6. Any other use which would create electrical interference with radio
communications, between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of the
flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or
otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft.
Sec. 6. Establishment of airports greater than Class 1.
(a) Permit required. Within a radius of eight miles from the center of the Williston
Municipal (Sloulin) Airport, no airport of Class 1 or greater, as hereinafter defined, shall be
established unless permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted, in accordance with
the provisions of this regulation.
(b) Schedule of minimum distance between municipal airport and any other
airport. Except as otherwise provided, the minimum distance between the Williston Municipal
(Sloulin) Airport and any other airport hereafter established, measured from center to center,
shall be not less than provided in the following schedule:
Class of Airport Distance from Williston Airport
1 5 miles
2 6 miles
3 7 miles
4 8 miles
(c) Airport classifications. Airport classifications for the purpose of this regulation
shall be in accord with the following schedule:
B:3 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
Length of Longest Runway Class
Under 3,400 feet 1
3,401 feet to 4,450 feet 2
4,451 feet to 5,200 feet 3
Over 5,200 feet 4
(d) Exceptions; board of adjustment. Exceptions to the spacing requirements
hereinbefore provided in this section may be granted by the board of adjustment, which is
hereby authorized to allow lesser distances between the Williston Municipal (Sloulin) Airport
and any other airport proposed to be established, but only after public hearing duly held in
accord with the provisions of this regulation, and where, owing to special conditions, the board
of adjustment duly finds that a literal enforcement of these provisions would result in
unnecessary hardship and such variance would not be contrary to the public interest.
Prior to granting any such exception or variance, the board of adjustment shall, for the
purpose of study and recommendation, refer the matter to the Civil Aeronautics Administration
and to any aviation commission, airport zoning commission, and any local planning body
having jurisdiction within the area affected.
If any of the aforementioned bodies, to whom the matter shall have been referred, does
not within 45 days transmit a report to the board of adjustment, then it shall be deemed to have
approved the proposal; provided, however, that upon request of any said body, the board of
adjustment shall grant a reasonable extension of such time.
In granting such exception or variance the board of adjustment shall impose special
conditions which will insure that the public interest is maintained.
Sec. 7. Nonconforming uses.
The regulations prescribed herein shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date hereof, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any
nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction,
alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun
prior to the effective date of this regulation, and is diligently prosecuted and completed within
two years thereof, except as provided in Section 10.
Sec. 8. City engineer; administrator; duties.
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to administer and enforce the regulations
prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the city engineer
upon a form furnished by him. Applications which are by this regulation to be decided by the
city engineer shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him. Applications for
action by the board of adjustment shall be forth-with transmitted by the city engineer to the
board for hearing and decision.
B:4 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX B - AIRPORT ZONING
Sec. 9. Permits to materially change airport, etc.
(a) Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land, and no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established, in any airport
approach zone or airport turning zone, unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and
granted. Each such application shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with
sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree
would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative,
the permit applied for shall be granted.
(b) Existing uses. Before any existing use, structure or tree may be replaced,
substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher or replanted, within any airport
approach zone or airport turning zone, a permit must be secured authorizing such replacement,
change or repair. No such permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or
creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be made or
become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of
this regulation [October 24, 1950] or than it is when the application for a permit is made.
Except as indicated, all applications for a permit for replacement, change or repair of existing
use, structure or tree shall be granted.
(c) Variances. Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of
any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property, not in accordance with the
requirements prescribed in this regulation, may apply to the board of adjustment for variance
therefrom. Such variance shall be allowed where a literal application or enforcement of the
regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted
would not be contrary to the public interest but do substantial justice and be in accordance with
the spirit of this regulation.
(d) Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such
action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purposes of this regulation and reasonable in the
circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to
permit, the City of Williston, North Dakota, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain
thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an
airport hazard.
Sec. 10.Appeals.
(a) Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the city
engineer, made in his administration of this regulation, if of the opinion that a decision of the
city engineer is improper application of this regulation, may appeal to the board of adjustment.
(b) All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by
the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the city engineer and with the board, a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city engineer shall forthwith transmit to the board
all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(c) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from
unless the city engineer certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it,
that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a say [stay] would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than
by order of the board on due cause shown.
B:5 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
(d) The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public
notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time.
Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
(e) The board may, in conformity with the provision[s] of this regulation, reverse,
or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order, requirement, decision or determination
appealed from and may make such order requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end shall have all powers of the city engineer.
Sec. 11. Board of adjustment.
(a) There is hereby created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the
following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the city engineer in the enforcement of this regulation.
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this regulation upon
which such board may be required to pass under such regulations.
3. To hear and decide specific variances under Section 9.
(b) The board of adjustment shall consist of five members, each to be appointed by
the joint airport zoning board for a term of three years and to be removable for cause by the
joint airport zoning board upon written charges and after public hearing.
(c) The board shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with
the provisions of this regulation. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman
and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting
chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the
board shall be public. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating each fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be
filed in the office of the city auditor and shall be a public record.
(d) The board shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the
facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, or affirming, or
modifying any order, requirements, decision or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this regulation.
(e) The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be
sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the city engineer, or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
regulation, or to affect [effect] any variation in this regulation.
Sec. 12.Judicial review.
Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment
may appeal to the district court as provided in Section 11 of Chapter 40 of the Session Laws of
1945 [N.D.C.C. § 2-04-2011]
Sec. 13.Penalties.
Each violation of this regulation, or any order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each day
B:6 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX B - AIRPORT ZONING
of violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition the joint airport
zoning board may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction, an action to prevent, restain
[restrain], correct or abate any violation of this regulation, pursuant to Chapter 2 — or (Airport
Zoning) 1947 Supplement of the North Dakota Revised Code of 1943 [N.D.C.C. § 2-04-2012]2
Sec. 14.Conflicting regulations.
Where this regulation imposes a greater or more stringent restriction upon the use of
land than is imposed or required by any other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this
regulation shall govern.
Sec. 15.Severability.
If any of the provisions of this regulation or the application thereof to any person or
circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of
the regulation which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this
end the provisions of this regulation are declared to be severable.
Sec. 16.Effective date.
This regulation shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption.
This Ordinance duly passed its first reading on the 17th day of October, 1950, and
thereafter on the 24th day of October, 1950, passed its second reading and was duly adopted.
The following Commissioners voted “aye” thereon: Webster, Lee and Ditsworth thereon and
the following voted “nay” thereon: None. Absent and not voting: Anderson and Rawitscher.
Signed and approved this 24th day of October, 1950.
W. N. Ditsworth,
President of the Board of City Commissioners.
Attest:
H. L. Grimstwedt,
City Auditor.
2 Editor’s Note: N.D.C.C. § 2-04-12 provides that a violation of regulations, orders or rulings
constitutes a Class B misdemeanor. See N.D.C.C. § 12.1-32-01.
B:7 Publication, Dec 2020

Appendix C
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS

APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Appendix C
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
ORDINANCE NO. 574
Editor’s Note: Appendix C sets forth the subdivision regulations of the City of
Williston, as enacted on June 9, 1981. The nature of a subdivisions ordinance and the
requirements of state law as to the procedures for enactment, amendment, appeals and the like
preclude its physical incorporation as an integral part of the Code; therefore, it has been
included in the appendix as enacted, for the information and convenience of the user.
Unless otherwise indicated by a history note following a particular section, the
ordinance is set out as originally enacted, the section headings and numbers having been
retained. Any material in brackets [ ] has been added by the editor for purposes of clarity.
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 544 OF THE CITY OF
WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, ALSO KNOWN AS THE “SUBDIVISION
REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF WILLISTON” PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION
OF THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN THE CITY OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA
AND UNINCORPORATED TERRITORY LOCATED WITHIN THE TERRITORIAL
JURISDICTION OF THE WILLISTON PLANNING COMMISSION; REQUIRING AND
REGULATING THE PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION OF PRE-LIMINARY AND
FINAL PLATS FOR SUCH PURPOSE; PROVIDING FOR THE VACATION OF PLATS;
PROVIDING DESIGN STANDARDS; PROVIDING MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS TO BE
MADE OR ARRANGED BY THE DEVELOPER OR SUBDIVIDER; PROVIDING FOR
VARIANCES; SETTING FEES; AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION
OF ITS PROVISIONS.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF CITY COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY
OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, TO-WIT:
1. The planning commission of the city is hereby authorized and instructed to
review and approve or disapprove the subdivision of land within the city and adjacent territory
in accordance with the laws of the State of North Dakota.
2. The planning commission is to be governed in its review of subdivisions by the
laws of the state, ordinances of the city and the following specific regulations.
Section 1. Purpose of chapter.
This ordinance is adopted in order to safeguard the best interests of the City of
Williston and to assist the subdivider in harmonizing his interests with those of the city at large.
Because each new subdivision becomes a permanent unit in the basic structure of the expanding
community to which the community will adhere, and because piecemeal planning of
subdivisions will bring on undesirable disconnected patch-work of pattern and poor circulation
of traffic unless its design and arrangement is correlated to the comprehensive plan and the
street and highway plan of the city, aiming at a unified scheme of community interests, all
subdivisions of land hereafter submitted for approval to the planning commission shall, in all
respects, fully comply with the regulations hereinafter set forth in this ordinance. These
regulations are hereby adopted for the following purposes:
C:1 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
1. To establish standard procedures, requirements and conditions for the
preparation, submission and approval of plats of the subdivision of land within
the city and its unincorporated jurisdiction thereof, as provided in Chapter 40-
48 of the North Dakota Century Code, and to enable the city planning
commission [to] exercise the authority granted therein, and
2. To require that such plats conform satisfactorily to the comprehensive plan for
the territorial jurisdiction of the city planning commission and other plans for
such jurisdiction or part thereof, including the land use plan and other portions
of the comprehensive plan.
Section 2. Title of chapter.
These regulations shall be known as the “Subdivision Regulations of the City of
Williston.”
Section 3. Conformity with chapter.
Hereafter all subdivisions made within the City and within the designated areas outside
of the corporate limits thereof, and not located in any other municipality, shall be subject to and
shall conform to these regulations and shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan and other
plans for such territory, or part thereof, including the land use plan and other portions of the
comprehensive plan.
Section 4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance certain words used herein are defined as follows:
Alleys: Alleys are minor public ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Block: Is an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by
streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of the
above with a physical land barrier such as a river.
Board: Board of adjustment.
Building line: A line extending across the full width of a lot in front of which no
building may be constructed other than steps.
Building permit: Is the permit to allow for structural construction as required under the
building code of the City of Williston.
City: City of Williston, North Dakota.
City auditor: City auditor of the City of Williston, North Dakota.
City commission: The board of city commissioners of the City of Williston, North
Dakota.
City engineer: The professional engineer or the director of public works ordinarily
retained by the City of Williston for the recommendation, advice and prosecution of
engineering work as requested by the city.
Comprehensive plan: A general plan for the improvement and development of
Williston, North Dakota as adopted by the city planning commission and the city commission.
C:2 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Cul-de-sac: A short street having one end open to traffic and being terminated by a
vehicular turn-around.
Dead end street: A street which has only one outlet for vehicular traffic and terminates
without a vehicular turn-around.
Depth of lot: The depth of a lot shall be the average distance from the front lot line to
the rear lot line. The front lot line is the lot boundary abutting a street. (In the case of a corner
lot abutting two streets, the front lot line is the boundary aligned with or an extension of
predominate front lines of lots in the remainder of the block.) The rear lot line shall be the
boundary opposite (or more nearly opposite) the front lot line.
Double frontage lots: Double frontage lots are those which extend continuously
between two parallel (or approximately parallel) streets bounding a block. A block containing
double frontage lots is composed of one rather than two tiers of lots.
Dwelling unit: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation.
Easement: Is a grant by a property owner of the use of a strip of land for such public
use as constructing and maintaining utilities, including but not limited to, sanitary sewers, water
mains, electric lines, telephone lines, T.V. or F.M. transmission lines, storm sewer or storm
drainage ways, gas lines and roadways.
Family: An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption
or a group of not more than five persons (excluding servants) who need not be related by blood,
marriage, or adoption living together in a dwelling unit.
Final plat: Is a drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all the requirements of the
City of Williston and in such form as required by the County of Williams for purposes of
recording.
Improvements: Street grading, street surfacing and paving, curb and gutters, street
lights, street signs, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, water meters, fire hydrants,
sanitary sewers, storm drainage facilities, culverts, bridges, public utilities or other such
installations as designated by the planning commission.
Intersection, street: Is the point of crossing or meeting of two or more streets.
Lot: One unit of a recorded plat or subdivision or a portion or parcel of land considered
as a unit and occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings and including
as a minimum such open spaces required by other city ordinances and having frontage on a
public street.
Lot or property pin: A monument established by certified land survey and set by a
registered land surveyor to provide for accurate location of property lines.
Market value: An estimate of the property worth, in terms of money, in the free and
open market.
Monument: An identification marker established by certified land survey and set by a
registered land surveyor at each section corner, angle point, block corner, street center line, or
other point.
C:3 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
Owner: Includes the plural as well as the singular, and where appropriate shall include
a natural person, partnership, firm, association, public or quasi-public corporation, private
corporation, or a combination of any of these.
Parcel: A contiguous quantity of land under separate ownership.
Parks and playgrounds: Are public land and open spaces in the City of Williston,
dedicated or reserved for recreation purposes.
Pedestrian way: Is a public or private right-of-way across a block or within a block to
provide access, to be used by pedestrians and which may be used for the installation of utility
lines.
Percentage of grade: Is the rise or fall of a slope in feet and tenths of a foot for each
100 feet of horizontal distance. The center line of a street shall be used to determine the street
rise of grade.
Planning commission: City planning commission of Williston, North Dakota.
Plat: A map which defines the subdivision of land. A plat commonly shows lots,
blocks, streets and other features relevant to the development and improvement of the property.
Preliminary plat: Is a tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision meeting
requirements herein enumerated.
Protective convenants: Are contracts made between private parties as to the manner in
which land may be used, with the view to protecting and preserving the physical and economic
integrity of any given area.
Recreational area, public: An area of land open to the public for recreational purposes
with no user fees charged.
Recreational area, semi-public: An area of land open to the public for recreational
purposes with user fees charged.
Reverse frontage lot: Is a corner lot the rear of which abuts upon the side of another lot
whether across an alley or not.
Sidewalk or walkway: That portion of a dedicated right-of-way or easement intended
for pedestrian use only.
Street: A public way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access
whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, alley, or however otherwise designated.
Street, collectors: Are those that carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of
thoroughfares and highways, including the principal entrance streets of residential districts as
shown on the comprehensive plan.
Street, minor: Are those which are used primarily to provide vehicular and pedestrian
access to abutting properties.
Street, private: A private roadway affording access by pedestrians and vehicles, which
is under individual rather than municipal control and ownership.
C:4 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Street, service road: Are minor streets which are parallel and adjacent to thoroughfares
and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through
traffic.
Street, thoroughfares: Are arterial streets which are used primarily for heavy traffic,
and serving as an arterial trafficway between the various districts of the community, as shown
on the comprehensive plan.
Street width: Is the shortest distance between lines of lots delineating the street right-ofway.
Subdivider: A person, corporation, partnership, association or any other group who
prepares or causes to be prepared a subdivision plat.
Subdivision administrator: The person or department designated to administrate
subdivision regulations.
Subdivisions: A subdivision of land is a parcel(s) which has been divided into two or
more separate units, any of which resultant parcels is less than three acres in area for the
purpose of transfer of ownership or building development, or, if a new street is involved, any
division of a parcel of land. The term includes resubdivision or rearrangement of three or more
lots in a subdivision, and where it is appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of
subdividing or to the land subdivided.
Swales: A drainage system for storm run-off which approximates natural drainage
patterns. For example, shallow drainage ways are provided beside streets and, if necessary, a
ponding area is provided. Thus, use of a natural percolation is emphasized, the need for
conventional curb, gutter and storm drains is minimized or eliminated. The net result is lower
initial cost to home buyers because of lower original costs and lower maintenance costs. This
system may be used when internal pedestrian ways are provided in subdivisions.
Tangent: Is a straight line departing from a curve which is perpendicular to the radius
of that curve.
Tract: A parcel of land intended for division or development of a subdivision.
U.S.G.S. datum: Refers to United States Geodetic Survey [Bureau of Land
Management] datum.
Vertical curve: Is the surface curvature on a street center line located between lines of
different percentage of grade.
Width of lot: The width of a lot shall be the average distance between side lot lines.
Side lot lines are those which are neither front nor rear lot lines.
Section 5. Approval of plats.
Plat approval [,] as required herein and in conformity with statutory authority within
the planning commission’s territorial jurisdiction, shall be by the planning commission, with
confirmation approval by the city commission. In all cases where land is offered for dedication
for streets or other public purposes, the governing body affected shall act to accept or reject the
offer of dedication and the deed for the fee to such lands. The approval of other jurisdictional
planning commissions shall be required on all plats of land situated within the unincorporated
jurisdiction of the City of Williston, North Dakota.
C:5 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
Section 6. Procedure for approval of plats.
All subdivision sketches submitted for approval, as well as all plats, preliminary and
final, shall be prepared in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance and in
conformance with the Williston comprehensive plan. The subdivider shall be responsible for
such conformance.
A. Preliminary steps:
1. Before preparing the general plan of a subdivision, the subdivider shall
consult informally with the subdivision administrator, city engineer,
city forester and department of public works director concerning the
relation of his property to existing conditions, future plans, and
community facilities, utilities and services.
2. It will be the duty of the planning commission to discourage the
subdividing of the lands that are far in advance of the needs of the
community; or that by their location cannot be efficiently served by
public utilities, schools, fire protection, police protection or other
municipal service; or that are located in areas subject to flooding or
that are topographically unsuitable for development; or that for any
other reason are unwisely or prematurely subdivided. It shall also be
the duty of the planning commission to encourage the replatting of
lands deemed to be unsatisfactorily subdivided or are underdeveloped.
3. It shall also be the duty of the planning commission to encourage the
coordinated platting of adjacent small parcels of land.
B. Preliminary plat approval:
1. The subdivider shall apply in writing to the planning commission for
tentative approval of the preliminary subdivision plat.
2. Eight prints of the preliminary subdivision plat shall be submitted to
the subdivision administrator for the planning commission at the city
hall at least 14 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which
the same shall be considered. The preliminary plat shall comply with
provisions of Section 10 of these regulations. Fees charged for the
filing of the preliminary subdivision plat shall be paid in full, on the
basis of the estimated number of lots created, at the time of application
for tentative approval. The subdivision administrator shall prepare a
report, thereon, setting out whether or not said plat meets the
requirements of the city ordinance, and the City of Williston
comprehensive plan. He shall present said report together with his
recommendations thereon, to the next meeting of the [planning]
commission, filing as herein set out.
3. After receipt of the application for preliminary plat approval, the
[subdivision] administrator shall give notice of a public hearing on
such proposed subdivision by advertising the time and place of such
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Williston or
in the county concerned at least 10 days prior to the date of such
hearing. The subdivider will furnish the name and address of the owner
C:6 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
of the land, or his agent, at the time of application, and the secretary of
the planning commission shall send to said address by registered mail a
notice of the time and place of such public hearing not less than five
days before the date fixed for the hearing. The public hearing may be
held at a regular meeting or special meeting of the planning
commission.
4. Within 30 days after the submission of a plat, the planning commission
shall approve or disapprove it. If the plat is not approved or
disapproved within such time, it shall be deemed to have been
approved, and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the
commission on demand. The applicant, however, may waive the
requirement that the commission shall act within the 30 days and
consent to an extension of such period. The grounds upon which any
plat is disapproved shall be stated upon the records of the commission.
5. Upon the making of its determination, the planning commission shall
embrace the same within a motion, which shall include all conditions it
required for approval, or conditions upon which approval will be
granted, and shall set forth the reasons for the approval given. A copy
of the motion shall be sent forthwith to the subdivider and a copy
thereof to the city commission together with the plat if it is approved,
conditionally or otherwise.
6. Approval shall be effective for a maximum period of 12 months, unless
upon application by the developer, an extension is granted. If the plat
or portion thereof has not been submitted for final approval within the
time limit, a preliminary plat must again be submitted for approval.
7. The city commission shall review the preliminary plat and the
recommendations of the planning commission at their next regular
meeting following the action of the planning commission and shall take
action on such plat and recommendations within 60 days. Failing to do
so, it shall be considered an approval of the plat and a certificate to that
effect shall be issued by the city commission on demand. Procedures
for approval, approval with conditions or denials shall be as prescribed
by the planning commission.
C. Final approval:
1. After the preliminary plat has been approved, and the subdivider
determines to proceed to secure final approval of all or a part thereof as
a final plat, the final plat shall be submitted to the planning
commission with a letter requesting such approval and describing the
proposed development schedule for the subdivision.
2. One mylar original and two reproducible copies of the final plat shall
be submitted to the subdivision administrator at least eight days prior
to the planning commission meeting at which the same shall be
considered. The application shall be accompanied by such other
documents and materials as may be required by these regulations or by
the city engineer or director of public works. The [subdivision]
C:7 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
administrator shall prepare a report thereon setting out whether or not
said final plat is in substantial agreement with the preliminary plat and
if not, in what particulars it varies therefrom; whether or not it
conforms to the requirements of state law and the city ordinance, and
that the final plat meets all the conditions as attached to the approval of
the preliminary plat. At this time an adjusted filing fee shall be
determined and any additional fee shall be paid.
3. If the planning commission approves the subdivision, such approval
will be entered upon the original and copies of the plat and will be
signed by the chairman of the planning commission. If the planning
commission disapproves the subdivision, such action, together with the
reasons therefor, will be entered in the official records of the planning
commission and a copy of such record will be sent to the subdivider. If
it shall determine that it cannot approve it unless certain conditions are
attached, it shall by motion set forth the conditions for approval and
forthwith send a copy of such conditions to the subdivider, and all
further action on the plat shall be suspended until the subdivider shall
respond thereto, provided that if no further action is taken by the
subdivider within a thirty-day period, the plat shall be deemed to be
disapproved.
4. The planning commission will act upon all requests for final approval
of a subdivision within 30 days after application for such approval is
made. Failure by the planning commission to act within such period
shall be deemed as approval of the subdivision and the secretary of the
planning commission shall issue a certificate to the effect upon
demand. However, the subdivider may waive this requirement and
agree to an extension of this period.
5. Upon final approval of a subdivision involving the creation of new
streets, the widening, decreasing or vacation of existing streets or
alleys, or the creation, enlargement or decreases of other lands devoted
to public use, the planning commission shall thereby and without
further public hearing have approved such change in streets, alleys, or
public lands as an amendment to the comprehensive plan. The planning
commission will transmit notice of such action to the city commission
of the City of Williston together with appropriate recommendations
concerning the acceptance of dedicated streets and alleys, or the
vacation thereof, and of the acceptance of other dedicated lands. In the
case of streets, alleys and public lands lying outside the City of
Williston, notice of the action of the planning commission and
appropriate recommendations will be transmitted to the board of
county commissioners of Williams County, the township board, and
other bodies having jurisdiction.
6. Final action by motion on the final plat shall be communicated
forthwith to the subdivider by the subdivision administrator for the
planning commission, and a copy of the motion shall be sent to the city
C:8 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
commission, together with the plat, and such other data as the
commission shall determine.
D. Submittal to the city commission:
1. Upon the adoption of the motion of approval or disapproval by the
planning commission, the final plat shall come before the city
commission for review.
2. The commission shall have the authority to hold such hearings on the
final plat as it shall determine, and upon such notice as it shall provide.
3. If the commission is not satisfied with the final plat as presented, it
may: (1) Disapprove the same; (2) set forth such conditions and
requirements as it shall require to be fulfilled before the same is
approved; or (3) refer the same to the planning commission which shall
act thereon at the next meeting and report back to the city commission
no later than 30 days after the said action of the city commission.
4. If the city commission shall determine to accept the plat, it shall by
resolution so determine, and the resolution shall provide for the
acceptance of all streets, alleys, easements or other public ways, parks,
and other spaces dedicated to public purposes.
5. The action of the city commission finally determining the matter shall
be communicated to the subdivider, and if the plat be disapproved,
reasons given by the commission for such determination shall be set
forth.
6. A final plat that is approved by the city commission shall be filed by
the subdivision administrator for record with the register of deeds of
Williams County, within 30 days after approval.
Section 7. Plats outside corporate limits.
Procedure for approval of preliminary and final plats of land outside of the corporate
limits of Williston shall be the same as set forth in Section 6 of this ordinance, except that one
copy of the preliminary plat shall be referred to the Williams County planning commission, and
one copy to the affected townships with a request for their recommendations to be submitted to
the Williston planning commission. The Williston planning commission shall take into account
such recommendations prior to taking action on the plat. If no such recommendations are
received by the Williston planning commission within 30 days, the plat shall be deemed
approved by the county and the township.
Section 8. Vacation of plat of record.
A. Conditions: A subdivider or owner may make application to the planning
commission to vacate any plat of record under the following conditions:
1. The plat to be vacated is a legal plat of record.
2. Vacation of the subdivision will not interfere with development of, nor deny
access via public thoroughfare to, adjoining properties or utility services or
other improvements.
C:9 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
3. Vacation of the subdivision will not be contrary to the Williston comprehensive
plan.
B. Procedure: [Vacation of the subdivision] shall comply with vacation
proceedings as outlined in Chapter 40-50 of the North Dakota Century Code. The land owner or
owners shall present a proposal to the planning commission, containing the legal description
and plat of the subdivision and calling for vacation thereof. The planning commission shall
study the proposal and shall send recommendations to the city commission. The city
commission shall approve or deny the proposal. If the proposal is approved, it shall then be
recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. All fees for the recording of such vacation
shall be paid by the subdivider.
Section 9. Professional assistance.
The city commission or the planning commission may request such professional
assistance as it deems necessary to properly evaluate the plats submitted, expenses to be paid by
the owner or subdivider.
Section 10. Specification for plats.
A. Specifications for preliminary plats:
1. The following data regarding identification and description of the preliminary
plat shall be provided:
a. Proposed name of subdivision, which name shall not duplicate or too
closely approximate the name of any plat or existing subdivision
heretofore recorded in the county except when such plat is an addition
to an existing plat of record. The name of a rearrangement of an
existing plat may be shortened from a complete legal description of the
rearrangement by stating “(said rearrangement) hereafter to be known
as
b. Location by section, township and range, or by other legal description.
c. Names and addresses of the owners, subdividers, and developers
having control of the lands included in said preliminary plat, the
designer of the plat, the surveyor and his registration number.
d. Graphic scale, not less than one inch to 100 feet, or other scale as
approved by the subdivision administrator.
e. North point.
f. Date of preparation.
2. The following data regarding existing conditions shall be provided for
preliminary plats:
a. Boundary line survey, including measured distances and angles which
shall close by latitude and departure with an error of closure not
exceeding one foot in 10,000 feet.
b. Total acreage in said preliminary plat computed to 1/10 of an acre.
c. Total square footage of each lot.
C:10 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
d. Location and names of existing or platted streets or other public ways,
parks and other public open spaces, buildings and structures, easements
and section and corporate lines within the tract and to a distance of 100
feet beyond the tract at the time of submission of the plat.
e. If the proposed subdivision is a rearrangement or a replat of any former
plat, the lot and block arrangement of the plat of record along with its
original name shall be indicated by dotted or dashed lines. Also, any
revision or vacated roadway of the original plat of record shall be so
indicated.
f. Location and size of existing surfaced streets shall be shown, as well as
all railroads, sewers, water mains, gravel pits, culverts, or other
underground facilities within and to a distance of 100 feet beyond the
tract.
g. Boundary lines of adjoining platted or unplatted land within 100 feet
beyond the tract.
h. Complete topography map that extends 100 feet beyond the
subdivision boundary line with contour intervals not greater than two
feet, water courses, high water elevation, and date thereof (of parts of
platted area that are wet or have been wet, or have been subject to
flooding), marshes, rock outcrops and other significant features; all
superimposed on at least one print of preliminary plat. United States
Geodetic Survey datum shall be used for all topographic mapping.
i. In the case of a subdivision where no new street is involved, the
prescribed topographic map requirements shall be left up to the
discretion of the city engineer or the department of public works
director.
3. The following data regarding proposed development design features of the
preliminary plat shall be provided:
a. Layout of proposed streets, alleys, pedestrian ways and easements,
showing right-of-way widths and proposed names of streets. The name
or number of any street similar to or heretofore used in the City of
Williston shall not be permitted unless the proposed street is an
extension of an already named street in which event that name or
number shall be used. All street names or numbers shall be subject to
the approval of the planning commission.
b. Layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of lots, approximate
square footage area of each lot, and the number or letter of each block.
c. Proposed public improvements: highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on
or near the tract.
d. Location and size of proposed parks, playgrounds, churches, or school
sites or other special uses of land to be considered for dedication to
public use, or to be reserved by deed of covenant for the use of all
C:11 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
property owners in the subdivision and any conditions of such
dedication or reservation.
e. Vicinity sketch, at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet or less for an
area 1/2 mile in radius of the tract, to show the relation of the plat to its
surroundings.
f. Existing and proposed covenants, if applicable.
g. A statement of proposed improvements to be installed by the
subdivider.
h. Profiles showing existing ground surface and proposed street grades,
including extensions for a reasonable distance beyond the limits of the
proposed subdivision; typical cross sections of the proposed grading,
roadway and sidewalk.
B. Data required for final plats. The owner or subdivider shall submit a final plat
together with any necessary supplementary information. The final plat shall consist of one
mylar original and two prints on a reproducible mylar base or other media approved by the city
engineer or public works director, and in sheet sizes of 22 inches by 36 inches, or other size
approved by the city engineer or public works director.
1. The final plat shall contain the following:
a. The final plat prepared for recording purposes shall be prepared in
accordance with provisions of North Dakota state statutes and
applicable city and county regulations.
b. Name of subdivision: Names shall not duplicate or too closely
approximate the name of any existing subdivision in Williams County
except when such plat is an addition to an existing plat of record. The
name of a rearrangement of an existing plat may be shortened from a
complete legal description of the rearrangement by stating “(said
rearrangement) hereafter to be known as __________.”
c. Location by section, township, range, county and state, and including
descriptive boundaries of the subdivision, based on an accurate
traverse, giving angular and linear dimensions which must
mathematically close. The allowable error of closure on any portion of
a final plat shall be one foot in 10,000 feet. The location of monuments
shall be noted or shown on the final plat. Location of such monuments
shall be shown in reference to existing official monuments or to the
nearest established street lines, including true angles and distances to
such reference point or monuments. Permanent monuments shall be
placed at each corner of each block or portion of a block, points of
curvature and points of tangents on street lines, and at each angle point
on the boundary of the subdivision. A permanent marker shall be
deemed to be a steel rod, 1/2 inch in diameter extending at least two
feet below the finished grade. In situations where conditions prohibit
the placing of monuments in the location prescribed above, offset
markers will be permitted.
C:12 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
d. Locations of lots, streets, public highways, alleys, parks and other
features with accurate dimensions in feet and decimals of feet, with the
length of radii and/or arcs of all curves, and with all other information
necessary to reproduce the plat on the ground. Dimensions shall be
shown from all angle points and points of curve to lot lines.
e. Boundary lines and description of boundary lines on any areas other
than streets and alleys which are to be dedicated or reserved for public
use.
f. Lots shall be numbered clearly and the square footage of each lot shall
be shown. Block numbers shall be shown clearly in the center of the
block and all streets shall be named.
g. Names and addresses of owners, subdividers, and developers, designer
of the plat, surveyor and his registration number, making the plat.
h. The scale of the plat shall be not less than one inch to 100 feet or other
scale as approved by the city engineer or director of public works to be
shown graphically, north point, and date of preparation.
i. Statement dedicating all easements as follows: Easements for
installation and maintenance of utilities and drainage facilities are
reserved over, under and along the strips marked “utility easements.”
j. Statement dedicating all streets, alleys and other public areas not
previously dedicated as follows: Streets, alleys and other public areas
shown on this plat and not heretofore dedicated to public use are
hereby also dedicated.
2. Certifications required on final plats:
a. All signatures shall be notarized.
b. Notarized certification by owner and by any mortgage holder of record
of their consent of the plat and the dedication of streets and other
public areas.
c. Notarized certification by registered land surveyor, to the effect that
the plat represents a survey made by him and that monuments and
markers shown therein exists as located and that all dimension and
geodetic details are correct.
d. Space for certificates of approval to be filled in by the signatures of the
owner(s), surveyor, president of the planning commission, city auditor,
president of the city commission, and notary publics for each as well as
the Williams County register of deeds. The form of approval by the
planning commission is as follows:
(1) Certificate of Registered Surveyor:
I, __________, being a registered North Dakota land surveyor, do hereby certify that I
have surveyed and mapped the property shown herein and the within map is a true and correct
representation of the land surveyed, and that I have fully complied with the provisions of the
C:13 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
North Dakota Century Code and the City of Williston subdivision ordinances to the best of my
knowledge and belief.
_________________________
Registered Land Surveyor
State of North Dakota
County of Williams
Be it known that on this _____ day of _________, 19_____, before me personally appeared
__________ and acknowledged the execution and signing of the above Certificate of
Registered Land Surveyor to be his voluntary act and deed.
_________________________
(Name) Notary Public
Williams County,
North Dakota
My Commission Expires: _____
(2) Owners Consent and Dedication:
We, the undersigned, being all the owners and mortgage holders of the lands platted herein, do
hereby voluntarily consent to the execution of said plat, and do dedicate the streets, alleys,
parks, and public grounds as shown thereon, including all sewers, culverts, bridges, water
distribution lines, sidewalks, grounds, whether such improvements are shown or not, to the
public use forever.
We agree not to vacate any portion of this plat without consent of the Planning Commission
and the City of Williston. We also hereby dedicate easements, to run with the land, for water,
sewer, gas, electric, telephone or other public utility lines or services under, on, or over those
certain strips of land designated hereon as “utility easements.”
_________________________
_________________________
State of North Dakota
County of Williams
Be it known that on the _____ day of _________, 19 _____, before me personally appeared
__________ and __________ and acknowledged the execution and signing of the above
Consent and Dedication to be his (her, their) voluntary act and deed.
C:14 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
_________________________
Notary Public,
Williams County,
North Dakota
My Commission expires: _____
(3) Planning Commission Approval:
The subdivision of land shown hereon has been approved by the Planning Commission of the
City of Williston on _________, 19 _____, in accordance with the laws of the State of North
Dakota, ordinances of the City of Williston, and regulations of said Planning Commission.
_________________________
(Name) President
State of North Dakota
County of Williams
Be it known that on the _____ day of _________, 19 _____, before me personally appeared
(name), President of the Planning Commission of the City of Williston and acknowledged the
execution and signing of the above.
_________________________
Notary Public,
Williams County,
North Dakota
My Commission expires:_________
(4) Approval by City Commission:
By virtue of Ordinance No. 544 passed November 28, 1978, the City Commission of the City of
Williston, North Dakota, has approved the subdivision of land shown hereon; has accepted the
dedication of all streets, alleys and other public ways shown hereon lying within the corporated
limits of the City of Williston; has accepted the dedication of all parks and other public areas
shown hereon (except those public areas specifically dedicated to other public bodies); and has
ordered the vacation of streets, alleys, and public ways of a subdivision previously recorded
with the Register of Deeds of Williams County in Book _____, Page _____, more particularly
described as follows:
NOTE: Use only that part of this paragraph that is applicable to the subdivision.
Further, said City Commission has approved the streets, alleys, and other public ways and
grounds as shown hereon as an amendment of the Comprehensive Street and Highway Plan and
any other appropriate portion of the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Williston.
ATTEST: _________________________ _________________________
City Auditor (Name) President, City Commission
C:15 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
Be it known that on this _____ day of _________, 19_____, before me personally appeared
__________ and _________ known to me to be the persons who executed the above certificate
and acknowledged to me that they executed the same.
_________________________
Notary Public
Williams County,
North Dakota
My Commission expires: _____
NOTE: A similar form will be required for acceptance of any streets or public lands
dedicated to any governing body other than the City of Williston.
(5) Certificate of the Williams County Register of Deeds:
This plat was filed for record in the office of the Williams County, Register of Deeds, in the
State of North Dakota at __________ on the _____ day of __________ A.D., 19 ______, and
was duly entered in the Book _____, Page _____.
_________________________
Williams County
Register of Deeds
C. The following information shall accompany the final plat and shall be filed
therewith at the time the final plat is submitted to the planning commission.
1. Plan and profiles of streets showing grades approved by the city engineer. The
profiles shall be drawn to city standard scales and elevations and shall be based
on a datum plane approved by the city engineer or director of public works.
2. A certificate by the city auditor certifying that the subdivider has complied with
one of the following alternatives:
a. All improvements as described in Section 14 of these regulations have
been installed in accord with the requirements of these regulations and
with the action of the planning commission giving approval of the
preliminary plat, or
b. A bond or certified check has been posted, which is available to the
city, and in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all required
improvements.
3. Restrictive covenants in form for recording.
4. A title opinion stating the name of the owner of record.
5. Other data. Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or deductions as
may be required by the planning commission in the enforcement of this
ordinance.
C:16 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 11. Design standards.
A. Streets and alleys:
1. The arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets shall conform as nearly
as possible to the Williston comprehensive plan. Except for cul-de-sac, streets
normally shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjoining or adjacent
subdivision, or provide for future connections to adjoining unsubdivided tracts,
or shall be a reasonable projection of streets to the nearest subdivided tracts.
The arrangement of thoroughfares and collector streets shall be considered in
their relation to the reasonable circulation of traffic, to topographic conditions,
to run-off of storm water, to public convenience and safety, and in their
appropriate relation to the proposed use of the area to be served.
2. Minor streets should be so planned as to discourage their use by nonlocal
traffic. Dead-end streets are prohibited, but cul-de-sacs will be permitted where
conditions justify their use. Street cul-de-sacs shall normally not be longer than
500 feet, including a terminal turnaround which shall be provided at the closed
end, with an outside right-of-way radius of not less than 55 feet.
3. Where the plat to be submitted includes only part of the tract owned or
intended for development by the subdivider, a tentative plan of a proposed
future street system for the unsubdivided portion shall be prepared and
submitted by the subdivider.
4. When a tract is subdivided into larger than normal building lots or parcels, such
lots or parcels shall be so arranged as to permit the logical location and
openings of future streets and appropriate resubdivision, with provision for
adequate utility connections for such resubdivision.
5. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles, except where topography or other conditions justify
variations. The minimum angle of intersection of streets shall be 80°. Street
intersection jogs with an offset of less than 150 feet shall be avoided.
6. Wherever the proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to the right-of-way
of a limited or controlled access U.S. or State Highway or a thoroughfare, the
planning commission shall determine which provision shall be required: (a) for
a service road approximately parallel and adjacent to the boundary of such
right-of-way, (b) for a street at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of
land between such street and right-of-way, or (c) for double frontage lots and a
reservation strip along the rear or thoroughfare property line with a screen
planting. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the
minimum distance for approach connections to future grade separations, grade
crossings or for lot depths.
7. Alleys shall be provided except that this requirement may be waived where
other definite and assured provision is made for emergency vehicle (police, fire
and ambulance) and service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and
parking consistent with and adequate for uses proposed. Alleys, where
provided, shall not be less than 20 feet wide for residential alleys and not less
than 25 feet for commercial and industrial alleys. Dead-end alleys will not be
C:17 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
permitted, except that this requirement may be waived where an adequate turnaround for emergency vehicles (fire, police and ambulance) is provided.
8. Dedication of half streets will not be approved, except where it is essential to
the reasonable development of the subdivision and in conformity with the other
requirements of these regulations, where it is found that it will be practical to
require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is
subdivided, or where it becomes necessary to acquire the remaining half by
condemnation so it may be improved in the public interest. If a half street rightof-way is approved, parking shall be prohibited on such half street until a full
street right-of-way is provided.
9. For all public ways hereafter dedicated and accepted, the minimum right-ofway widths for streets shall be as shown in the Comprehensive Plan for
Williston, and where not shown therein, the minimum right-of-way for streets,
alleys, or pedestrian ways included in any subdivision shall not be less than the
minimum dimensions for each classification as follows:
Right-of-Way
Major Arterial Street 100 feet
Minor Arterial Street 80 feet
Collector Street 60 feet
Local Street 50 feet
Service Road 30 feet
Residential Alley 20 feet
Industrial-Commercial Alley 25 feet
Pedestrian Way 10 feet
Where existing or anticipated traffic or utilities warrant greater widths of street
right-of-way, these shall be required.
10. All proposed streets shall be offered for dedication as public streets.
11. Reserve strips in private ownership controlling access to streets shall be
prohibited.
12. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on
arterial and collector streets.
13. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more
than 10°, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a
sight distance of not less than 400 feet for collector streets, and of such greater
radii as the planning commission shall determine for special cases.
14. Pavement widths shall measure from the back of the curbs of roadways and
shall not be less than the following:
C:18 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
a. Major arterial streets: 48 feet.
b. Minor arterial streets: 44 feet.
c. Collector streets: 44 feet.
d. Local street: 34 feet.
e. Cul-de-sacs: radius of cul-de-sac shall be the same as street width with
a minimum radius of 40 feet.
f. Alleys: 20 feet.
g. Sidewalks: five - six feet.
h. The swale concept is approved where internal pedestrian walks and
bike-ways are provided.
15. No street names or numbers shall be used which will duplicate or be confused
with the names of existing streets. Street names or numbers shall be subject to
the approval of the Planning Commission.
16. Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with due
allowance for reasonable vertical curves:
a. Arterial streets: 6%.
b. Collector streets: 8%.
c. Local streets: 10%.
17. No street grade shall be less than 4/10 of 1%.
18. Flat grades are preferred from 50 to 100 feet away from an intersection, but in
no case shall grades exceed 4% for a distance of at least 50 feet from all
intersections.
19 General considerations:
a. Intersections of more than two streets at a point shall not be permitted.
b. Alleys or other appropriate access shall be provided in commercial and
industrial districts.
c. Dead-end streets as permanent features shall be prohibited.
d. The quality of construction should be comparable to existing and
approved construction in adjacent areas.
B. Easements:
1. Where alleys are not provided an easement for utilities, at least 10 feet wide,
shall be provided along each rear lot line and along any other line as may be
deemed necessary by the city engineer to form a continuous right-of-way of at
least 20 feet in width, said greater or lesser width shall be specified by the city
engineer or director of public works and provided accordingly upon the plat.
2. Utility easements shall connect with easements established in adjoining
properties. These easements, when approved, shall not thereafter be changed
C:19 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
without the approval of the city commission, by resolution upon the
recommendation of the city planning commission.
3. Additional easements for pole guys should be provided at the outside of turns.
Where possible, lot lines shall be arranged to bisect the exterior angle so that
pole guys will fall alongside lot lines.
4. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, coulee, drainage way,
channel, or stream, a storm water easement, drainage right-of-way or park
dedication, whichever the planning commission may deem the most adequate,
conforming substantially with the lines of such water course shall be provided,
together with such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate
for the storm water drainage of the area. The width of such easements shall be
determined by the city engineer or director of public works.
5. The use of underground installation of all utilities (including power, gas,
telephone and cable television) is strongly encouraged in the new subdivisions.
C. Blocks:
1. Block length. In general, intersecting streets, determining block lengths, shall
be provided at such intervals as to serve cross-traffic adequately and to meet
existing streets. Where no existing plats control, the blocks in residential
subdivisions shall normally not exceed 1,320 feet in length, except where
topography or other conditions justify a departure from this maximum. In
blocks longer than 800 feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the
block may be required. The width and location of such pedestrian ways shall be
subject to No. 2 below and to the approval of the city engineer or director of
public works and the planning commission. Blocks for business or industrial
use should normally not exceed 700 feet in length.
2. Block width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two
tiers of lots of appropriate depth, except in such cases where lots fronting on
service roads are necessary for traffic control. Blocks intended for business or
industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their
respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries.
D. Lots:
1. The minimum lot area, width and depth shall not be less than that established
by the Williston zoning ordinance, except that in those areas in which the
public sewer facilities are not likely to be available before development, the
planning commission may require lot size to accommodate adequate land use
density and sewage disposal systems, in conformance to the comprehensive
plan of Williston and the city zoning ordinance.
2. Corner lots for residential use shall have additional width to permit appropriate
building setback from both streets as defined in the Williston zoning ordinance.
3. Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to street lines or radial
to curved street lines.
4. Double frontage lots shall be avoided except where lots back on an arterial
street, or where topographic or other conditions render subdividing otherwise
C:20 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
unreasonable. Such double frontage lots shall have an additional depth of at
least 20 feet in order to allow space for screen planting along the back lot line if
such screening is not otherwise accounted for. The facing of houses away from
an arterial street is strongly encouraged if there is an alternative street to face.
5. Every lot must have frontage on a publicly dedicated street other than an alley,
or in the case of commercial or industrial properties be granted access via a
recorded Perpetual Right-of-Way easement or Reciprocal Easement
Agreement. Said public dedicated street or in the case of a commercial or
industrial property, as easement, shall be at least 30 feet in width and meet the
subdivision regulations and building department requirements as established by
the City of Williston. In the case of commercial or industrial properties said
easement shall follow the requirements as defined below or as modified by a
Development Agreement:
a. For purposes of this subsection, a Perpetual and/or Reciprocal
Easement is defined as a contract that allows multiple parties with
specific ownership or interest in said property(ies) to use both the
surface and underground rights to the property(ies) for the express
mutual benefit of said property(ies);
b. Said easements shall provide ingress and egress to owners and their
invitees and location of public or private utilities with the property(ies);
c. Said easements shall benefit each property owner that such easement
crosses or provides benefit;
d. Said Reciprocal Easements shall not be construed as allowing or
providing a pass through benefit of access or utilities to property(ies)
that are not a contractual party to said easements;
e. Said easement shall not confer right to property(ies) that are not a party
to the easement;
f. Said easements shall grant permission for construction, maintenance
and repairs of utilities and surface improvements as needed;
g. Said easements shall be subject to all City of Williston subdivision and
building regulations regarding site development unless otherwise
modified by Development Agreement;
h. Easement shall run with the land;
i. For new subdivisions, easements shall be specifically noted on the final
plat. Perpetual or Reciprocal easement agreements must be recorded at
the time of final plat recording;
j. Access roads within property(ies) that are served by said easements
shall be delineated on the street signs as private in nature;
k. All associated agreements dealing with utilities or access to the
property(ies) shall identify that such services are via private
conveyance and as such are not the responsibility of the City of
Williston unless modified by Development Agreement;
C:21 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
l. Maintenance of roads and utilities provided by such easements shall be
the responsibility of the benefiting lot owners unless otherwise
modified by Development Agreement.
6. Side lot line shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street line.
E. Public sites and open spaces:
1. In subdividing land or resubdividing an existing plat, due consideration shall be
given by the subdivider to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for
schools, parks, playgrounds, conservation areas, or other public or semi-public
recreational areas or open spaces. Areas so dedicated or reserved shall conform
as nearly as possible to the comprehensive plan, as determined by reasonable
discretion of the city commission upon recommendation of the planning
commission. All areas to be reserved for or dedicated to public use shall be
indicated on the preliminary plat in order that it may be determined when and
in what manner such areas will be dedicated to or acquired by the appropriate
agency.
2. Residential subdivisions. The subdivider of any tract of land which is to be
developed for residential uses shall dedicate to the public for public use as
parks, playgrounds, public open space, or storm water holding areas or ponds,
that percentage of the net tract to be subdivided which corresponds with the
applicable density of the subdivision in the following schedule:
Percentage
0 to 6 dwelling units per acre 6
7 to 12 dwelling units per acre 7
13 to 20 dwelling units per acre 8
Subdivisions of 20 acres in size or greater with lots
between 1.5 and 2.99 acres shall have a 2% park
dedication requirement.
Subdivisions of 3 acre lots or larger shall not have to
dedicate for parks or open space.
If the density of the proposed residential subdivision exceeds 20 dwelling units
per acre, the city commission shall require the dedication of such percentage of
the proposed subdivision as it deems reasonable and in the public interest,
which percentage shall in no event be less than 8% nor more than 10%.
3. Commercial, industrial and other developments. In accordance with the
purpose and intent of this subparagraph, the developer of any tract of land for
any uses enumerated in this subparagraph shall dedicate to the public for public
use as parks, playgrounds, public space or storm water holding areas or ponds,
such portion of the development tract, not to exceed 6% thereof, as the city
commission deems to be reasonable and in the public interest, taking into
C:22 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
consideration the recommendation by the planning and zoning commission
which shall consult with the park district, the locale of the development tract,
its accessibility, serviceability, and zoned use.
4. Dedications of land or cash in lieu of dedication of land for public sites and
open space shall be based on the net usable land, that is, the amount of land left
after dedication of public streets and alleys, as indicated by the square footage
on the preliminary plat.
5. Delineation of area to be dedicated. The actual area to be dedicated for public
use as parks, playgrounds, public open space, or storm water holding areas or
ponds shall be delineated on the preliminary and final plat. Copies of such
preliminary plat or site plan shall be referred to the park board for its scrutiny
and report to the commission of its findings, conclusions, and recommendation,
this referral being in addition to the referral to the planning commission.
6. Cash in lieu of dedication of land. If the park board and city waive a dedication
of land under this section the plat may still be finalized subject to a park fee to
be assessed at the time the first building permit for each lot is issued. The fee
shall be assessed as follows:
a. The park dedication fee shall be assessed by service unit at the time a
building permit is issued. The service unit charge for a residential and
commercial property per service unit shall be set by resolution of the
city commission after recommendation of the planning commission
which shall consult the park board prior to recommending the fee or
any change in such fee.
b. Service unit. For the purpose of this ordinance a service unit will be
computed as follows:
Residential:
1. Minimum charge of one service unit being equivalent to
10,000 square feet of property served.
2. Larger lots will be assessed in direct proportion to size. That is
a 12,500 square foot lot will be assessed 1.25 service units up
to a maximum of two service units.
3. Multi-family and apartment houses will be assessed one
service unit for each apartment or dwelling.
Commercial:
1. Commercial shall be assessed for one service unit per 10,000
square feet of property served.
Any lot already developed but not platted is subject to the same
formula at the time such lot is platted.
7. Restriction on use of cash in lieu of dedication. All cash in lieu of dedication
received by the city pursuant to paragraph 6 in this Section 11 shall be placed
in a special fund and used only for acquisition of land for parks, playgrounds,
public open space, and storm water holding areas or ponds, development of
C:23 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
existing park and playground sites, public open space, and storm water holding
areas or ponds, and debt retirement in connection with land previously acquired
for such public purposes, all within the general location of the subdivision from
which the cash in lieu of dedication is received or for any community park
facilities that would serve the same subdivision.
8. In cases where property is being replatted or resubdivided and a dedication for
parks or cash in lieu of dedication for open spaces and parks has been paid, no
additional dedication or cash in lieu of dedication shall be required unless such
replatting or subdivision results in an increased density of housing or an
increased intensity of use. In such case, a park fee or dedication not to exceed
that set forth in Section 11.E.6. may be assessed by the city commission based
upon recommendation of the planning commission after consultation with the
park board.
F. Planned unit development. The subdivision of land in a planned unit development
(P.U.D.) shall follow the development agreements as determined by the city planning
commission and city commission. Any variance required of this ordinance for the adoption of
the P.U.D. shall herein be considered as a part of the approval of the P.U.D.
[Ord. No. 618, 6-14-1983; Ord. No. 855, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 948, 5-24-2012]
Section 12. Schedule of fees.
The city commission shall establish a schedule of fees and a collection procedure to
cover the cost of examining plans, advertising and holding public hearings, and other expenses
incidental to the approval of a subdivision. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of
the subdivision administrator and may be altered or amended only by the city commission.
All applicable fees shall be paid in full at the time of application for tentative approval
of a preliminary plat. If, because of the failure of the subdivider to submit a final plat within 12
months after receiving tentative approval of the preliminary plat, it will be necessary to resubmit a preliminary plat for tentative approval, the subdivider shall be required to pay a new
fee based upon the fee rates in effect at the time of such re-submission.
Section 13. Variances.
A. General conditions. The planning commission may recommend a variance from
the provisions of this ordinance when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict
compliance. In granting any variance, the commission shall prescribe only conditions that it
deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required
hereinbelow, the commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed subdivision
upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the commission
finds:
1. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said property such
that the strict application of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the
applicant of the reasonable use of his land when compared to the reasonable
use of land as enjoyed by neighboring land owners.
2. The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial
property right of the petitioner.
C:24 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
3. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare
or injurious to other property or property values in the territory in which said
property is situated.
B. Applications required. Applications for any such variance shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider at the time when the preliminary plat is filed for consideration by the
[planning] commission, stating fully and clearly all facts relied upon by the petitioner and shall
be supplemented with maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the commission in
the analysis of the proposed project. The plans for such development shall include such
covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the full achievement of
the plan.
Section 14. Required improvements.
A. Statement of policy:
1. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to require installation of
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, watermain, street grading, and street surfacing in
all new subdivisions within the city boundaries, and storm sewer, street
grading, street surfacing and approved sewage disposal and water systems
within the general jurisdiction of this ordinance.
2. The following improvements shall be installed at the sole expense of the
developer:
a. Storm sewers, culverts, storm water inlets, and other drainage facilities
will be required where they are necessary to insure adequate storm
water drainage for the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications for
street construction as approved by the city engineer or director of
public works.
b. The full width of the right-of-way shall be graded, including the subgrade of the areas to be paved, in accordance with standards and
specifications for street construction as approved by the city engineer
or director of public works.
c. Sanitary sewer in the city limits to serve the entire subdivision
including service connection, extended to the property line, for each lot
or, in areas outside the city, sufficient percolation tests to insure proper
function of independent systems.
d. Watermain in the city limits to be provided where the city deems it to
be reasonably available to serve the entire subdivision including
valves, fire hydrants and service connections (extended to the property
line) to serve each lot or, in areas outside the city, adequate insurance
that individual water systems will function in the subdivision.
e. Street identification signs. Street identification signs of the standard
design approved by the city commission shall be installed at each street
intersection.
3. In the case of the improvements set forth below, the developer shall install the
same at his own expense or, as an alternative, shall submit a legally sufficient
C:25 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
petition for the installation of the same. Such petition must be submitted prior
to, or at the time of, the request for final plat approval in accordance with
Section 6 of this ordinance.
a. Street surfacing. All streets shall be improved with surfacing to overall
width in accordance with city standards.
b. Street trees. Street trees shall be planted in residential areas of
subdivisions in conformance with city standards and specifications for
street tree planting as established by the city forester.
c. Curbs, gutters and sidewalks. Curbs, gutters, and sidewalks shall be
provided in conformance with the standards and specifications as
approved by the city commission.
B. No final plat shall be approved by the city unless the owner or subdivider:
1.
a. Shall have installed survey monuments at all block corners, angle
points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shown
on the final plat;
b. Shall have installed approved iron monuments, at each corner or angle
on the outside border, minimum one-half inch diameter by two feet
long;
c. Shall have preserved in precise position, all United States, state, county
or other official benchmarks, monuments or triangulations, stations in
or adjacent to the property, all as required by the city engineer or
director of public works;
2.
a. Shall have furnished a cash deposit or corporate surety bond
conditioned that the applicant will faithfully perform all requirements
by him undertaken with reference to the proposed plat and will install
all required improvements;
b. Shall have approved plans and specifications as listed below:
C. Plans and specifications. A developer or subdivider shall have the option of
developing his subdivision under option 1 or 2 below, except that a subdivision outside of the
corporate city limits shall be required to follow option 2 only.
1. City development option.
a. Plans and specifications for the construction of required improvements
shall be prepared by a registered and licensed engineer or subject to his
approval. All construction shall be in accordance with such plans and
specifications and subject to the city engineer’s or director of public
works’ inspection and approval. Required bond amounts shall be
determined by the city engineer or director of public works.
b. Upon completion of all improvements ordered to be made in the
subdivision, the city commission shall direct that the assessable cost
C:26 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
thereof be levied less any portion of the cost contributed or paid by the
owner or subdivider, and after required hearing, the city commission
will proceed as provided by law to levy said assessed costs.
2. Private development option.
a. Before a final plat is approved by the city, the owner and subdivider of
the land covered by the said plat shall execute and submit to the city an
agreement, which shall be binding on his or their heirs, personal
representatives and assigns, that he will cause no private construction
to be made on said plat or file or cause to be filed any application for
building permits for such construction until all improvements required
under this ordinance have been made or arranged for in the manner
following, as respects the streets to which the lots sought to be
constructed have access.
b. Prior to the making of such required improvements, the owner or
subdivider shall deposit with the city an amount equal to 1 1/2 times
the city engineer’s or director of public works’ estimated cost of such
improvements, either in cash or an indemnity bond, with sureties
satisfactory to the city conditioned upon the payment of all
construction costs incurred in making of such improvements and all
expense incurred by the city for engineering and legal fees and other
expense in connection with the making of such improvements.
c. The subdivider shall submit with the final plat or at the time of
completion of improvements, if bonded, a certificate of completion of
construction of required improvements. Such certificates shall be
prepared by a registered engineer and shall include a statement of the
inspection and approval of the same by the city engineer. Drawings
showing all improvements built shall be filed with the city.
D. Building permit. No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any
building, structure or improvement on any land required to be subdivided by these regulations
until all requirements of these regulations have been fully complied with.
E. No final plat shall be approved by the city commission on land subject to
flooding or containing poor drainage facilities and on land which would make adequate
drainage of the streets and lots impossible. However, if the subdivider agrees to make
improvements which will, in the opinion of the city engineer, make the area completely safe for
occupancy, and provide adequate street and lot drainage, the final plat of the subdivision may
be approved.
F. All of the required improvements to be installed under the provisions of this
ordinance shall be inspected during the course of their construction by the city engineer or
director of public works. All of the inspection costs pursuant thereto shall be paid by the owner
or subdivider in the prescribed manner. All required improvements shall be installed by the
developer at no cost to the city.
Section 15. Enforcement.
A. Validity:
C:27 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
1. No plat or subdivision of the City of Williston or within the extraterritorial
limits thereof shall be recorded or filed with the Williams County register of
deeds, nor shall any plat or subdivision have any validity until it complies with
the provision of this ordinance and has been approved by the city commission
and the applicable planning commissions, as prescribed herein.
B. Building permits:
1. Not more than one building permit shall be issued for each separate tract
existing at the effective date of these regulations [July 8, 1981] unless the tract
shall have been platted in accordance with the provisions of these regulations.
C. City funds expended:
1. No public improvements over which the city commission has control shall be
made with the city funds, nor shall any city funds be expended for street
maintenance, street improvements, or other services in any area that has been
subdivided after the date of the adoption of these regulations [June 9, 1981]
unless such subdivision and street have been approved in accordance with the
provisions of this ordinance and the street accepted by the city commission as a
public street.
Section 16. Penalty.
Any owner, or the agent of any owner, of land located within a subdivision who
transfers, sells, agrees to sell, or negotiates to sell any such land by reference to or exhibition of
a plat of a subdivision, or by any other use thereof, before such plat has been approved by the
planning commission and governing body and recorded as approved in the office of the
appropriate register of deeds, shall forfeit and pay a penalty as provided by Section 40-48-23 of
the North Dakota Century Code. ($100) for each lot or parcel transferred or sold or agreed or
negotiated to be sold.) The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies provided in this section. The
municipality may enjoin such transfer, sale or agreement by an action for injunction, or it may
recover the penalty by civil action.
Section 17. Amendments.
Changes in these regulations, as amendments, may be adopted by the city commission
after a public hearing on any such change with 10 days’ notice thereof. Each proposed change
shall be submitted to the planning commission for a report thereon. Failure to report within 30
days shall be deemed to be approval, unless an extension of time is agreed to by both parties.
Section 18. Repeal of conflicting ordinances and regulations.
A. From and after these regulations take effect, all regulations, ordinances and part
of the City of Williston and the city planning commission in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
Section 19. Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance be declared
unconstitutional or void, such decision shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole
or any part thereof, other than the part so declared invalid.
C:28 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX C – SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section 20. Effective date.
This ordinance shall be in effect from and after its adoption and publication as required
by law.
C:29 Publication, Dec 2020

Appendix D
FRANCHISES
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
Appendix D
FRANCHISES
ARTICLE I. RAILROAD LINE1
ORDINANCE NO. 311
Editor’s Note: Appendix D sets forth the franchise ordinances of the City of Williston. Unless
otherwise indicated by a history note following a particular section, the ordinances are set out
as originally enacted, the section headings, if any, and numbers having been retained. Any
material in brackets [ ] has been added by the editor for purposes of clarity.
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO [BURLINGTON NORTHERN, INC.] THE
RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A SPUR TRACK LINE OF
RAILROAD ALONG AND ACROSS FIRST STREET IN THE CITY OF WILLISTON,
NORTH DAKOTA.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF
WILLISTON, WILLIAMS COUNTY, NORTH DAKOTA:
Section 1. [Authority granted.]
There is hereby conferred upon Burlington Northern, Inc., its successors and assigns
permission and authority to construct, maintain and operate a spur track line of railroad over,
upon and across First Street, extending from a point in the south line of said First Street in the
City of Williston a distance approximately 55 feet east of the east line of Sixth Avenue West
extended southerly, thence northeasterly and easterly to a point approximately 10 feet south of
the southeast corner of Smith and Tatem’s Rearrangement of Outlot No. one according to the
recorded plat thereof, and further extending 55 feet east over, upon and across Fourth Avenue
West. See the map attached [to the ordinance from which this section is derived], marked
Exhibit “A” and by this reference made a part hereof. [Ord. No. 532, § 1, 7-12-1977]
Section 2. [Duties of grantee.]
The said spur track line of railroad shall be so located, constructed, maintained and
operated as to interfere as little as possible with the use of said First Street and Fourth Avenue
West for ordinary business, and the street crossings over said line shall be constructed and
maintained by the grantee herein at its own cost and expense, in proper condition for ordinary
use and travel upon said street. [Ord. No. 532, § 2, 7-12-1977]
Section 3. [Effective date.]
This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and
publication as provided by law.
ARTICLE II. TRANSPORTATION OF PASSENGERS2
ORDINANCE NO. 490
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO THE WILLISTON COUNCIL FOR THE
AGING, INC., WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, AND ASSIGN THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE,
1 Editor’s Note: This ordinance was adopted on November 8, 1949.
2 Editor’s Note: This ordinance was adopted on July 23, 1974.
D:1 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
FRANCHISE AND PERMISSION TO USE THE STREETS, HIGHWAYS, BRIDGES,
UNDERPASSES, AND PUBLIC PLACES OF THE CITY OF WILLISTON, NORTH
DAKOTA FOR THE PURPOSE OF OPERATING AND MAINTAINING A MOTOR
VEHICLE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM FOR THE CARRIAGE AND
TRANSPORTATION OF PASSENGERS, AND PRESCRIBING THE TERMS AND
CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO SUCH FRANCHISE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF CITY COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY
OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA.
Section I. Permit to operate.
The WILLISTON COUNCIL FOR THE AGING, INC., hereinafter called the Grantee,
is hereby granted for an indefinite period from and after the passage, approval and acceptance
hereof, the right, privilege, franchise, and permission to use the streets, highways, bridges,
underpasses and public places of the City of Williston, North Dakota for the operation of motor
vehicle transportation system within the limits of the City of Williston, North Dakota.
Section II. Interference with public travel.
Such use of the highways as is granted in this permit shall not be exercised in any way
which may interfere with the public safety and convenience of the public for ordinary travel,
and shall not interfere in any way with any use to which said City of Williston, North Dakota
shall put streets and public property, and subject to the conditions hereinafter provided.
Section III. Subject to laws, ordinances and regulations.
The rights and privileges herein granted to the Grantee shall be subject to all the
provisions of the laws of the State of North Dakota and the ordinances not in conflict herewith
of the City of Williston, North Dakota, in addition to all the conditions imposed hereunder.
(a) Continuance. That it will continue to operate said system until the rights,
privileges, franchises and permissions herein granted shall be terminated by
lapse of time, or shall be revoked by proper action of the city commission, or
until it shall elect to discontinue the same, either temporarily or permanently,
after due notice as hereinafter provided.
(b) Discontinuance of service. That the Grantee has the right to suspend the
operation of the said system.
(c) Indemnity. That the Grantee will defend, save harmless and indemnify the City
of Williston, its officers, agents and employees from any claim, demand,
action, liability, damages or judgment which may arise or accrue out of the
operation or maintenance of said transportation system.
(d) Liability insurance. That the Grantee will, before the commencement of
operations hereunder, obtain and deposit with the City Auditor of the City of
Williston, North Dakota, insurance policies covering public liability and
property damage insurance for the protection of passengers and other users of
the streets in a good and responsible insurance company to be filed with the
city commission. The amount of indemnity in such public liability insurance
policies shall be not less than $25,000 for injuries to one person, and not less
than $250,000 for injuries to more than one person any one accident; the
amount of indemnity in the property damage insurance policy shall be not less
D:2 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
than $20,000; such policies shall also contain a provision requiring the insurer
to notify the City Auditor of the City of Williston at least 15 days before the
expiration of such policy, either by cancellation or limitations; the Grantee
shall also at all times comply with the North Dakota Workmen’s Compensation
Law:
(e) Routes. That the said Grantee will operate system anywhere in the City of
Williston.
(f) Hours of operation. That the said Grantee has the privilege of operating the
said system 24 hours a day.
(g) Rules of operation. That the said grantee has the privilege of stopping to take
on or discharge passengers at any place throughout the city, as he sees fit, for
the safety of all concerned, and the vehicle be marked with proper safety signs.
(h) Transportation is limited to persons qualified under Title III of the Older
Americans Act.
ARTICLE III. TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH SYSTEM3
ORDINANCE NO. 463
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NORTHWESTERN BELL TELEPHONE
COMPANY, A CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT TO USE
AND OCCUPY THE STREETS, ALLEYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF
WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONSTRUCTING,
MAINTAINING AND OPERATING A GENERAL TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH
SYSTEM WITHIN SAID CITY.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COMMISSION OF WILLISTON, NORTH
DAKOTA:
Section 1. [Franchise granted; term; purpose.]
That Northwestern Bell Telephone Company, a corporation, its successors and assigns,
are hereby granted the right to use and occupy the streets, alleys and other public places of the
City of Williston, North Dakota, for a term of 20 years from the effective date hereof, for the
purpose of constructing, maintaining and operating a general telephone or telegraph system
within said city.
Section 2. [Rights subject to police power.]
That the rights herein granted are subject to the exercise of the police owner as the
same now is or may hereafter be conferred upon said city.
Section 3. [When effective.]
That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect, and shall constitute a binding
contract between the City of Williston and Northwestern Bell Telephone Company[,] when it
shall have been enacted according to law, and when the provisions hereof shall have been
accepted in writing by said Northwestern Bell Telephone company and such acceptance filed
with the City Auditor.
3 Editor’s Note: This ordinance was adopted on May 25, 1971.
D:3 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
ARTICLE IV. GAS DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
ORDINANCE NO. 909
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO MONTANA DAKOTA UTILITIES CO., A
DIVISION OF MDU RESOURCES GROUP, INC., A CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS
AND ASSIGNS, THE FRANCHISE AND RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND
OPERATE WITHIN AND UPON, IN AND UNDER THE STREETS, ALLEYS AND
PUBLIC GROUNDS OF THE CITY OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, A GAS
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR TRANSMITTING AND DISTRIBUTING NATURAL OR
MANUFACTURED GAS, OR A MIXTURE OF BOTH, FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE USE.
WHEREAS, pursuant to law the City has the power to grant a non-exclusive franchise
for a term of no more than 20 years; and,
WHEREAS, pursuant to city ordinance the City may grant a franchise, by ordinance;
and,
WHEREAS, it is in the public interest that a franchise be granted to Montana Dakota
Utilities Co., for construction, operation and maintenance of a gas distribution system.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of City Commissioners of the
City of Williston, North Dakota:
Section I. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words and terms are defined as follows:
1. “City” means the City of Williston, North Dakota.
2. “Franchise” means all of the rights and obligations extended by City to Grantee
herein.
3. “Grantee” means Montana Dakota Utilities, Co.
Section II. Grant of authority.
There is hereby granted by the City to the Grantee, its successors and assigns, subject to
the conditions and limitations contained herein, the right and privilege to occupy and use the
streets, alleys and public grounds of the City as now, or hereafter constituted, for the purpose of
constructing, maintaining and operating, within, upon, in and under the same, a gas distribution
system for transmitting and distributing natural and manufactured gas, or a mixture of both, for
public and private use.
Section III. Grantee’s obligations.
Grantee shall maintain an efficient distribution system for furnishing natural or
manufactured gas, or a mixture of both, for public and private use at such reasonable rates as
may be approved by the Public Service Commission of North Dakota and under such orders,
rules or regulations as may be issued by a federal or state agency having jurisdiction thereof.
Section IV. Non-Exclusive Grant.
This Franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent the City
from granting to any other party the right to use the streets, alleys and public grounds of the
City for like purposes.
D:4 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
Section V. Compliance with laws and ordinances.
Grantee shall at all times during the life of this Franchise comply with all applicable
laws and ordinances of the City.
Section VI. Reservation of rights.
City reserves any right it may have, under its police power, or otherwise, to control or
regulate the use of the streets, alleys and public grounds by Grantee, and to enact all ordinances
necessary and proper in the exercise of that power. City also reserves the right, pursuant to state
laws and rules and regulations of the Public Service Commission and the City ordinances as
such ordinances may be amended from time to time, to impose, by ordinance, a reasonable
franchise tax for revenue purposes applicable to all franchises of like kind.
Section VII. Conditions on street occupancy.
1. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing
by the Grantee, the Grantee shall, at its own costs and expense and in a manner
approved by the City Engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk,
driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as
before said work was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in an
approved condition during the length of this Agreement.
2. In event that at any time during the period of the Franchise, the City shall
lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of, any street, alley or other public
way, the Grantee upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay and
relocate its pipes that may interfere with such alteration or change to the extent
reimbursement is not provided under state or federal law.
Section VIII. Insurance and indemnification.
Grantee shall maintain, at all times during the term of the Franchise, liability insurance,
insuring Grantee and the City against any and all damages, losses or claims of any nature
arising out of Grantee’s operations under the Franchise, or a self-insurance or self-retention
program with adequate reserves, in minimum amount of $1,000,000. Grantee agrees to protect
and save harmless City from any claims for damages or injuries resulting from Grantee’s
operations under the Franchise, and to defend and indemnify City against all claims, actions,
proceedings, costs, damages and liabilities, including attorneys’ fees.
Section IX. Assignment.
Grantee may assign this Franchise to another party or corporation, subject to all
obligations of the Grantee hereunder, with the consent of the City, which may not be
unreasonably withheld.
Section X. Acceptance.
Within 30 days after Grantee is notified of adoption of this Ordinance, Grantee shall
file with the City Auditor its written acceptance of this Franchise, subject to all of its terms and
conditions.
Section XI. Term.
This Franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of 20
years from the date upon which it is accepted by the Grantee. City reserves the right to review
this Agreement with the Grantee every five years.
D:5 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
Section XII.
Provisions of this Resolution are not severable and if either the City or Grantee initiate
legal action to challenge any of the provisions or if there is a judicial finding of invalidity of
any of the provisions including the invalidity of the fee or amount of fee assessed, this franchise
may be voidable one year thereafter by either the City or the Grantee.
ARTICLE V. ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO MONTANA DAKOTA UTILITIES CO., A
DIVISION OF MDU RESOURCES GROUP, INC., A CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS
AND ASSIGNS, THE FRANCHISE AND RIGHT TO CONSTRUCT, MAINTAIN AND
OPERATE WITHIN AND UPON, IN AND UNDER THE STREETS, ALLEYS AND
PUBLIC GROUNDS OF THE CITY OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, AN
ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM FOR TRANSMITTING AND DISTRIBUTING
ELECTRIC ENERGY FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE USE.
WHEREAS, pursuant to law the City has the power to grant a non-exclusive franchise
for a term of no more than 20 years; and,
WHEREAS, pursuant to city ordinance the City may grant a franchise by ordinance;
and,
WHEREAS, it is in the public interest that a franchise be granted to Montana Dakota
Utilities Co., for construction, operation and maintenance of an electric distribution system.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of City Commissioners of the
City of Williston, North Dakota:
Section I. Definitions.
As used herein, the following words and terms are defined as follows:
1. “City” means the City of Williston, North Dakota.
2. “Franchise” means all of the rights and obligations extended by City to Grantee
herein.
3. “Grantee” means Montana Dakota Utilities, Co.
Section II. Grant of authority.
There is hereby granted by the City to the Grantee, subject to the conditions and
limitations contained herein, the right and privilege to occupy and use the streets, alleys and
public grounds of the City as now, or hereafter constituted, for the purpose of constructing,
maintaining and operating, within, upon, in and under the same, an electric distribution system
for transmitting and distributing electric energy for public and private use.
To encourage harmony and operational efficiency in the provision of electric
distribution service in the City of Williston, to promote safety and discourage unreasonable
duplication of electric facilities, to assure adequate and reliable electric service for all
consumers within the City of Williston, and provide franchise grantees with equitable
participation in the provision of electric distribution service within undeveloped areas annexed
to the City of Williston, during the term of this Franchise, the authority granted by this
Franchise to Grantee is limited to the use of the City’s streets, alleys and public grounds for the
purpose of distributing electric energy for public and private use within the service areas and to
D:6 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
the service locations of the Grantee as designated and agreed to between the Grantee and other
electric franchise grantees and accepted by the City, or in the absence of such agreement,
designated by the City. The Grantee shall have all the rights, privileges, and obligations to
provide electric distribution service within such service areas and to such service locations as
agreed upon. This limitation shall not restrict the Grantee’s right to occupy and use the streets,
alleys and public grounds of the City anywhere within the City to construct, operate, and
maintain transmission and distribution line facilities for the purpose of providing adequate
electric service within the service areas and to the service locations of the Grantee.
Section III. Grantee’s obligations.
Grantee shall maintain an efficient distribution system for furnishing electric energy for
public and private use at reasonable rates and under such orders, rules or regulations as may be
issued by a federal or state agency having jurisdiction thereof.
Section IV. Non-Exclusive Grant.
This Franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent the City
from granting to any other party the right to use the streets, alleys and public grounds of the
City for like purposes.
Section V. Compliance With Laws and Ordinances.
Grantee shall at all times during the life of this Franchise comply with all applicable
laws and ordinances of the City.
Section VI. Reservation of rights.
City reserves any right it may have, under its police power, or otherwise, to control or
regulate the use of the streets, alleys and public grounds by Grantee, and to enact all ordinances
necessary and proper in the exercise of that power. City also reserves the right, pursuant to state
laws of the State of North Dakota and the rules and regulations of the Public Service
Commission and the City ordinances as such ordinances may be amended from time to time, to
impose, by ordinance, a reasonable franchise tax for revenue purposes applicable to all
franchises of like kind.
Section VII. Conditions on street occupancy.
1. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the
grantee within the City shall be so located as to cause minimum interference
with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to
cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of
property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or public ways and
places. Any new transmission lines, and existing lines whenever they are
modernized, upgraded or extensively rehabilitated, shall be placed
underground, or they shall be constructed in a manner that causes minimum
interference with the landscape or appearance of the City.
2. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing
by the Grantee, the Grantee shall, at its own costs and expense and in a manner
approved by the City Engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk,
driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as
before said work was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in an
approved condition during the length of this Agreement.
D:7 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
3. In the event that at any time during the period of the Franchise, the City shall
lawfully elect to alter, or change the grade of any street, alley or other public
way, the Grantee upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay and
relocate, at its own expense, its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other fixtures that may interfere with the alteration or change.
4. The Grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will
interfere with any electric light, water hydrant or water main, or in such a
manner as to interfere with the usual travel on said streets, alleys and public
ways.
5. The Grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving
permit issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the
moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or
lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the
Grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The
Grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours’ advance notice to arrange for
such temporary wire changes.
Section VIII. Insurance and indemnification.
Grantee shall maintain, at all times during the term of the Franchise, liability insurance,
insuring Grantee and the City against any and all damages, losses or claims of any nature
arising out of Grantee’s operations under the Franchise, or a self-insurance or self-retention
program with adequate reserves, in minimum amount of $1,000,000. Grantee agrees to protect
and save harmless City from any claims for damages or injuries resulting from Grantee’s
operations under the Franchise, and to defend and indemnify City against all claims, actions,
proceedings, costs, damages and liabilities, including attorneys’ fees.
Section IX. Assignment.
Grantee may assign this Franchise to another party or corporation, subject to all
obligations of the Grantee hereunder, with the consent of the City, which may not be
unreasonably withheld.
Section X. Acceptance.
Within 30 days after Grantee is notified of adoption of this Ordinance, Grantee shall
file with the City Auditor its written acceptance of this Franchise, subject to all of its terms and
conditions.
Section XI. Term.
This Franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of 20
years from the date upon which it is accepted by the Grantee. City reserves the right to review
this Agreement with the Grantee every five years.
Section XII.
Provisions of this Resolution are not severable and if either the City or Grantee initiate
legal action to challenge any of the provisions or if there is a judicial finding of invalidity of
any of the provisions including the invalidity of the fee or amount of fee assessed, this franchise
may be voidable one year thereafter by either the City or the Grantee.
Adopted this 26th day of August 2008.
D:8 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
ARTICLE VI. TELEVISION TRANSMITTING AND DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM
Section I. Definitions.
For convenience herein, the City of Williston, North Dakota, is designated and referred
to as “Municipality,” and Charles L. Scofield is designated and referred to as “Grantee.” Any
reference to either includes their respective successors and assigns.
Section II. [Franchise granted; purpose.]
There is hereby granted to the Grantee the franchise and right to construct, maintain,
extend and operate, within, upon, in and under the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the City
of Williston, and the territory under its jurisdiction and control, a transmitting and distribution
system for transmitting and distributing television and other electronic signals by cable,
microwave, or any other feasible method, for all public and private uses. Grantee agrees to
serve any residence within the City of Williston on a uniform basis.
Section III. [General duty of grantee.]
Grantee shall maintain and operate its system and render efficient service in accordance
with the rules and regulations as are, or may be, set forth by the Municipality or by the proper
Federal and/or State regulatory body.
Section IV. [Franchise not exclusive.]
This franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent the
Municipality from granting to any other party the right to use the streets, alleys and public
grounds of the Municipality for like purposes.
Section V. [Grantee subject to regulations.]
Grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful
exercise of the power by the Municipality, and to such reasonable regulations as the
Municipality shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide. The right is hereby reserved to
the Municipality to adopt, in addition to the provisions herein contained and existing applicable
ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its power, by
ordinance or otherwise.
Section VI. [Indemnification.]
Grantee shall, at all times, hold the Municipality harmless from and against any and all
damages, lawful claims and demands for injury to persons or property which may be made
against the Municipality in any manner growing out of the maintenance or operation, or both, of
such system for transmitting and distributing television or other electronic signals, or any
equipment of the Grantee including, but not limited to, copyright infringement, and in case suit
shall be filed against said Municipality, either independently or jointly with Grantee, to recover
for any claim or damages, Grantee, upon written notice to him by the Municipality, shall defend
the Municipality against said action and, in the event of a final judgment being obtained against
the Municipality, either independently or jointly with Grantee on account solely of the acts of
the Grantee, the Grantee will pay said judgment and all costs and hold the Municipality
harmless therefrom.
D:9 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
Grantee shall furnish public liability insurance with the Municipality as one of the
named insureds in such amounts as the governing body of the Municipality may from time to
time determine.
Section VII. [Consent required for assignment of franchise.]
Grantee shall not have the right to sell or assign this franchise to any party or
corporation without the written consent of the Municipality. All obligations of Grantee
hereunder shall be binding upon his successors and assigns.
Section VIII. [Fees to Municipality.]
Grantee shall pay to the Municipality to defray the Municipality’s costs in
administering this ordinance and for the privilege of operating the system under this franchise, a
sum to be set by resolution by the City Commission of the City of Williston, said sum not to
exceed that allowed by any State or Federal regulation. Said fee shall be based upon the
revenues on a quarterly basis, payable within 30 days following the close of each quarter.
Section IX. [Acceptance of franchise.]
Within 30 days after passage and final approval of this ordinance, Grantee shall file
with the Auditor of the Municipality his written acceptance of this franchise.
Section X. [Duration of franchise.]
This franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of 20 years
from the date upon which this Ordinance shall become effective as provided by law.
This ordinance replaces Ordinance No. 415.
ARTICLE VII. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS4
ORDINANCE NO. 818
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO SKYLAND
TECHNOLOGIES, INC., A CORPORATION, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE
RIGHT TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS, ALLEYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES
OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONSTRUCTING,
MAINTAINING AND OPERATING A TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEM WITHIN SAID
CITY.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF CITY COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY
OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:
Section 1. [Definitions.]
For the convenience herein, the City of Williston, North Dakota, is designated and
referred to as “Municipality,” and Skyland Technologies, Inc., is designated and referred to as
“Grantee.” Any reference to either includes their respective successors and assigns.
Section 2. [Franchise granted; purpose.]
There is hereby granted to the Grantee a nonexclusive franchise and right to construct,
maintain, extend and operate within, upon, in and under the streets, alleys and public grounds of
the City of Williston, a telecommunication system for public and private use.
4 Editor’s Note: This ordinance was adopted November 23, 1999.
D:10 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
Section 3. [General duty of Grantee.]
Grantee shall maintain and operate its system and render efficient service at such
reasonable rates as may be approved in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
appropriate federal and/or state regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof.
Section 4. [Franchise not exclusive.]
This franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent the
Municipality from granting to any other party the right to use the streets, alleys and public
grounds of the Municipality for like purposes.
Section 5. [Reservation of police power.]
Grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful
exercise of the police power of the Municipality, and to such other reasonable regulations as the
Municipality shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide to control or regulate the use of
the streets, alleys and public grounds of the Municipality. The right is hereby reserved to the
Municipality to adopt, in addition to the provisions herein contained and existing applicable
ordinances, such as additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its police
power, by ordinance or otherwise, to control or regulate the use of the streets, alleys and public
grounds of the Municipality. Among the specifically reserved police powers, the Municipality
is authorized to adopt by resolution uniform excavation fees and, in addition, uniform
installation fees in the event Municipality crews are utilized for the repair of any excavation
required by the Grantee in the exercise of this franchise.
Section 6. [Impeding, blocking or disturbing streets.]
During the construction, maintenance, or enlargement of any part of said system, the
Grantee shall not unnecessarily impede or block travel in said streets and highways in said
Municipality and shall leave all streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lanes and public
places and all grounds disturbed by said construction in good condition upon the completion of
said work.
Section 7. [Restoration of disturbed streets, etc.]
In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, the
Grantee, in addition to paying the excavation fees as set forth above, shall, at its own cost and
expense and in a manner approved by the City Director of Public Works or City Engineer,
replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area in and to an
acceptable condition.
The City Engineer or the Public Works Director shall have the discretion to require
boring in lieu of open cutting on public thoroughfares.
Section 8. [Indemnification.]
Grantee shall indemnify and save and hold the Municipality harmless from any loss or
damage due to the construction, installation, and maintenance of its system, and its use of the
streets, alleys and public grounds of the Municipality.
Section 9. [Assignment of franchise.]
Grantee shall not have the right to sell or assign this franchise to any party or
corporation without the written consent of the Municipality. Such consent shall not be
D:11 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
unreasonably withheld. All obligations of Grantee hereunder shall be binding upon its
successors and assigns.
Section 10. [Fee to defray administrative costs.]
Municipality reserves its legal rights existing under North Dakota law to establish by
resolution a reasonable fee to be paid by Grantee to the Municipality to defray the
Municipality’s cost in administering this ordinance and for the privilege of operating the system
under this franchise. The fee established may be amended from time to time by resolution.
Grantee reserves its legal rights to challenge the legality and reasonableness of the fee.
Section 11. [Acceptance of franchise.]
Within 30 days after passage and final approval of this ordinance, Grantee shall file
with the Auditor of the Municipality its written acceptance of this franchise.
Section 12. [Duration of franchise.]
This franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a period of 20 years
from the date upon which this ordinance shall become effective as provided by law. However,
in the event of significant change of circumstances which become apparent to either party
during the term of this franchise, said parties shall negotiate in good faith to accommodate said
circumstances with a view toward amending this franchise. Such amendment process, however,
shall not occur more frequently than every five years during the term of this franchise.
Section 13. [Provisions not severable.]
The provisions of this ordinance are not severable, and if either the Municipality or the
Grantee initiate legal action to challenge any of the provisions or if there is judicial finding of
invalidity of any of the provisions, including the invalidity of the fee or amount of fee assessed
under Section 10, this franchise may be voided one year thereafter by either the Municipality or
the Grantee.
ARTICLE VIII. CABLE SYSTEM
ORDINANCE NO. 1072
[Amends Ordinance 860]
AN ORDNANCE GRANTING TO MIDCONTINENT COMMUNICATIONS, G.P., THE
NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE, RIGHT AND PRIVILEGE, UPON CERTAIN
CONDITIONS, TO USE THE STREETS, ALLEYS OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF THE
CITY OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING A
CABLE SYSTEM.5
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF CITY COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF
WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, AS FOLLOWS:
STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE
The City intends, by the adoption of this Franchise, to bring about the development of a Cable
System, and the continued operation of it. Such a development can contribute significantly to
the communication and desires of many. Further, the City may achieve better utilization and
improvement of public services with the development and operation of a Cable System.
5 Editor’s Note: Ord. No. 1072 was adopted November 28, 2017. Prior history includes Ord. No.
860.
D:12 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
FINDINGS
In the review of the Renewal Proposal and application of Midcontinent Communications G.P.
(“Grantee”), and as a result of a public hearing, the City Council makes the following findings:
1.) The Grantee’s technical ability, financial condition, legal qualifications, and
character were considered and approved in a full public proceeding after due
notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
2.) Grantee’s plans for constructing, upgrading, and operating the System were
considered and found adequate and feasible in a full public proceeding after
due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; and
3.) The Franchise granted to Grantee by the City complies with the existing
applicable North Dakota Statutes, federal laws and regulations.
SECTION 1.
SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
1.) Short Title. This Franchise Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Cable
Television Ordinance.
2.) Definitions. For the purposes of this- Franchise, the following terms, phrases,
words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory. The
word “may” is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.
(a) “Basic Cable Service” means any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational and governmental access programming required by the
franchise to be carried on the basic tier. Basic Cable Service as defined
herein shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(7)(1993).
(b) “Cable Programming Service” means any Video Programming
provided over a Cable System, regardless of service tier, including
installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such Video
Programming, other than:
(1) Video Programming carried on the Basic Service Tier;
(2) Video Programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-perprogram basis; or
(3) A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or payper-program Video Programming offered on a multiplexed or
time-shifted basis so long as the combined service:
a. Consists of commonly-identified Video Programming;
and
b. Is not bundled with any tier of service.
Cable Programming Service as defined herein shall not be
inconsistent with the definition as set forth in 47 U.S.C. §
543(1) (2) (1993) and 47 C.F.R. 76.9019(b)(1993).
D:13 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
(c) “Cable Service” means the one-way transmission to Subscribers of
Video Programming, or other programming service, and Subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such Video
Programming or other programming service.
(d) “Cable System” or “System” means a facility, consisting of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception,
and control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which
includes Video Programming, and which is provided to multiple
Subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
(1) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
(2) A facility that serves Subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
(3) A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., except that
such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for
purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541 (c) to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of Video Programming directly to
Subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services;
(4) An open video system that with 47 U.S.C. § 653; or
(5) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems.
(e) “City” means City of Williston, a municipal corporation, in the State of
North Dakota, acting by and through its City Commission.
(f) “City Commission” means the Williston, North Dakota City
Commission.
(g) “Drop” means the cable that connects the ground block on the
Subscriber’s residence to the nearest feeder cable of the System.
(h) “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission and any
legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
(i) “Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof
(including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted
subject to 47 U.S.C. § 546 issued by a franchising authority, whether
such authorization is designated as a franchise permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise which
authorizes the construction or operation of a Cable System.
(j) “Grantee” is Midcontinent Communications, G.P., its agents and
employees’ lawful successors, transferees or assignees.
(k) “Gross Revenue” means all revenue received from Basic Cable
Service, Cable Programming Service and Pay Television directly by
the Grantee from the operation of its System within City. The term
D:14 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
“Gross Revenues” shall not include installation fees, disconnection
fees, upgrade and downgrade of service fees, fees for the sale, leasing,
or servicing of equipment, franchise fees, advertising revenues, late
fees, any fees itemized and passed through as a result of franchise
imposed requirements or any taxes or fees on services furnished by
Grantee imposed directly on any Subscriber or user by any
municipality, state, or other governmental unit and collected by
Grantee for such governmental unit.
(l) “Installation” means the connection of the System from feeder cable to
the point of connection including Standard Installations and custom
installations.
(m) “LockoutDevice” means an optional mechanical or electrical accessory
to a Subscriber’s terminal which inhibits the viewing of a certain
program, certain channel, or certain channels provided by way of the
Cable Communication System.
(n) “Pay Television” means the delivery over the System of pay-perchannel or pay-per-program audio-visual signals to Subscribers for a
fee or charge, in addition to the charge for Basic Cable Service or
Cable Programming Services.
(o) “Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or other legal entity.
(p) “Standard Installation” means any residential installation which can be
completed using a Drop of 150 feet or less.
(q) “Street” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any
public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk,
parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter
held by City.
(r) “Subscriber” means any Person who lawfully receives Cable
Television Service.
(s) “Video Programming” means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television
broadcast station.
SECTION 2.
GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.) Grant of Franchise. This Franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and
conditions contained herein.
2.) Grant of Nonexclusive Authority.
(a) The Grantee shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect,
operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the Streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or and
all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in City, poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other television
D:15 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
conductors and fixtures necessary for maintenance and operation in
City of a Cable Communications System as herein defined.
(b) This Franchise shall be nonexclusive, and City reserves the right to
grant a similar use of said Streets, alleys, public ways and places, to
any Person at any time during the period of this Franchise, provided,
however, that any person seeking to provide Cable Service shall be
required to obtain a Franchise granted by the City, which shall include
the same material terms and conditions as this Franchise.
(c) Grantee shall have the authority to use City easements, public rightsof-way, Streets and other conduits for the distribution of Grantee’s
System. The City shall all developers of future subdivisions to allow
and accommodate the construction of the System as part of any
provisions for utilities to serve such subdivisions.
3.) Franchise Term. This Franchise shall be in effect for a period of 10 years from
the date of acceptance by Grantee, unless renewed, revoked or terminated
sooner as herein provided.
4.) Previous Franchises. Upon acceptance by Grantee as by Section 11 herein, this
Franchise shall supersede and replace any previous Ordinance or Agreement
granting a Franchise to Grantee to own. Operate and maintain a Cable
Communications System within City. Ordinance No. 590 is hereby expressly
repealed.
5.) Rules of Grantee. The Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as
shall be reasonably necessary to enable said Grantee to exercise its rights and
perform its obligation under this Franchise.
6.) Territorial Area Involved. This Franchise is granted for the corporate
boundaries of City, as it exists from time to time. In the event of annexation by
City, or as development occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area
covered, provided, however, that Grantee shall not be required to extend
service beyond its present System boundaries unless there is a minimum of 40
homes per cable mile as measured from the last fiber or terminating amplifier.
Access to Cable Service shall not be denied to any group of potential
residential cable Subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area
in which such group resides. Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time
to construct and activate cable plant to service or newly developed areas.
7.) Written Notice. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in writing
under this Franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to
any officer of Grantee or City’s Administrator of this Franchise or 48 hours
after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with
registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the party to
whom notice is being given, as follows:
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party
given as provided in this Section.
D:16 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
8.) Drops to Public Buildings. Grantee shall provide Installation of one cable
Drop, one cable outlet, and monthly Basic Cable Service without charge to all
public and private K-12 schools, and the administration building, excluding
home schools, located in the City within 150 feet of the System, upon request
of the school system.
Grantee shall provide one cable Drop and monthly Basic Cable Service to the
Law Enforcement Center and to Sloulin International Airport and shall provide
Installation of one cable Drop, one cable outlet, and monthly Basic Cable
Service without charge to City-owned buildings, excluding hospitals, nursing
homes, apartments or other buildings located at the airport, located in the City
within 150 feet of the System as designated by the City up to a maximum of 5.
(need to create an address list for current buildings-Midcontinent will provide
first draft based on current free service list)
No redistribution of the free Basic Cable Service provided pursuant to this
Section shall be allowed. Additional Drops and/or outlets in any of the above
locations will be provided by Grantee at the cost of Grantee’s time and
material. Alternatively, at the institution’s request, said institution may add
outlets at its own expense as long as such installation meets Grantee’s
standards and provided that any fees for Cable Communications Services are
paid. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring Grantee to extend the
System to serve additional institutions as may be designated by City. Grantee
shall have six month from the date of City Commission designation of
additional institution(s) to complete construction of the Drop and outlet,
weather permitting.
9.) EG Channel and Facilities Midcontinent will provide one channel for
Educational and Government (EG) programming. City reserves the right to
utilize franchise fee revenues to support capital and operating costs for EG
access facilities and programming. Grantee shall provide the cable between one
program origination site and its headend.
SECTION 3.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
1.) Construction Codes, Permits and System Upgrade.
(a) Grantee shall obtain all required permits from City before commencing
any construction upgrade or extension of the System, including the
opening or disturbance of any Street, or private or public property
within City. Upon the payment of an administrative permit review fee
of $250, Grantee shall be exempt from any permit fees required by the
City as a result of Grantee’s upgrade of the Cable System.
(b) The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation
work performed pursuant to the provisions of the Franchise and to
make such tests at its own expense as it shall find necessary to ensure
compliance with the terms of the Franchise and applicable provisions
of local, state and federal law.
D:17 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
2.) Repair of Streets and Property. Any and all Streets or public property or private
property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair,
replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the
System shall be promptly and fully restored by Grantee, at its expense, to a
condition as good as that prevailing prior to Grantee’s work in accordance with
standard practices for right-of-way occupants as applied by the Department of
Public Works for repairs, excavations, maintenance and restoration.
3.) Conditions on Street Use.
(a) If at any time during the period of this Franchise, City shall elect to
alter, or change the grade or location of any alley or other public way,
the Grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by City,
remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes and
other fixtures of the System, and in each instance, comply with the
standards and specifications of City.
If City reimburses other authorized right-of-way users the Street,
Grantee shall be likewise reimbursed.
(b) The Grantee shall, on request of any Person holding a moving permit
issued by City, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the
moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be
paid by the Person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall be given
not less than 10 days’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary
changes.
(c) The Grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and
overhanging the Streets, alleys, sidewalks or public easements of City
so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with
the wires and cables of the Grantee.
(d) Nothing contained in this Franchise shall relieve any Person from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring Grantee’s facilities.
4.) Undergrounding of Cable.
(a) In all areas of City where all other utility lines are placed underground,
Grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities
underground.
(b) In any area of City where one or more public utilities are aerial,
Grantee may maintain or replace its existing cables, wires and other
facilities from the same pole with the consent of the owner of the pole.
All new installation shall be underground unless prior written consent
is obtained from Grantors Public Works Director or equivalent City
Official.
5.) Safety Requirements. The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and
reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than
commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public,
D:18 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
SECTION 4.
DESIGN PROVISIONS
1.) Operation and Maintenance of System. The Grantee shall render effective
service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and
for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the extent feasible, shall be
preceded by notice in accordance with Section 2.7 herein and shall occur
during periods of minimum use of the System.
2.) Technical Standards. The technical standards used in the operation of the
System shall comply at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by
the FCC relating to cable communications systems pursuant to the Federal
Communications rules and regulations and found in Title 47, Section 76.601 to
76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time.
3.) Lockout Device. Upon the request of a Subscriber, Grantee shall provide by
sale or lease a Lockout Device.
SECTION 5.
SERVICE PROVISIONS
1.) Subscriber Inquiry and Complaint Procedures. Grantee shall have a publicly
listed toll-free telephone number and operated so as to receive Subscriber
complaints and requests on a twenty-four hour-a-day, seven days-a-week basis.
2.) Refund Policy. In the event a Subscriber established or terminates service and
receives less than a full month’s service, Grantee shall prorate the monthly rate
on the basis of the number of days in the period for which service was rendered
to the number of days in the billing.
SECTION 6.
OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS
1.) Franchise Fee.
(a) Grantee shall pay City an annual franchise fee in the amount of 5% of
Grantee’s annual Gross Revenue.
(b) The franchise fee shall be payable monthly. The payment shall be
made within 30 days of the end of each of month, together with a brief
report showing the basis for the computation.
2.) Indemnification of City.
(a) City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials,
employees and agents shall not be liable for any loss or damage to any
real or personal property of any Person, or for any injury to or death of
any Person, arising out of or in connection with the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of, or other action or event
with respect to the System.
(b) Grantee shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless City, its officers,
boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and
agents, from and against all liability, damages, and penalties which
D:19 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
they may legally be required to pay as a result of the exercise of the
Franchise, except claims because of any use of Internet Services in
public institutions and any claims covered by Worker’s Compensation.
This language is not intended to limit third party liability for which
Grantee might be liable for injuries covered by Worker’s
Compensation.
(c) Nothing in this Franchise relieves a Person from liability arising out of
the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the Grantee’s
lawfully installed in accordance with industry standards facilities while
performing work connected with grading, regarding, or changing the
line of a Street or public place or with the construction or
reconstruction of a sewer or water system.
(d) In order for City to assert is rights to be indemnified, defended, and
held harmless, City must with respect to each claim:
(1) Promptly notify Grantee in writing of any claim or legal
proceeding which gives rise to such right;
(2) Afford Grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully
control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or
disposition of any claim or proceeding; and
(3) Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of Grantee, at
Grantee’s expense, in its participation in, and control,
compromise, settlement or resolution or other disposition of
such claim or proceeding subject to paragraph two above.
3.) Insurance.
(a) As part of the indemnification provided in Section 6.2, but without
limiting the foregoing, Grantee shall file with its acceptance of this
Franchise, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at
its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy,
including contractual liability coverage, in protection of City in its
capacity as such. The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not
less than $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of any one Person,
and $3,000,000 for personal injury or death of two or more Persons in
any one occurrence, $1,000,000 for property damage to any one Person
and $3,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one act or
occurrence.
(b) The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by Grantee in
full force and effect during the entire term of the Franchise. Each
policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer
will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for
nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of
Grantee or for other reasons, except after 30 days advance written
notice have been provided to City.
D:20 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
SECTION 7.
REVOCATION, ABANDONMENT, AND SALE OR TRANSFER
1.) City’s Right to Revoke. In addition to all other rights which City has pursuant
to law or equity, City reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel this
Franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if after the hearing
required by Section 7.2(b) herein, it is determined that Grantee has violated any
material provision of this Franchise.
2.) Procedures for Revocation.
(a) City shall provide Grantee with written notice of a cause for revocation
and the intent to revoke and shall allow Grantee 60 days subsequent to
receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to provide
adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the Franchise.
Together with the notice required herein, City shall provide Grantee
with written findings of fact which are the basis of the revocation.
(b) Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording due
process before the City Council prior to revocation, which public
hearing shall follow the sixty-day notice provided in paragraph (a)
above. City shall provide Grantee with written notice of its decision
together with written findings of fact supplementing said decision.
(c) After the public hearing and upon written determination by City to
revoke the Franchise, Grantee may appeal said decision with an
appropriate state or federal court or agency.
(d) During the appeal period, the Franchise shall remain in full force and
effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
(e) Upon satisfactory correction by Grantee of the violation upon which
said notice was given, the initial notice shall become void.
3.) Abandonment of Service. Grantee may not abandon the System or any portion
thereof without having first given three months’ written notice to City.
4.) Sale or Transfer of Franchise. No sale or transfer of this Franchise shall take
place without the written approval of the City, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. All of the rights, privileges, obligations, duties, and
liabilities created by this Franchise shall pass to and be binding upon the
successor or assign of Grantee. Said approval shall not be required where
Grantee grants a security interest in its Franchise and assets to secure
indebtedness.
SECTION 8.
PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
1.) Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. Grantee shall not deny service, deny
access, or otherwise discriminate against Subscribers or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age. Grantee shall comply
at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and city laws, and all
executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
D:21 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
2.) Subscriber Privacy. Grantee shall comply with the terms of 47 U.S.C. § 551
relating to the protection of Subscriber privacy.
SECTION 9.
UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
1.) Unauthorized Connections or Modifications Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any firm, Person, group, company, corporation, or governmental body or
agency, without the express consent of the Grantee, to make or possess, or
assist anybody in making or possessing any connection, extension, or division,
whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with
or to any segment of the System.
2.) Removal or Destruction Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm, Person,
group, company, corporation, or government body or agency to willfully
interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or
segment of the System that has been lawfully and properly installed and
maintained under this franchise.
SECTION 10.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1.) Franchise Renewal. Any renewal of this Franchise shall be done in accordance
with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
2.) Amendment of Franchise Ordinance. Grantee and City may agree, from time to
time, to amend this Franchise. Such written amendments may be made at any
time if City and Grantee agree that such an amendment will be in the public
interest or if such an amendment is required due to changes in federal, state or
local laws. City shall act pursuant to local law pertaining to the ordinance
amendment process.
SECTION 11.
PUBLICATION, EFFECTIVE DATE AND ACCEPTANCE.
1.) Publication: Effective Date. This Franchise shall be published in accordance
with applicable North Dakota law. The effective date of this Franchise shall be
the date of acceptance by Grantee in accordance with the provisions of Section
11.2.
2.) Acceptance.
(a) Grantee shall accept this Franchise by executing same. Such
acceptance by the Grantee shall be deemed the grant of this Franchise
for all purposes.
(b) Upon acceptance of this Franchise, Grantee shall be bound by all the
terms and conditions contained herein.
(c) Grantee shall accept this Franchise in the following manner:
(1) This Franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by
Grantee and delivered to City.
D:22 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
(2) With its acceptance, Grantee shall also deliver any insurance
certificates required herein that have not previously been
delivered.
ARTICLE IX. ELECTRICAL DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM6
ORDINANCE NO. 877
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO
MOUNTRAIL WILLIAMS ELECTRIC COOPERATIVE, A CORPORATION, ITS
SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREETS,
ALLEYS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, FOR THE
PURPOSE OF CONSTRUCTING, MAINTAINING, AND OPERATING AN ELECTRICAL
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM WITHIN SAID CITY.
Be it ordained by the Board of City Commissioners of the City of Williston, North
Dakota:
PARAGRAPH 1: [Definitions.] The term “City” shall mean the City of Williston, a municipal
corporation.
The term “Company” shall mean Mountrail Williams Electric Cooperative, a
corporation.
PARAGRAPH 2: [Term of agreement.] The term of this agreement shall be for a period of
20 years from and after the date of its approval and execution by the parties.
PARAGRAPH 3: [Grant of franchise; purpose.] Subject to all existing rights and to all terms
and conditions as hereinafter set out, City hereby grants to Company a permit in, on, under, and
across the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the City, for the purpose of constructing,
operating, repairing and maintaining, an electric distribution system including distribution and
transmission lines, together with all poles, pole lines and fixtures and appurtenances, both
overhead and underground, usually, conveniently, or necessarily used in connection therewith,
for the purpose of transmitting and furnishing electric energy for light, heat, power and for
other purposes for public and private use in and to the said City and the inhabitants thereof, and
others, and for the purpose of transmitting into and through said City such electric energy,
provided that such electric distribution system and transmission lines shall be so located as in
no way to interfere with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel along and over said
streets, alleys, and public grounds, and provided that Company in the construction, operation,
repair and maintenance of such poles, pole lines, and fixtures and appurtenances, shall be
subject to such conditions, restrictions and regulations as may be imposed by the Board of City
Commissioners.
PARAGRAPH 4: [Reservation of police power.] Grantee shall, at all times during the life of
this franchise be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the City, and to such other
reasonable regulations as the City shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide to control
or regulate the use of the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the City. The right is hereby
reserved to the City to adopt, in addition to the provisions herein contained and existing
applicable ordinances, such additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of its
6 Editor’s Note: This ordinance was adopted October 12, 2004.
D:23 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
police power, by ordinance or otherwise, to control or regulate the use of the streets, alleys and
public grounds of the municipality.
PARAGRAPH 5: [Right to establish municipal electric distribution system not restricted.]
This Agreement shall in no way be construed to limit or restrict the right of the City to establish
a municipal electric distribution system in accordance with Chapter 40-33 of the North Dakota
Century Code or any other applicable laws of the State of North Dakota. This Agreement shall
in no way be construed to limit or restrict the right of the City to exercise the powers of eminent
domain as set forth in Chapter 32-15 of the North Dakota Century Code and any other
applicable laws of the State of North Dakota.
PARAGRAPH 6: [Service areas.] The use by the Company of streets, alleys and public
grounds of City, as authorized herein, shall be exercised by the Company only for the purpose
of providing and furnishing electric services within the following described areas situated in
Williams County, North Dakota: (see Exhibit 1,7
 hereby incorporated by reference, for a
schedule of said areas). Newly annexed areas will be covered by this Agreement in accordance
with the procedures described hereinafter.
If electric service facilities (owned by the Company) are present within the boundaries
of the annexed area, the Company shall send notice of its desire to serve all or a portion of the
annexed area to the City and all other franchised suppliers of electricity authorized to serve the
annexed area. Such notice shall designate the specific areas sought to be served in the annexed
area. Any franchised supplier of electricity authorized to serve the area must object to the
Company and City, in writing, within 10 days of such notice and meet with the Company to
discuss the issues. The Company shall meet with the objecting franchisee within 10 days of a
written objection from any other franchised supplier of electricity authorized to serve the
designated area. The parties shall meet in good faith to discuss and resolve which areas the
respective supplier and Company will serve.
Upon resolution, the Company and any other franchised supplier of electricity will
provide the City with an Electric Supplier Agreement with respect to which supplier will serve
which areas within the newly annexed area.
Should the suppliers be unable to reach a mutual agreement a report of such meeting or
meetings shall be submitted by the Company to the City and to any other franchised supplier of
electricity authorized to serve the designated area within 30 days of the date of the original
company notice to serve the area. Any franchised supplier of electricity within the City shall
have 20 days after receiving Company’s report, to provide written objection thereto. Upon
submission of a timely objection, not subsequently withdrawn in writing, a hearing shall be
scheduled within 30 days before the City Commission. At such hearing all parties and the
public may present information and testimony and the City Commission will make a final
binding decision within 30 days of the hearing.
The service areas designated pursuant to this paragraph shall be altered only by formal
amendment to this Agreement specifically authorized and approved by the Williston City
Commission and executed by the City and the Company. All notices and objections provided
by this paragraph shall be served by registered or certified mail. Objections submitted by a
franchised supplier of electricity within the City shall be submitted to both the City and the
Company.
7 Editor’s Note: Exhibit 1, referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
D:24 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
PARAGRAPH 7: [Trimming of trees.] There is also granted Company, during the term of
this Agreement, permission and authority to trim all trees and shrubs in the streets, alleys, and
public grounds of the City interfering with the proper construction, operation, repair and
maintenance of any poles, electrical lines, and fixtures or appurtenance installed in the
pursuance of the authority hereby granted provided that the Company shall save said City
harmless from any liability in the premises. In undertaking the trimming of trees and shrubs, the
Company shall comply with all ordinances of the City now in existence or hereinafter adopted
and shall obtain any and all necessary permits before undertaking any such work.
PARAGRAPH 8: [Franchise not exclusive.] Nothing in this Agreement contained herein
shall be construed as giving the Company any exclusive franchise or privilege in, on, over,
under, or across the streets, alleys, or public grounds of the City.
PARAGRAPH 9: [Assignment of franchise.] With the prior written approval of the Board of
City Commissioners of the City of Williston, the Company shall have full right and authority to
assign to any person, persons, firm, or corporation all of the rights conferred under it by this
Agreement, provided that the assignee of such rights, by accepting such assignment, shall
become subject to the terms and provisions of this Agreement.
PARAGRAPH 10: [Agreement subject to present and future laws.] The rights, privileges,
and undertakings and responsibilities herein set out shall at all times be subject to and exercised
solely according to the provisions of the present and future laws of the State of North Dakota
and the ordinances of the City of Williston.
PARAGRAPH 11: [Indemnification.] The Company shall indemnify and save and hold the
City harmless from any liability, including attorney’s fees and costs, for loss, claim or damage
due to the construction, installation, and maintenance of Company’s distribution system, and its
use of the streets, alleys and public grounds of the City. This provision is not, as to third parties,
a waiver of any defense of immunity otherwise available to the City. Company, in defending
any action on behalf of the City, shall be entitled to assert, on behalf of the City, every defense
or immunity that the City could have asserted in its own behalf.
Exhibit 1 - MWEC Consumers in Williston City Limits - 4-23-2004
No. Township Legal Description
MWEC
Location Name Drawing
1) Williston T154N R101W SE4 SEC2 050-02-9011 OK Tire Exhibit A
2) Williston T154N R101W SE4 SEC2 050-02-9212 GFG Food Service Exhibit A
3) Williston T154N R101W SE4 SEC2 050-02-9313 EA Sween Co. Exhibit A
4) Williston T154N R101W SE4 SEC2 050-02-9406 Kalley’s Kitchen Exhibit A
5) Williston T154N R101W SE4 SEC2 050-02-9406A OK Tire Exhibit A
6) Williston T154N R101W SE4 SEC2 050-02-9617 Newman Sign Co. Exhibit A
7) Williston T154N R101W SW4 SEC3 050-03-0105 NW Gun Club Exhibit B
8) Williston T154N R101W SW4 SEC3 050-03-1008 Williston Park Dist Exhibit B
9) Williston T154N R101W SW4 SEC3 050-03-1008A Williston Park Dist Exhibit B
10) Williston T154N R101W SW4 SEC3 050-03-4108 Williston Park Dist Exhibit B
11) Williston T154N R101W SE4 SEC3 050-03-5421 Federal Aviation Adm. Exhibit C
12) Williston T154N R101W NE4 SEC10 050-10-5390 H&H Electric Exhibit B
D:25 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
No. Township Legal Description
MWEC
Location Name Drawing
13) Williston T154N R101W NE4 SEC10 050-10-5681 Basin Concrete Exhibit B
14) Williston T154N R101W SW4 SEC12 050-12-2106 Bill Jorgensen Sketch A
15) Williston T154N R101W SW4 SEC12 050-12-4546 Gary Hansen Sketch A
16) Williston T154N R101W NE4 SEC13 050-13-7497 Potential Consumer Sketch B
17) Williston T154N R101W NE4 SEC22 050-22-8196 O.B. Gunderson Sketch B
18) Stony Creek T154N R100W NW4 SEC19 051-19-0355 Scenic Sports Sketch C
19) Stony Creek T154N R100W NE4 SEC19 051-19-9753 Agriliance Sketch C
20) Stony Creek T154N R100W NE4 SEC19 051-19-9957 Agriliance Sketch C
21) Stony Creek T154N R100W NE4 SEC19 051-19-9961 Wms Rural Water Sketch C
ARTICLE X. TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND DATA SYSTEMS
Adopted August 27, 2013
ORDINANCE NO. 976
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING A NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO MISSOURI
VALLEY COMMUNICATIONS, INC., ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, THE RIGHT
TO USE AND OCCUPY THE STREET, ALLEYS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF
WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONSTRUCTING,
MAINTAINING, AND OPERATING A TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND DATA SYSTEM
WITHIN SAID CITY.
Be it ordained by the Board of City Commissioners of the City of Williston, North
Dakota, as follows:
SECTION 1. For the convenience herein, the City of Williston, North Dakota, is
designated and referred to as “Municipality,” and Missouri Valley Communications, Inc., is
designated and referred to as “Grantee.” Any reference to either includes their respective
successor and assigns.
SECTION 2. There is hereby granted to the Grantee a non-exclusive franchise and right
to construct, maintain, extend, and operate within, upon, in and under the streets, alleys, and
public grounds of the City of Williston, a telecommunications and data system for public and
private use. There is granted to Grantee permission and authority to trim all trees in alleys,
streets, and public grounds of said Municipality so as to remove all parts of said trees
interfering with the proper erection, maintenance, and operation of poles, wires, cables, or other
fixtures or appliances installed or to be installed pursuant to authority hereby granted.
SECTION 3. Grantee shall maintain and operate its system and render efficient service
at such reasonable rates as may be approved in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
appropriate federal and/or state regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof.
SECTION 4. The franchise shall not be exclusive and shall not be construed to prevent
the Municipality from granting to any other party the right to use the streets, alleys, and public
grounds of the Municipality for like purposes.
SECTION 5. Grantee shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all
lawful exercise of the police power of the Municipality, and to such other reasonable
regulations as the Municipality shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide to control or
D:26 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
regulate the use of the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the Municipality. The right is
hereby reserved to the Municipality to adopt, in addition to the provisions herein contained and
existing applicable ordinances, such as additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the
exercise of its police power, by ordinance or otherwise, to control or regulate the use of the
streets, alleys, and public grounds of the Municipality. Among the specifically reserved police
powers, the Municipality is authorized to adopt by resolution uniform excavation fees and, in
addition, uniform installation fees in the event Municipality crews are utilized for the repair of
any excavation required by the Grantee in the exercise of this franchise.
SECTION 6. During the construction, maintenance, or enlargement of any part of said
system, the Grantee shall not unnecessarily impede or block travel in said streets and highways
in said Municipality and shall leave all streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, curbs, lanes, and
public places and all grounds disturbed by said construction on good condition upon the
completion of said work.
SECTION 7. In case of disturbance of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved
area, the Grantee, in addition to paying the excavation fees as set forth above, shall, at its own
cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City Director of Public Works or City
Engineer, replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area in and to an
acceptable condition.
The City Engineer or the Public Works Director shall have the discretion to require
boring in lieu of open cutting on public thoroughfares.
Except for requests from the Municipality for location of Municipal facilities, Grantee
may impose a reasonable fee on any party requesting Grantee locate its underground facilities.
SECTION 8. Grantee shall indemnify and save and hold the Municipality harmless
from any loss or damage due to the construction, installation, and maintenance of its system,
and its use of the streets, alleys, and public grounds of the Municipality.
SECTION 9. Grantee shall not have the right to sell or assign this franchise to any party
or corporation without the written consent of the Municipality. Such consent shall not be
unreasonably withheld. All obligations of Grantee hereunder shall be binding upon its
successors and assigns.
SECTION 10. Municipality reserves its legal rights existing under North Dakota law to
establish by resolution a reasonable fee to be paid by Grantee to the Municipality to defray the
Municipality’s cost in administering this ordinance and for the privilege of operating the system
under this franchise. The fee established may be amended from time to time by resolution.
Grantee reserves its legal rights to challenge the legality and reasonableness of the fee and to
pass such fees on to its subscribers as authorized by state or federal law.
SECTION 11. Within 30 days after passage and final approval of this ordinance,
Grantee shall file with the Auditor of the Municipality its written acceptance of this franchise.
SECTION 12. This franchise shall continue and remain in full force and effect for a
period of 20 years from the date upon which this ordinance shall become effective as provided
by law. However, in the event of significant change of circumstances which become apparent to
either party during the term of this franchise, said parties shall negotiate in good faith to
accommodate said circumstances with a view towards amending this franchise. Such
amendment process, however, shall not occur more frequently than every five years during the
term of this franchise.
D:27 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
SECTION 13. The provisions of this ordinance are not severable, and if either the
Municipality or the Grantee initiate legal action to challenge any of the provisions or if there is
judicial finding of invalidity of the fee or amount of fee assessed under Section 10, this
franchise may be voided one year thereafter by either the Municipality or the Grantee.
ARTICLE XI. DATA, VIDEO AND CABLE SYSTEM
Adopted January 14, 2014
ORDINANCE NO. 984
AN ORDINANCE GRANTING TO NEMONT COMMUNICATIONS, INC., (“NEMONT”)
THE NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE, RIGHT AND PRIVILEGE, UPON CERTAIN
CONDITIONS, TO USE THE STREETS, ALLEYS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES OF
THE CITY OF WILLISTON, NORTH DAKOTA, FOR THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING A
DATA, VIDEO, AND CABLE SYSTEM.
Be it Ordained by the Board of City Commissioners of the City of Williston, North Dakota, as
follows:
STATEMENT OF INTENT AND PURPOSE
The City intends, by the adoption of this Franchise, to bring about the development of a Data,
Video, and Cable System, and the continued operation of it. Such a development can contribute
significantly to the communication needs and desires of many. Further, the City may achieve
better utilization and improvement of public services with the development and operation of a
Cable System.
FINDINGS
In the review of the Renewal Proposal and application of Nemont Communications, Inc.
(“Grantee”), and as a result of a public hearing, the City Council makes the following findings:
1.) The Grantee’s technical ability, financial condition, legal qualifications, and
character were considered and approved in a full public proceeding after due
notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard;
2.) Grantee’s plans for constructing, upgrading, and operating the Data, Video, and
Cable System were considered and found adequate and feasible in a full public
proceeding after due notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard; and
3.) The Franchise granted to Grantee by the City complies with the existing
applicable North Dakota statutes, federal laws and regulations.
SECTION 1.
SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITIONS
1.) Short Title. This Franchise Ordinance shall be known and cited as the Cable
Television Ordinance.
2.) Definitions. For the purposes of this Franchise, the following terms, phrases,
words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words in the singular number include the plural
number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory. The
word “may” is directory and discretionary and not mandatory.
D:28 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
(a) “Basic Cable Service” means any service tier which includes the lawful
retransmission of local television broadcast signals and any public,
educational, and governmental access programming required by the
franchise to be carried on the basic tier. Basic Cable Service as defined
herein shall not be inconsistent with 47 U.SC. § 543(b)(7)(1993.).
(b) “Cable Programming Service” means any Video Programming
provided over a Cable System, regardless of service tier, including
installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video
Programming, other than:
(1) Video Programming carried on the Basic Service Tier;
(2) Video Programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-perprogram basis; or
(3) A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or payper- program Video Programming offered on a multiplexed or
time-shifted basis so long as the combined service:
a. Consists of commonly-identified video Programming;
and
b. Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service. Cable
Programming Service as defined herein shall not be
inconsistent with the definition as set forth in 47
U.S.C. § 543(1)(2) (1993) and 47 C.F.R. 76.901(b)
(1993.)
(c) “Cable Service” means the one-way transmission to Subscribers of
Video Programming, or other programming service, and Subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such Video
Programming or other programming service. Cable Service includes
any service using Internet Protocol (“IP”) packetization for digital
video signals transmitted over a network.
(d) “Cable System” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and
control equipment that is designed to provide Cable Service which
includes Video Programming and which is provided to multiple
Subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
(1) A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of
one or more television broadcast stations;
(2) A facility that serves Subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
(3) A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201 et seq., except that
such facility shall be considered a Cable System (other than for
purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541 (c) to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of Video Programming directly to
D:29 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
Subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services;
(4) An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
(5) Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its
electric utility systems; or
(6) That portion of the facility and plant dedicated to the provision
of communications services other than video services.
(e) “City” means City of Williston, a municipal corporation, in the State of
North Dakota, acting by and through its City Commission.
(f) “City Commission” means the Williston, North Dakota City
Commission.
(g) “Drop” means the facility that connects the NID or ONT on the
Subscriber’s residence to the nearest feeder cable of the Cable System.
(h) “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission and any
legally appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
(i) “Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof
(including a renewal of an authorization which has been granted
subject to 47 U.S.C. § 546) issued by a franchising authority, whether
such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license,
resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which
authorizes the construction or operation of a Cable System.
(j) “Grantee” is Nemont Communications, Inc., its agents and employees,
lawful successors, transferees or assignees.
(k) “Gross Revenue” means all revenue received from Basic Cable
Service, Cable Programming Service and Pay Television directly by
the Grantee from the operation of its Cable System within City. The
term “Gross Revenue” shall include revenue received from Internet
Service only to the extent Internet Service is determined to be a Cable
Service pursuant to applicable federal law. The term “Gross Revenues”
shall not include installation fees, disconnection fees, upgrade and
downgrade of service fees, fees for the sale, leasing, or servicing of
equipment, franchise fees, advertising revenues, late fees, any fees
itemized and passed through as a result of franchise imposed
requirements or any taxes or fees on services furnished by Grantee
imposed directly on any Subscriber or user by an municipality, state, or
other governmental unit and collected by Grantee for such
governmental unit.
(l) “Installation” means the connection of the System from feeder cable to
the point of connection, including Standard Installations and custom
installations.
(m) “Internet Service” means the offering of access to the international
computer network of both federal and non-federal interoperable packet
switched data networks to customers for a fee. For purposes of this
D:30 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
Franchise, Internet Service shall mean the direct access to the Internet
provided to customers over the Cable System and shall not include the
provision of incidental services including, but not limited to Internet
web design, Internet web hosting, sales or leases of modems or other
services not associated with the basic monthly Internet service fees.
(n) “Pay Television” means the delivery over the System of pay-perchannel or pay-per-program audio-visual signals to Subscribers for a
fee or charge, in addition to the charge for Basic Cable Service or
Cable Programming Services.
(o) “Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or other legal entity.
(p) “Standard Installation” means any residential installation which can be
completed using a Drop of 150 feet or less.
(q) “Street” means the surface of, and the space above and below, any
public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, path, court, sidewalk,
parkway, or drive, or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter
held by the City.
(r) “Subscriber” means any Person who lawfully receives Cable
Television Service.
(s) “Video Programming” means programming provided by, or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by, a television
broadcast station.
SECTION 2
GRANT OF AUTHORITY AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.) Grant of Franchise. This Franchise is granted pursuant to the terms and
conditions contained herein.
2.) Grant of Nonexclusive Authority.
(a) The Grantee shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect,
operate, and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the Streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or
dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in City,
poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes, and other
television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and
operation in City of a Cable Communications System as herein
defined.
(b) This Franchise shall be nonexclusive, and City reserves the right to
grant a similar use of said Streets, alleys, public ways and places, to
any Person at any time during the period of this Franchise, provided,
however, that any Person seeking to provide Cable Service shall be
required to obtain a Franchise granted by the City, which shall include
the same material terms and conditions as this Franchise.
D:31 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
(c) Grantee shall have the authority to use City easements, public rightsof-way, Streets and other conduits for the distribution of Grantee’s
System. The City shall require all developers of future subdivisions to
allow and accommodate the construction of the System as part of any
provisions for utilities to serve such subdivisions. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in the event of a conflict between this Ordinance No. 984
and State laws governing public rights-of-way, Grantee shall be subject
to the State laws governing public rights-of-way with respect to its
telecommunications plant.
3.) Franchise Term. This Franchise shall be in effect for a period of 20 years form
the date of acceptance by Grantee, unless renewed, revoked or terminated
sooner as herein provided.
4.) Rules of Grantee. The Grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as
shall be reasonably necessary to enable said Grantee to exercise is rights and
perform its obligation under this Franchise.
5.) Territorial Area Involved. This Franchise is granted for the corporate
boundaries of City, as it exists from time to time. In the event of annexation by
City, or as development occurs, any new territory shall become part of the area
covered, provided, however, that Grantee shall not be required to extend
service unless Grantee determines such extension is commercially reasonable
Access to Cable Service shall not be denied to any group of potential
residential cable Subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area
in which such group resides.
Grantee shall be given a reasonable period of time to construct and activate cable plant
to service annexed or newly developed areas.
6.) Written Notice. All notices, reports, or demands required to be given in writing
under this Franchise shall be deemed to be given when delivered personally to
any officer of Grantee or City’s Administrator of this Franchise or 48 hours
after it is deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, with
registered or certified mail postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the party to
whom notice is being given, as follows:
If to City: City of Williston
Attention: City Auditor
P.O. Box 1306
Williston, ND 58802-1306
If to Grantee: Nemont Communications
61 Highway 13 S
Scobey, MT 59263
Such addresses may be changed by either party upon notice to the other party
given as provided in this Section.
D:32 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
7.) Drops to Public Buildings. Upon request, Grantee shall provide Installation of
one cable Drop, one cable outlet, and monthly Basic Cable Service without
charge to all public and private K-12 schools, and the administration building,
excluding home schools, located in the City within 150 feet of the Cable
System, upon request of the school system.
Grantee shall provide one cable Drop and monthly Basic Cable Service, upon
request, to the Law Enforcement Center and to Sloulin International Airport
and shall provide Installation of one cable Drop, one cable outlet, and monthly
Basic Cable Service without charge to City-owned buildings used in support of
City functions, excluding hospitals, nursing homes, apartments or other
buildings located at the airport, located in the City within 150 feet of the Cable
System as designated by the City up to a maximum of 5.
No redistribution of the free Basic Cable Service provided pursuant to this
Section shall be allowed. Additional Drops and/or outlets in any of the above
locations will be provided by Grantee at the cost of Grantee’s time and
material.
Alternatively, at the institution’s request, said institution may add outlets at its
own expense, as long as such installation meets Grantee’s standards and
provided that any fees for Cable Communications Services are paid. Nothing
herein shall be construed as requiring Grantee to extend the Cable system to
serve additional institutions as may be designated by City. Grantee shall have
six months from the date of City Commission designation of additional
institution(s) to complete construction of the Drop and outlet, weather
permitting.
8.) EG Channel and Facilities. Upon request, Nemont will provide one channel for
Educational and Government (EG) programming. City reserves the right to
utilize franchise fee revenues to support capital and operating costs for EG
access facilities and programming. Grantee shall provide the cable between one
program origination site and its headed provided that the available cable
facilities are fiber based.
SECTION 3.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
1.) Construction Codes, Permits and Cable System Upgrade.
(a) Grantee shall obtain all required permits from City before commencing
any construction upgrade or extension of the Cable system, including
the opening or disturbance of any street, or private or public property
with City. Upon the payment of an administrative permit review fee of
$250, Grantee shall be exempt from any permit fees required by the
City as a result of Grantee’s upgrade of the Cable System pursuant to
Section 3.1(b).
(b) The City shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation
work performed pursuant to the provisions of the Franchise and to
make such tests at its own expense as it shall find necessary to ensure
D:33 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
compliance with the terms of the Franchise and applicable provisions
of local, state and federal law.
2.) Repair of Streets and Property. Any and all Streets or public property or private
property, which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair,
replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the Cable
System shall be promptly and fully restored by Grantee, at its expense, to a
condition as good as that prevailing prior to Grantee’s work in accordance with
standard practices for right-of-way occupants as applied by the Department of
Public Works for repairs, excavations, maintenance and restoration.
3.) Conditions on Street Use.
(a) If at any time during the period of this Franchise, City shall elect to
alter, or change the grade or location of any Street, alley or other public
way, the Grantee shall, at its own expense, upon reasonable notice by
City, remove and relocate its poles, wires, cables, conduits, manholes
and other fixtures of the System, and in each instance comply with the
standards and specifications of City. If City reimburses other
authorized right-of-way users the Street, Grantee shall be likewise
reimbursed.
(b) The Grantee shall, on request of any Person holding a moving permit
issued by City, temporarily move its wires or fixtures to permit the
moving of buildings with the expense of such temporary removal to be
paid by the Person requesting the same, and the Grantee shall be given
not less than 30 days’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary
changes.
(c) The Grantee shall have the authority to trim any trees upon and
overhanging the Streets, alleys, sidewalks or public easements of City
so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with
the wires and cable of the Grantee.
(d) Nothing contained in this Franchise shall relieve any Person from
liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid
injuring Grantee’s facilities.
4.) Undergrounding of Cable.
(a) In all areas of City where all other utility lines are placed underground,
Grantee shall construct and install its cables, wires and other facilities
underground.
(b) In any area of City where one or more public utilities are aerial,
Grantee may maintain or replace its existing cables, wires and other
facilities from the same pole with the consent of the owner of the pole.
All new installation shall be underground unless prior written consent
is obtained from Grantor’s Public Works Director or equivalent City
Official.
5.) Safety Requirements. The Grantee shall at all times employ ordinary and
reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than
D:34 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public.
SECTION 4.
DESIGN PROVISIONS
1.) Operation and Maintenance of Cable System. The Grantee shall render
effective service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good
cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruption, to the extent
feasible, shall be preceded by notice in accordance with Section 2.6 herein and
shall occur during periods of minimum use of the Cable System.
2.) Technical Standards. The technical standards used in the operation of the Cable
System shall comply, at minimum, with the technical standards promulgated by
the FCC relating to cable communications systems pursuant to the Federal
Communications Commission’s rules and regulations and found in Title 47,
Section 76.601 to 76.617, as may be amended or modified from time to time.
SECTION 5.
SERVICES PROVISIONS
1.) Subscriber Injury and Complaint Procedures. Grantee shall have a publicly
listed local or toll-free telephone access line which is available to subscribers
on a twenty-four-hour-a-day, seven days-a-week basis.
2.) Refund Policy. In the event a Subscriber established or terminates service and
receives less than a full month’s service, Grantee shall prorate the monthly rate
on the basis of the number of days in the period for which service was rendered
to the number of days in the billing.
SECTION 6.
OPERATION AND ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS
1.) Franchise Fee.
(a) Grantee shall pay City an annual franchise fee in the amount of 5% of
Grantee’s annual Gross Revenue.
(b) The franchise fee shall be payable monthly. The payment shall be
made within 30 days of the end of each month, together with a brief
report showing the basis for the computation.
2.) Indemnification of City.
(a) City, its officers, boards, committees, commissions, elected officials,
employees and agents shall not be liable for any loss or damage to any
real or personal property of any Person, or for any injury to or death of
any Person arising out of or in connection with the construction,
operation, maintenance, repair or removal of, or other action or event
with respect to the Cable System.
(b) Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless City, its officers,
boards, committees, commissions, elected officials, employees and
agents, from and against all liability, damages, and penalties which
D:35 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
they may legally be required to pay as a result of the exercise of the
Franchise, except claims because of any use of Internet Services in
public institutions, any claims covered by Worker’s Compensation, and
claims occasioned by the City or its employees or agents. This
language is not intended to limit third party liability for which Grantee
might be liable for injuries covered by Worker’s Compensation.
(c) Nothing in this Franchise relieves a Person from liability arising out of
the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid injuring the Grantee’s
lawfully installed for accordance with industry standards facilities
while performing work connected with grading, regarding, or changing
the line of a Street or public place or with the construction or
reconstruction of a sewer or water system.
(d) In order for the City to assert its rights to be indemnified, defended,
and held harmless, City must with respect to each claim:
(1) Promptly notify Grantee in writing of any claim or legal
proceeding which gives rise to such right;
(2) Afford Grantee the opportunity to participate in and fully
control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or
disposition of any claim or proceeding; and
(3) Fully cooperate with reasonable requests of Grantee, at
Grantee’s expense, in its participation in, and control,
compromise, settlement or resolution or other disposition of
such claim or proceeding subject to paragraph two above.
3.) Insurance.
(a) As a part of the indemnification provided in Section 6.2, but without
limiting the foregoing, Grantee shall file with its acceptance of this
Franchise, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect at
its sole expense, a comprehensive general liability insurance policy,
including contractual liability coverage, in protection of City in its
capacity as such. The policies of insurance shall be in the sum of not
less than $300,000 for personal injury or death of any one person, and
$1,000,000 for personal injury or death of two or more Persons in any
one occurrence, $300,000 for property damage to any one Person and
$1,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one act or
occurrence.
(b) The policy or policies of insurance shall be maintained by Grantee in
full force and effect during the entire term of the Franchise. Each
policy of insurance shall contain a statement on its face that the insurer
will not cancel the policy or fail to renew the policy, whether for
nonpayment of premium, or otherwise, and whether at the request of
Grantee or for other reasons, except after 30 days, advance written
notice have been provided to City.
D:36 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
SECTION 7.
REVOCATION, ABANDONMENT, AND SALE OR TRANSFER
1.) City’s Right to Revoke. In addition to all other rights which City has pursuant
to law or equity, City reserves the right to revoke, terminate or cancel this
Franchise, and all rights and privileges pertaining thereto, if after the hearing
required by Section 7.2(b) herein, it is determined that Grantee has violated any
material provision of this Franchise and the same has not been cured by
commercially reasonable efforts of Grantee.
2.) Procedures for Revocation.
(a) City shall provide Grantee with written notice of a cause for revocation
and the intent to revoke and shall allow Grantee 60 days subsequent to
receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation or to provide
adequate assurance of performance in compliance with the Franchise.
Together with the notice required herein, City shall provide Grantee
with written findings of fact which are the basis of the revocation.
(b) Grantee shall be provided the right to a public hearing affording due
process before the City Council prior to revocation, which public
hearing shall follow the sixty-day notice provided in paragraph (a)
above. City shall provide Grantee with written notice of its decision
together with written findings of fact supplementing said decision.
(c) After the public hearing and upon written determination by City to
revoke the Franchise, Grantee may appeal said decision with an
appropriate state or federal court or agency. If none is provided by law,
then to the state district court in the Northwest Judicial District.
(d) During the appeal period, the Franchise shall remain in full force and
effect unless the term thereof sooner expires.
(e) Upon satisfactory correction by Grantee of the violation upon which
said notice was given, the initial notice shall become void.
3.) Abandonment of Service. Grantee may not abandon the Cable System or any
portion thereof without having first given three months’ written notice to the
City.
4.) Sale or Transfer of Franchise. Except with respect to a transfer to a wholly
owned affiliate of Nemont, no sale or transfer of this Franchise shall take place
without the written approval of the City, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. All of the rights, privileges, obligations, duties, and
liabilities created by this Franchise shall pass to and be binding upon the
successor or assign of Grantee. Said approval shall not be required where
Grantee grants a security interest in its Franchise and assets to secure
indebtedness.
D:37 Publication, Dec 2020
WILLISTON CODE
SECTION 8.
PROTECTION OF INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS
1.) Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. Grantee shall not deny service, deny
access, or otherwise discriminate against Subscribers or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age. Grantee shall comply
at all times with all other applicable federal, state, and city laws, and all
executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination.
2.) Subscriber Privacy. Grantee shall comply with the terms of 47 U.S.C. § 551
relating to the protection of Subscriber privacy.
SECTION 9.
UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
1.) Unauthorized Connections or Modifications Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for
any firm, Person, group, company, corporation, or governmental body or
agency, without the express consent of the Grantee, to make or possess, or
assist anybody in making or possessing, any connection, extension, or division,
whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with
or to any segment of the Cable System.
2.) Removal or Destruction Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any firm, Person,
group, company, corporation, or government body or agency to willfully
interfere, tamper, remove, obstruct, or damage, or assist thereof, any part or
segment of the Cable System that has been lawfully and properly installed and
maintained under this Franchise.
SECTION 10.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
1.) Franchise Renewal. Any renewal of this Franchise shall be done in accordance
with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
2.) Amendment of Franchise Ordinance. Grantee and City may agree, from time to
time, to amend this Franchise. Such written amendments may be made at any
time if City and Grantee agree that such an amendment will be in the public
interest or if such an amendment is required due to changes in federal, state or
local laws. City shall act pursuant to local law pertaining to the ordinance
amendment process.
SECTION 11.
PUBLICATION, EFFECTIVE DATE AND ACCEPTANCE
1.) Publication; Effective Date. This Franchise shall be published in accordance
with applicable North Dakota law. The effective date of this Franchise shall be
the date of acceptance by Grantee in accordance with the provisions of Section
11.2.
2.) Acceptance.
D:38 Publication, Dec 2020
APPENDIX D – FRANCHISES
(a) Grantee shall accept this Franchise by executing same. Such
acceptance by the Grantee shall be deemed the grant of this Franchise
for all purposes.
(b) Upon acceptance of this Franchise, Grantee shall be bound by all the
terms and conditions contained herein.
(c) Grantee shall accept this Franchise in the following manner:
(1) This Franchise will be properly executed and acknowledged by
Grantee and delivered to City.
(2) With its acceptance, Grantee shall also deliver any insurance
certificates required herein that have not previously been
delivered.
D:39 Publication, Dec 2020

Code Comparative Table
Chapter CCT
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
§ CCT-1. CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE FOR 1957 CODE
1957 Code, Section Section this Code
19.3 5-77
19.4 5-73
19.6 5-75
20.1 5-41
20.8 — 20.10 5-38 — 5-40
21.1 6-1
SECTION 31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:883
1957 Code, Section Section this Code
21.2 6-3
21.3 6-4
21.4 6-2
21.5 6-6
21.6 6-7
21.7 6-8
21.8 6-10
21.9 6-14
21.10 6-13
21.11 6-12
21.12 6-9
21.13 6-10
21.14 6-5
21.15 6-6
22.1 18-41
22.2 18-32
22.3 18-34
22.4 18-33
22.5 — 22.8 18-35 — 18-38
22.9 18-40
22.10 18-39
22.11 18-16
22.12 — 22.14 18-18 — 18-20
22.15 18-17
23.1 10-17
23.2 20-52
23.4 9-31
23.5 20-99
23.6 20-107
23.7 20-104
23.8 20-55
23.9 20-44
23.11 — 23.14 9-22 — 9-25
23.15 — 23.17 9-27 — 9-29
§ CCT-1 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-1
AO:884
1957 Code, Section Section this Code
23.18 9-26
23.19 9-32
23.20 9-30
23.21 20-88
23.22 20-87
23.22-1 20-86
23.23 20-46
23.24 20-49
23.25 20-47, 20-50, 20-51
23.26 20-48
23.27 20-16
23.28 20-52
23.29 20-54
23.31 20-71
23.32 20-69
23.33 20-73
23.34 20-74
23.35 20-72
23.36 20-68
23.37 20-70
24.1 21-16
24.2 21-18
24.3 21-20
24.4 21-21
24.5 21-22
24.6 21-19
24.7 21-23
24.8 21-24
24.9 21-26
24.10 21-31
24.12 21-61
24.13 21-63
24.14 21-62
24.15 — 25.17 21-64 — 21-66
§ CCT-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-1
AO:885
1957 Code, Section Section this Code
24.18 21-74
24.19 21-67
24.20 21-69
24.21 21-68
24.22 21-75
24.23 21-73
24.24 21-72
24.25 21-1
24.26 21-70
24.27 21-71
24.28 21-60
25.1 22-1
25.2 22-3
25.3 22-5
25.4 22-4
25.5 22-2
25.6 26-26
25.7 22-6 — 22-21
25.8 22-45
25.8-1 22-44
25.8-2 22-1
25.8-3 22-46
25.8-4 22-48
25.9 22-23
25.10 22-47
§ CCT-2. CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE FOR 1957 ORDINANCES
ADOPTED AFTER 1957
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted
since the 1957 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior
to such date were incorporated into the 1957 Code, a table of which
immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been
omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature.
§ CCT-1 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:886
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
10-24-1950 App. B
377 5-27-1958 1 5-11
2 — 4 5-15 — 5-17
5 5-19
6 5-18
7 5-12
8 5-14
9 5-23, 5-24
436 3-21-1967 1,2 2-4
438 9-26-1967 1 5-11
439 10-24-1967 1 10-242
2 10-243, 10-248
3 10-252
4 10-249, 10-250
5 10-251
6 10-244 — 10-246
7 10-247
Art./Sec.
440 2-6-1968 I, 1 21-16
2 21-18
3 21-20
4 21-21
5 21-22
6 21-18
7 21-23
8 21-25
9 21-27
11 21-24
12 21-26
13 — 15 21-42 — 21-44
16 21-48
17 21-45
18 21-47
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:887
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
19 21-46
20 21-17
21 21-28
22 21-29, 21-30
23 21-34
24 21-39
25 21-36
26 21-32
27 21-33
28 21-41
29 21-40
30 21-38
31 21-35
32 21-37
441 2-20-1968 I-IX App. D, Art. V
442 2-20-1968 I-IX App. D, Art. IV
443 5-21-1968 1 9-45
2 9-48 — 9-52, 9-54
3 9-56
4 9-47, 9-55
7 9-53
8 9-46
448 11-5-1968 1 2-23 — 2-25
2 2-18 — 2-22
452 3-18-1969 I, 1 4-57
4.2 4-58
4.3 4-59
4.4 4-5, 4-7
II, 4.6 4-3
III, 4.7 4-19
4.8 4-20-4-22
4.9 4-23
4.10 4-25
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:888
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
4.11 4-24
4.12 4-26
4.13 — 4.15 4-67 — 4-69
4.16 4-27, 4-70
IV, 4.18 — 4.20 4-39-4-41
4.21 4-43
4.22 4-42
4.23 4-44
4.24 — 4.27 4-78 — 4-81
4.28 4-45
V, 4.29 4-1
4.30 4-2
4.31 4-4, 4-6
453 3-25-1969 6-9 — 6-11
455 8-12-1969 1-11
455-A 9-2-1969 1-11
460 12-22-1970 22-44
22-45
462 5-25-1971 1 — 4 5-257 — 5-260
463 5-25-1971 1 — 3 App. D, Art. III
465 6-15-1971 12-50
469 1-18-1972 1 10-383
2 10-385, 10-387
3 10-386
4 10-384
470 1-4-1972 6-9
472 3-7-1972 12-59, 12-60
473 5-9-1972 1 5-37
474 5-23-1972 1 2-17
477 8-22-1972 1 22-23
2 22-22
3 22-25
4 22-24
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:889
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
478 9-12-1972 12-12
480 3-6-1973 6-9
484 9-11-1973 6-9
485 9-25-1973 1-11
486 11-20-1973 14-1, 14-7
487 5-28-1974 I 20-99
II 20-100
III 20-102
IV 20-103
V 20-105
VI 20-106
VII 20-108
VIII 20-101
488 6-11-1974 1 5-21
2 5-22
489 7-9-1974 1 10-301
2 10-304
3 10-306
4 10-307
5 10-305
6 10-308
7 10-309
8 10-310
9 10-302
10 10-312
12 10-303
13 10-314
490 7-23-1974 I — III App. D, Art. II
Art/Sec.
494 4-8-1975 I, 1 5-209
2 5-211
II, 1 5-226
2 5-227
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:890
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
3, 4 5-229
5 5-228, 5-229, 5-231
6 5-230
6-A 5-238
7 5-233
8, 9 5-232
10 5-234
11 5-236
12 5-237
13 5-235
III 1, 1-A 5-212
2 5-214, 5-217, 5-218
3 5-215
5 5-216
IV 5-210
497 1-28-1975 22-44
22-45
22-47
Res. 7-12-1977 1 9-69
2 9-68
3 9-70
4 9-72
5 9-71
6 9-73
500 7-22-1975 2-18-2-22
501 7-22-1975 10-6
503 9-9-1975 14-8
505 9-23-1975 5-89, 5-94
506 9-23-1975 8-12
509 9-23-1975 1 9-10
510 9-23-1975 2 10-385
3 10-386
511 10-28-1975 9-51
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:891
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
513 11-12-1975 10-387
514 2-24-1976 1 20-30
2 20-29
3 20-34
4 20-35
5 20-36
6 20-33
7 20-32
8 20-37
9 20-38
10 20-31
11 — 15 20-39 — 20-43
16 20-49, 20-53
17 20-56
515 1-13-1976 1 15-23
2 15-25
3 15-17, 15-18
4 15-24
517 3-9-1976 1 5-11, 5-23
518 4-13-1976 4-69, 4-70
521 7-27-1976 1-1 10-1
2-1 16-16
2-2 16-18
2-3 16-21
2-4 16-22
2-5 16-24
2-6 16-23
2-7 16-20
2-8 16-19
2-9 10-129
3-1 10-2
3-2 10-3, 16-17
3-3 10-4
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:892
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
3-4 10-27
3-5 10-26
3-6 10-5
3-7 10-20 — 10-25
3-8 10-19
3-9 10-31 — 10-35
4-1 10-77
4-2 10-79
4-3 10-81, 10-83
4-4 — 4-6 10-84 — 10-86
4-7 10-75, 10-78, 10-82
4-8 10-80
4-9 10-76
5-1 10-150
5-2 10-154
5-3 10-155 — 10-160
5-4 10-151
5-5 10-164, 10-165
5-6 10-152
5-7 10-161 — 10-163
5-8 10-153
6-1 — 6-3 10-204 — 10-206, 10-215,
10-216
6-4 10-208
6-5 10-210
6-6 10-207
6-7 10-209, 10-211, 10-212
6-8 10-213
6-9 10-214
7-1 — 7-3 10-228 — 10-230
8-1(a) 10-178
8-1(b) 10-192
8-2 10-185 — 10-190
8-3 10-179, 10-180, 10-185
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:893
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
8-4 10-191
8-5 — 8-7 10-181 — 10-183
9-1 10-131, 10-132
9-3 10-130
9-4 10-129
9-5 10-128
9-6 10-103
9-7 10-104
9-8 10-106
9-9 10-112
9-10 10-107
9-11 10-113, 10-114
9-12 10-115
9-13 10-116
9-14 10-124
9-15 — 9-17 10-117 — 10-119
9-18 10-102
9-19 10-105
9-20 10-108 — 10-111
9-21 10-138
9-22 — 9-25 10-120 — 10-123
9-26 10-125
9-27 10-126
9-28 2-01
9-29 10-127
9-30 — 9-32 10-133 — 10-135
9-33 10-137
9-34 10-136
10-1 10-500
10-2 10-507
10-3 10-505
10-4 10-504
10-5 10-510
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:894
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
10-6 10-506
10-7 10-502
10-8 10-501
10-9 10-503
10-10 10-511
10-11 10-512
10-12 10-508
10-13 10-509
11-1 — 11-3 10-326 — 10-328
11-4 10-328
11-4 10-331
11-5 10-330
11-6 10-329
11-7 10-332
12-1 10-344
12-2 10-345
12-3 10-350
12-4 10-354
12-5 10-351
12-6 10-353
12-7 10-352
12-8 10-348
12-9 10-349
12-10 10-355
12-11(a) 10-346
12-11(b) 10-347
13-1 10-274, 10-275
13-2 10-276
14-1 10-277, 10-278
14-2 10-282 — 10-284
14-3 10-269
14-4 10-270 — 10-273
14-5 — 14-7 10-264 — 10-266
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:895
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
14-8 10-268
14-9 10-280
14-10 10-267
14-11 10-279
14-12 10-281
14-13 10-285 — 10-288
15-1 10-290, 10-291
16-1 10-292, 10-293
18-4 10-18
19-1 10-12 — 10-14
19-2 10-8
19-3 — 19-5 10-28 — 10-30
19-6 10-11
19-9, 19-10 10-10
19-11 10-9
20-1 — 20-3 10-47 — 10-49
20-4 10-60
20-5 10-51 — 10-58
20-6 10-59
20-7 10-50
20-8 10-63
20-9 10-62
20-10 10-61
523 9-21-1976 25.8 22-45
25.8-1 22-44
25.10 22-47
524 9-28-1976 6-9
525 11-9-1976 15.50 12-51
527 11-23-1976 4 10-98 — 10-101
10-150
3 10-206, 10-215
4 10-98 — 40-101
19-1-A 10-16
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:896
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
530 3-22-1977 4-69
532 7-12-1977 1 App. D, § 1
2 2
534 8-23-1977 Arts. I, II 20-17
III 20-49
IV — VI 20-17
535 9-13-1977 1-7 10-363 — 10-369
8 10-371
9 10-370
538 5-23-1978 1 — 9 7-1-7-9
539 7-25-1978 2 6-1
540 7-25-1978 1 17-2
2 17-5
3 17-7
4 17-3
5 17-4
6 17-6
541 7-25-1978 1 22-38
2 22-41
3 22-43
4 22-39
5 22-40
6 22-42
543 8-22-1978 1 19-1
2 19-5
3 19-2
4 19-6
5 19-11
6 19-8
7 19-17
8 12-12
9 19-15
10 19-13
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:897
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
11 19-14
12 19-18
13 19-16
14 19-19
15 19-3
16 19-4
19 19-9
20 19-7
21 19-10
544 11-28-1978 1 — 20 App. C
546 3-27-1979 1 5-23.5-24
547 3-27-1979 25.8 22-45
25.8-1 22-42
25.10 22-47
548 4-24-1979 1 22-38
550 8-28-1979 I 3-1, 3-2
II 3-14-3-23
III 3-35-3-44
IV 3-55-3-61
V 3-73-3-89
VI 3-101
VII 3-108, 3-109
VIII 3-115
IX 3-122
X 3-129
XI 3-136
XII 3-140
XIII 3-145
XIV 3-149
551 8-28-1979 2-19
552 4-8-1980 1 5-290
2 5-291
3 5-292
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:898
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
4 5-293
5 5-294
8 5-295
553 6-10-1980 1 5-36
2 5-36.1
3 5-36.2
4 5-36.3
554 6-10-1980 2 22-60
3 22-61
4 22-62
5 22-63
557 6-24-1980 1 20-52
558 7-22-1980 1 5-11
2 5-26
3 5-27
4 5-28
5 5-29
6 5-30
7 5-31
8 5-32
9 5-33
10 5-13
11 5-34
12 5-35
561 10-28-1980 1 9-99
2 9-100
3 9-101
4 9-102
5 9-103
562 1-1-1981 I, 1 7.5-1
2 7.5-2
3 7.5-3
4 7.5-4
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:899
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
II, 5 7.5-5
6 7.5-6
7 7.5-7
8 7.5-8
9 7.5-9
III, 10 7.5-10
11 7.5-11
IV, 12 7.5-12
13 7.5-13
V, 14 7.5-14
15 7.5-15
16 7.5-16
17 7.5-17
18 7.5-18
19 7.5-19
20 7.5-20
21 7.5-21
VI, 22 7.5-22
23 7.5-23
24 7.5-24
VII, 25 7.5-25
564 1-27-1981 15-36
1 15-37
2 15-38
3 15-39
4 15-40
5 15-41
565 1-27-1981 1.1 — 1.7 10-294
1.8 10-295
566 2-24-1981 1 5-23, 5-24, 5-64, 5-69,
5-125, 5-213, 20-30, 20-101
567 3-10-1981 1 17.5-1
2 17.5-2, 17.1-3
3 17.5-5
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:900
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
4 17.5-6, 17.5-7
5 17.5-8
568 3-10-1981 1 1-11
571 4-1-1981 1 9-85
2 9-86
3 9-87
574 6-15-1981 1-20 App. C
577 1-26-1982 10-264 — 10-298
578 6-23-1981 6-9
579 6-23-1981 1 3-37
583 7-28-1981 1 2.5-1
2 2.5-2
3 2.5-3
5 2.5-4
584 8-25-1981 2-19
586 10-22-1981 1 10-36
587 12-22-1981 1-3 12-67
588 11-24-1981 10-128, 10-129
589 1-26-1982 Not codified
590 3-23-1982 App. D., Art. VI
591 3-23-1982 10-387
592 3-23-1982 3-24
593 4-27-1982 Not codified
594 5-11-1982 1 17-98
2 17-99
3 17-100
4 17-101
5 17-102
6 17-103
7 17-104
8 17-105
9 17-106
10 17-107
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:901
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
11 17-108
12 17-109
13 17-110
595 5-11-1982 A I, 1-28 17-1
A II, 1 17-6
2 17-7
3 17-8
4 17-9
A III, 1 17-16
2 17-17
3 17-18
4 17-19
5 17-20
6 17-21
7 17-22
A IV, 1 17-29
2 17-30
3 17-31
4 17-32
5 17-33
6 17-34
7 17-35
8 17-36
9 17-37
10 17-38
11 17-39
A V, 1 17-46
2 17-47
3 17-48
4 17-49
5 17-50
6 17-51
7 17-52
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:902
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
8 17-53
9 17-54
10 17-55
11 17-56
A VI, 1 17-62
2 17-63
3 17-64
4 17-65
A VII, 1 17-72
A VIII, 1 17-78
2 17-79
A IX, 1 17-86
2 17-87
3 17-88
A X, A XI Not codified
A XII, 1 17-93
596 5-11-1982 I 22-49
II 22-50
III 22-51
IV 22-52
V 22-53
VI 22-54
VII 22-55
597 5-25-1982 1 18-47
2 18-48
3 18-49
4 18-50
5 18-51
6 18-52
7 18-53
8 18-54
9 18-55
10 18-56
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:903
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
11 18-57
12 18-58
13 18-59
598 5-25-1982 Not codified
599 5-25-1982 5-36.4
600 6-8-1982 1 3-37
601 6-8-1982 10-308
602 5-25-1982 Not codified
603 7-27-1982 10-298
604 6-29-1982 22-44, 22-45, 22-47
605 9-28-1982 1 18-16
2 18-17
3 18-18
4 18-19
5 18-20
6 18-21
7 18-22
8 18-23
9 18-24
10 18-25
11 18-26
12 18-27
13 18-28
14 18-29
15 18-30
16 18-31
17 — 19 Not codified
20 18-31.1
21 18-31.2
606 8-10-1982 1 20-100
2 20-103
3 20-104
4 20-106
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:904
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
5 20-109
6 20-110
607 10-26-1982 Not codified
608 11-9-1982 1 18-17
2 18-31.2
609 3-25-1983 1 5-301
2 5-302
3 5-303
4 5-304
5 5-305
610 12-14-1982 1, 2 12-17
611 4-26-1983 1 — 3 10-37
612 4-26-1983 1, 2 10-38
613 6-1983 Not codified
614 5-10-1983 Not codified
615 5-10-1983 Not codified
616 4-26-1983 1 8-1
2 8-2
3 8-3
4 8-4
5 8-5
6 8-6
7 8-7
8 8-8
9 8-9
10 8-10
11 8-11
12 8-12
617 5-10-1983 1 10-301 — 10-314
2 10-298
3 10-299
618 6-14-1983 Appx. D, Sec. 11.E.2
619 6-28-1983 1 3-1
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:905
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
2 3-45
620 6-28-1983 1 10-11
2 10-12
3 10-13
4 10-14
5 10-15
6 10-16
621 6-28-1983 1 — 3 10-39
622 6-28-1983 1 — 4 12-68
623 9-27-1983 Not codified
624 9-27-1983 1 20-17, 20-49
2 20-17
625 11-15-1983 1, 2 22-27
626 1-24-1984 1 20-120
2 20-121
3 20-122
4 20-123
5 20-124
627 1-24-1984 6-9
628 2-28-1984 1 3-18
2 3-37
629 3-27-1984 Not codified
630 5-8-1984 22-53
631 5-22-1984 13-1 — 13-9
632 5-8-1984 Not codified
633 5-8-1984 Not codified
634 5-22-1984 1 5-282
2 5-283
3 5-284
4 5-285
5 5-286
6 5-287
635 7-10-1984 Not codified
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:906
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
636 8-14-1984 7-1 — 7-9
637 Not adopted
638 10-23-1984 Not codified
639 12-11-1984 Not codified
640 2-12-1985 12-15
641 2-12-1985 1 20-130
2 20-131
642 5-28-1985 4-7, 4-22, 4-23, 4-28, 4-40,
4-46, 4-69, 4-70, 4-80, 4-81,
4-82
643 2-26-1985 21-22, 21-24
644 5-28-1985 10-63
645 5-14-1985 Not codified
646 6-11-1985 5-23, 5-24, 5-31
647 6-11-1985 1 5-312
2 5-313
3 5-314
4 5-315
648 7-9-1985 10-383 — 10-387
649 7-9-1985 22-46
650 7-9-1985 Not codified
651 8-13-1985 4-23
652 8-13-1985 2-17
653 8-27-1985 10-135
654 8-27-1985 10-11
655 8-27-1985 1 10-13.1
2 10-13.2
656 8-27-1985 5-290 — 5-292
657 10-22-1985 Not codified
658 10-22-1985 Not codified
659 11-26-1985 Not codified
660 12-13-1985 1 10-298
661 1-28-1986 1 8-1
2 8-2
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:907
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
3 8-3
4 8-4
5 8-5
6 8-6
7 8-7
8 8-8
9 8-9
10 8-10
11 8-11
12-13 Not codified
662 2-25-1986 Not codified
663 3-25-1986 Not codified
664 3-25-1986 Not codified
665 3-25-1986 13-4
666 4-10-1986 12-69
667 4-10-1986 10-36
670 5-15-1986 5-316 — 5-320
671 8-12-1986 Not codified
672 6-24-1986 Not codified
673 7-8-1986 9-24
674 6-24-1986 20-56
675 8-12-1986 10-299
676 Not adopted
677 8-26-1986 5-110 — 5-115
678 8-26-1986 1 20-18
2 20-19
3 20-20
4 20-21
5 20-22
6 20-23
679 10-28-1986 10-264, 10-298A
680 10-28-1986 5-89, 5-94
681 10-28-1986 5-209 — 5-212, 5-233,
5-260
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:908
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
682 10-14-1986 Not codified
684 10-28-1986 10-298A
685 1-5-1987 4-22, 4-26
686 Not codified
687 2-4-1987 2 4-89
2-3 4-90
688 Not codified
689 4-14-1987 10-329
690 Not codified
691 Not codified
692 4-28-1987 19-3
693 4-28-1987 3-76
694 Not codified
695 Not codified
696 6-23-1987 10-98
697 6-23-1987 2-19
698 6-23-1987 3-90
699 Not codified
700 8-11-1987 1 10-298A
2 10-299
3 10-298A
4 10-264
701 8-25-1987 10-161
702 8-25-1987 1 9-104
2 9-105
3 9-106
703 Not codified
704 Not codified
705 10-27-1987 10-39
706 11-24-1987 12-14
707 12-8-1987 10-139
708 Not codified
709 1-26-1988 8-5
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:909
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
710 Not codified
711 2-9-1988 I — XI App. D, Art. IV
712 Not codified
713 6-28-1988 3-61, 3-130
714 Not codified
715 Not codified
716 Not codified
717 Not codified
718 8-22-1989 10-64
719 Not codified
720 8-22-1989 4-19
721 Not codified
722 9-12-1989 3-14
723 9-12-1989 10-315
724 9-26-1989 9-113
725 Not codified
726 11-14-1989 5-1 — 5-321
727 3-13-1990 18-31.3
728 Not codified
729 Not codified
730 10-9-1990 Not codified
731 11-27-1990 Not codified
732 11-27-1990 Not codified
733 2-26-1991 3-75
734 2-26-1991 10-36
735 2-26-1991 1-4 10-139
736 2-26-1991 1-4 12-74
737 2-26-1991 1, 2 12-75
738 2-26-1991 12-76
739 2-26-1991 11-6
740 3-26-1991 Exh. A 20-19, 20-20(a), (d)
(Special
election)
5-14-1991 Charter
741 5-28-1991 5-11
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:910
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
742 6-11-1991 1 23-1
2 23-2
3 23-3
4 23-4
5 23-5
6 23-6
7 23-7
8 23-8
9 23-9
10 23-10
11 23-11
12 23-12
743 6-11-1991 1 24-1
2 24-2
3 24-3
4 24-4
5 24-5
6 24-6
7 24-7
8 24-8
9 24-9
744 6-11-1991 Not codified
745 11-12-1991 1 3-1, 3-37(12), (13), 3-40,
3-41, 3-46, 3-76, 3-115,
3-140
746 11-12-1991 6-1 — 6-17
747 9-24-1991 App. D, Art. VII
748 10-8-1991 Not codified
749 12-10-1991 Not codified
750 12-10-1991 1 8-1
2 8-2
3 8-3
4 8-4
5 8-5
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:911
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
6 8-6
7 8-7
8 8-8
9 8-9
10 8-10
11 8-11
751 3-24-1992 10-315
752 3-24-1992 10-36
753 3-24-1992 1-3 10-39
754 3-24-1992 10-300
755 6-9-1992 3-73
756 6-9-1992 3-80
757 9-22-1992 Not codified
758 1-26-1993 Not codified
759 3-23-1993 Not codified
760 5-11-1993 I 22-49
II 22-50
III 22-51
IV 22-52
V 22-53
VI 22-54
VII 22-55
761 6-8-1993 Not codified
762 Not used
763 8-24-1993 I 5-326
II 5-327
764 9-4-1993 Not codified
765 Failed
766 2-16-1994 1 9-121
2 9-122
3 9-123
4 9-124
767 4-12-1994 1 25-1, 25-2
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:912
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
768 6-14-1994 1 3-41
2 3-76
769 10-4-1994 5-11
770 10-11-1994 Not codified
771 11-8-1994 3-83
772 1-17-1995 10-40 — 10-42
773 4-11-1995 18-31.2
774 4-11-1995 18-23
775 4-11-1995 18-36
776 4-11-1995 18-52
777 6-13-1995 4-1, 4-2, 4-8
778 6-27-1995 12-67
779 6-27-1995 23-12
780 7-11-1995 21-61-21-75
781 10-10-1995 2 12-70
3 12-71
4 12-72
782 10-10-1995 1 9-114
2 9-117
783 8-8-1995 10-105
784 8-22-1995 4-20, 4-23
785 12-12-1995 11-4
786 1-23-1996 12-49
787 1-23-1996 12-70
788 1-23-1996 9-117
789 2-13-1996 Not codified
790 4-23-1996 11-7
791 4-23-1996 3-80
792 4-23-1996 3-37
793 9-24-1996 3-58
794 9-24-1996 3-79
795 12-10-1996 Not codified
796 2-25-1997 1, 2 10-140
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:913
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
797 8-12-1997 3-58
798 8-12-1997 3-45
799 8-12-1997 3-37
800 8-12-1997 3-57
801 8-12-1997 3-87
802 9-9-1997 22-25
803 9-23-1997 1-11
804 9-23-1997 10-388
805 9-23-1997 1, 2 12-73
806 9-23-1997 1, 2 10-389
807 10-14-1997 Not codified
808 10-14-1997 Not codified
809 10-14-1997 Not codified
810 4-28-1998 1-3 5-36A
811 6-9-1998 Not codified
812 4-13-1999 5-17, 5-28, 5-29, 5-61,
5-510, 5-111, 5-209, 5-326
813 5-11-1999 5-130
814 6-22-1999 8-15 — 8-18
815 10-12-1999 12-18 — 12-22
816 10-12-1999 3-75
817 11-23-1999 1 8.5-1
2 8.5-2
3 8.5-3
4 8.5-4
5 8.5-5
6 8.5-6
818 12-9-1999 Appx. D, Art. VII
819 Not codified
820 Not codified
821 4-25-2000 3-18
822 4-11-2000 5-23
823 4-11-2000 5-64
824 4-11-2000 5-119
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:914
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
825 4-11-2000 5-213
826 Not adopted
827 4-11-2000 10-41
828 4-11-2000 10-40
829 4-11-2000 10-39
830 4-11-2000 10-40.1
831 5-23-2000 19-1, 19-3, 19-5, 19-8,
19-16, 19-17
832 6-27-2000 10-61, 10-62, 10-63
833 Not codified
834 6-13-2000 19-16
835 8-8-2000 2-1 — 2-6
836 8-8-2000 5-15
837 Not codified
838 Not codified
839 Not codified
840 Not codified
841 10-24-2000 4-9
842 12-27-2000 10-39
843 2-27-2001 12-72
844 3-13-2001 6-1 — 6-17
845 4-10-2001 20-1 — 20-135
846 4-24-2001 1 23-11, 23-12
847 4-8-2001 20-23, 20-88
848 9-25-2001 12-72
849 9-25-2001 2-17
850 Not codified
851 11-15-2001 12-72
852 11-27-2001 9-117
853 Not codified
854 3-26-2002 3-150
855 5-28-2002 Appx. C, Sec. 11.E.3,
11.E.6, 11.E.8
856 Not adopted
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:915
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
857 9-10-2002 6-2
858 11-26-2002 Not codified
859 11-26-2002 3-140
860 11-26-2002 Appx. D, Art. VIII
861 1-14-2003 1 23-1
2 23-2
3 23-3
4 23-4
5 23-5
6 23-6
7 23-7
8 23-8
9 23-9
10 23-10
11 23-11
12 23-12
862 1-14-2003 1 24-1
2 24-2
3 24-3
4 24-4
5 24-5
6 24-6
7 24-7
8 24-8
9 24-9
863 5-28, 5-31, 5-32, 5-33, 5-34,
5-35, 5-36A, 5-94, 5-110,
5-111, 5-118, 5-209, 5-210,
5-211, 5-233, 5-314, 9-121,
9-122
864 Not codified
865 Not codified
866 Not codified
867 Not codified
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:916
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
868 7-8-2003 10-242, 10-243, 10-248,
10-252
869 9-12-2003 10-99
870 12-9-2003 10-16
871 12-9-2003 10-12, 10-13
872 1-13-2004 17-10
873 1-13-2004 1 22-38
2 22-39
3 22-40
4 22-41
5 22-42
6 22-43
7 22-43.1
874 2-10-2004 10-513
875 6-8-2004 10-63
876 Not codified
877 10-12-2004 Appx. D, Art. IX
878 12-28-2004 10-166
879 Not adopted
880 1-25-2005 10-167
881 4-26-2005 10-315
882 6-28-2005 5-282 — 5-288
883 7-12-2005 10-36
884 Not codified
885 Not codified
886 9-27-2005 10-39
887 Not codified
888 Not codified
889 Not codified
890 Not codified
891 Not codified
892 2-28-2006 2-17
893 11-28-2006 6.5-1 — 6.5-2
894 Not codified
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:917
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
895 6-26-2007 3-150
896 Not codified
897 10-23-2007 8-1
898 Not codified
899 12-26-2007 2-17
900 Not codified
901 Not codified
902 Not codified
903 5-27-2008 10-167
904 6-10-2008 10-63
905 Not adopted
906 7-8-2008 Art. IV 5-530-5-539
Art. V 5-540-5-559
Art. V 5-560-5-564
907 Not adopted
908 8-26-2008 3-76
909 8-26-2008 Appx. D, Art. IV
910 8-26-2008 Appx. D, Art. V
911 9-23-2008 1 3-37(b)
2 3-37(b)(19)
3 3-38
912 Not codified
913 2-10-2009 12-78
914 Not codified
915 2-18-2009 8-12.1
916 3-10-2009 1 3-58
917 3-24-2009 1 10-274
918 4-14-2009 10-101
919 4-14-2009 10-139
920 5-12-2009 10-383 — 10-387, 10-390
— 10-393
921 7-28-2009 11 23-11
12 23-12
922 Not codified
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § CCT-2
AO:918
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
923 9-8-2009 1 18-19
2 18-20
924 2-23-2010 1 10-316(a)
2 10-316(b)
3 10-316(c)
4 10-316(d)
5 10-316(e)
6 10-316(f)
7 10-316(g)
8 10-316(h)
925 Not codified
926 Not codified
927 5-11-2010 22-28
928 6-8-2010 8-12.1
929 Not codified
930 7-27-2010 1.0 8.3-1 — 8.3-5
2.0 8.3-6
3.0 8.3-7 — 8.3-14
4.0 8.3-15 — 8.3-20
5.0 8.3-21 — 8.3-25
6.0 8.3-26
931 12-14-2010 1 10-299
932 Not adopted
933 12-28-2010 Not codified
934 Not codified
935 Not codified
936 5-10-2011 1 9-88, 9-89
937 8-23-2011 1 17-40(a)
2 17-40(b)
3 17-40(c)
4 17-40(d)
5 17-40(e)
6 17-40(f)
§ CCT-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § CCT-2
AO:919
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section Section this Code
938 7-12-2011 5-321
939 7-26-2011 1 22-71
2 22-72
3 22-73
4 22-74
5 22-75
6 22-76
7 22-77
940 9-27-2011 2-17
941 10-11-2011 2.5-6 — 2.5-10
942 11-22-2011 1 10-1
2 10-266, 10-273, 10-299
943 12-13-2011 11 23-11
12 23-12
944 1-10-2012 1 21-16
945 3-27-2012 Not codified
946 3-27-2012 1 3-37(b)(19)
947 4-10-2012 1 17-97.4, 17-97.5
948 5-24-2012 Appx. C, 11, D, 5
949 5-8-2012 1 17.5-6
950 6-26-2012 1 5.5-1
2 5.5-2
3 5.5-3
4 5.5-4
951 6-26-2012 4 23-4
11 23-11
12 23-12
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ CCT-2 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:920
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
952 Not adopted
953 7-10-2012 Not codified
954 Not adopted 9
955 7-10-2012 Specialty
restaurant beer
license, 3-37,
Ord. § 1
3-37(b)(7) 9
956 8-28-2012 Zoning Not codified 9
957 2-12-2013 Amends salaries,
2-17, Ord. § 1
2-17 9
958 10-9-2012 Zoning Not codified 9
959 10-9-2012 Zoning Not codified 9
960 12-26-2012 Zoning Not codified 9
961 4-9-2013 Zoning Not codified 9
962 4-23-2013 Zoning Not codified 9
963 4-23-2013 Zoning Not codified 9
964 4-23-2013 Zoning Not codified 9
965 4-23-2013 Zoning Not codified 9
966 6-11-2013 Amends
fireworks-sale
and use, 8-13,
Ord. § 1
8-13 9
967 Not adopted 9
968 8-27-2013 Zoning Not codified 9
969 8-27-2013 Amend driving
without liability
insuranceprohibited,
10-36, Ord. § 1
10-36 9
970 8-27-2013 Amends driving
while under the
influence of
liquor or drugsprohibited,
10-12; penalty,
10-13
10-12, 10-13 9
971 9-24-2013 Zoning Not codified 9
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:921
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
972 Not adopted
973 8-27-2013 Amends general
penalty, 1-11,
Ord. § 1
1-11 9
974 9-24-2013 Zoning Not codified 9
975 9-10-2013 Restricting
Smoking in
public places
and places of
employment,
12-80, Ord. § 1.0
12-80-12-80.6 9
976 8-27-2013 Grant of nonexclusive
franchise to
Missouri Valley
Communicationstelecommunications
and data system
Appx. D, Art. X 9
977 10-8-2013 Amends salaries,
2-17, Ord. § 1
2-17 9
978 10-22-2013 Adds ingestion
of marijuana
prohibited,
12-79
12-79 9
979 10-22-2013 Amends speed
limits-specific
application,
10-154
10-154 9
980 Zoning Not codified 9
981 Zoning Not codified 9
982 Zoning Not codified 9
983 Zoning Not codified 9
984 1-14-2014 Nonexclusive
franchise to
Nemont
Communications,
Inc.
Appx. D, Art. XI 9
§ DL-1 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:922
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
985A 1-14-2014 Adds emergency
temporary
homeless
shelters,
15-42-15-45
15-42 9
985B Zoning Not codified 9
986 Zoning Not codified 9
987 2-25-2014 Amends sale of
tobacco to
minors, 12-71;
purchase,
possession or
use of tobacco
by minors, 12-72
9
Ord. § 1 12-71 9
Ord. § 2 12-72
988 9-9-2014 Amend
Merchants,
vendors and
solicitors,
Chapter 18
Ch. 18 9
989 3-11-2014 Amends
fireworks,
8-13-8-13.7
9
Ord. § 1 8-13.1 9
Ord. § 2 8-13.2 9
Ord. § 3 8-13.3 9
Ord. § 4 8-13.4 9
Ord. § 5 8-13.5 9
Ord. § 6 8-13.6 9
Ord. § 7 8-13.7 9
990 Zoning Not codified 9
991 Zoning Not codified 9
992 4-8-2014 Adds City
lodging and
restaurant tax,
9-125.1-9-125.8,
Ord. § 1
9-125.1-9-125.8 9
993 Zoning Not codified 9
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:923
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
994 6-10-2014 Amends vehicles
for hire, Ch. 21
Ch. 21 9
995 6-10-2014 Vehicle
registration-adds
transfer of title,
penalty, 10-6.1,
Ord. § 1
10-6.1 9
996 6-24-2014 Amends water
emergency
restrictions and
prohibitions,
lawn watering
22-63 9
997A 5-27-2014 Amends
Commercial
Building Codework
exempt
from permit,
5-13
5-13 9
997B 5-27-2014 Amends
Residential
Building Code,
5-14
5-14 9
998 Zoning Not codified 9
999 Zoning Not codified
1000 Zoning Not codified 9
1001 9-9-2014 Property
Maintenanceamends
weed
and mowing
control-action
upon
noncompliance,
5-286; penalties,
5-287
5-286, 5-287 9
1002 9-9-2014 Property
Maintenanceunlawful
to store
or accumulate
junk, trash or
rubbish, 5-292,
5-295, 5-296
5-292, 5-295,
5-296
9
§ DL-1 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:924
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1003 9-9-2014 Amend parking
violationspenalty,
10-299
10-299 9
1004 11-12-2014 Zoning Not codified 9
1005 10-28-2014 Amends Ch. 5,
Building
regulations,
penalties -
Superseded by
Ord. No. 1006
9
1006 11-25-2014 Amends Ch. 5,
Building
regulations,
penalties
5-321, 5-322 9
1007 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1008 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1009 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1010 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1011 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1012 1-27-2015 Amends Ch. 10,
Motor Vehicles
and Traffic;
10-36, driving
without liability
insurance
prohibited
1013 1-27-2015 Amends Ch. 13,
Pawnbrokers;
13-1, 13-6, 13-7,
13-7.1, 13-10,
regulation of
pawnbrokers
10
1014 3-10-2015 Amends Ch. 8,
Article I,
International
Fire Code
10
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:925
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1015 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1016 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1017 5-26-2015 Amends Ch. 15,
Planning and
Development;
amends 15-36,
15-37, Interim
Zoning District
10
1018 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1019 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. 18,
Merchants,
Vendors, and
Solicitors;
readopts Articles
I-IV; Adds Article
V, Frozen
Dessert Vending
10
1020 7-28-2015 Amends Ch. 3,
Alcoholic
Beverages; 3-35,
license required;
3-47, temporary
charitable or
civic event
alcoholic
beverage permit
authorized
10
1021 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1022 8-25-2015 Amends Ch. 3,
Alcoholic
Beverages; 3-41,
special Sunday
alcoholic
beverage permit
10
§ DL-1 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:926
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1023 8-25-2015 Amends Ch. 5,
Buildings and
Building
Regulations;
5-326,
International
Property
Maintenance
Code adopted;
5-327,
Conflicting
ordinances
10
1024 (Not adopted as
of May 9, 2016)
10
1025 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1026 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1027 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1028 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1029 10-27-2015 Amends Ch. 10,
Motor Vehicles
and Traffic;
10-36, driving
without liability
insuranceprohibited
1030 11-24-2015 Amends Ch. 2,
Administration;
2-3, retained
appointive
officers
10
1031 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1032 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1033 12-8-2015 Zoning, Not
codified
10
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:927
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1034 1-26-2016 Amends Ch. 3,
Alcoholic
Beverages;
Creates Article
XV,
Entertainment
and Live
Performances
Upon Licensed
Alcoholic
Beverage
Licensed
Premises,
3-151-3-154
10
1035 1-26-2016 Amends Ch. 9,
Licenses and
Business
Regulations;
Article V, Adult
Entertainment,
9-85 - 9-90
10
1036 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1037 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1038 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1039 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1040 2-23-2016 Amends Ch. 3,
Alcoholic
Beverages; 3-36,
retail licenses to
be issued; 3-37,
conditions and
license fees
10
1041 3-8-2016 Zoning, Not
codified
10
1042 Not adopted 11
1043 Codified in
Supp. No. 12 (5/
19)
11
§ DL-1 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:928
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1044 6-13-2017 Amends Ch. 3
Alcoholic
Beverages; 3-1
Definitions; 3-36,
3-37 Licensing
1045 4-25-2017 Amends Ch. 9,
License and
Business
Regulations;
9-68 — 9-71,
9-73; Games of
Chance; repeals
9-72 Fees
11
1046 Not adopted 11
1047 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 10,
Motor Vehicles
and Traffic;
Article IV,
10-142
Headlamps
Required on
Motor Vehicles
11
1048 7-12-2016 Zoning, Not
codified
11
1049 4-25-2017 Amends Ch. 3,
Alcoholic
Beverages;
Article III, 3-40,
3-42, Special
permits; 3-122
Term of licenses
11
1050 8-23-2016 Zoning, Not
codified
11
1051 9-13-2016 Amends Ch. 2,
Administration;
adds 2-7 Powers
and Duties of
City
Administrator
11
1052 11-8-2016 Zoning, Not
codified
11
1053 Not adopted 11
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:929
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1054 12-27-2016 Amends Ch. 5,
Buildings and
Building
Regulations;
Weed and
Mowing Control
Programs 5-282
— 5-286
11
1055 12-27-2016 Amends Ch. 20
Streets and
Sidewalks 20.86
— 20.88 Snow
Removal; Snow
Removal moved
to Ch. 5
Buildings and
Building
Regulations,
adds Division 5
Snow and Ice
Removal
11
1056 Not received 11
1057 6-13-2017 Amends Ch. 10
Motor Vehicles
and Traffic; adds
10-141 Wireless
Communication
Devises
Prohibited-
Texting and
Driving
11
1058 Zoning, Not
codified
§ DL-1 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:930
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1059 3-16-2017 Amends Ch. 9,
License and
Business
Regulations;
Article VIII,
Authority for
Sale of Tobacco
Products, 9.114
— 9.117;
amends Ch. 12
Offenses-
Miscellaneous;
repeals 12-10 —
12-72 Sale of,
Tobacco
Products
11
1060 Zoning, Not
codified
11
1061 Zoning, Not
codified
11
1062 Zoning, Not
codified
11
1063 6-13-2017 Amends Ch. 2.5
Airport
Regulations;
2.5-7 Definitions;
2.5-8 Parking
Rules and
Regulations;
2.5-11 Penalties
11
1064 6-13-2017 Amends Ch. 11
Municipal Judge;
11-7
Authorization to
Impose a $25
Victim Impact
Fee Upon
Conviction of a
Criminal Offense
11
1065 8-8-2017 Zoning, Not
codified
11
1066 Not adopted 11
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:931
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1067 8-22-2017 Amends Ch. 21
Vehicles for
Hire; 21-22
Vehicles for
Hire-
Requirements,
21-23 Insurance,
21-25 Transfer;
21-27 Renewal,
21-52 Parking of
Taxicabs When
Not in Operation
11
1068 8-22-2017 Amends Ch. 12
Offenses-
Miscellaneous;
12-12 Garbage,
Glass, Debris or
Rubbish on
Streets or Public
Property
11
1043 6-24-2016 Amends Ch. 3
Alcoholic
Beverages; 3-1
Definitions,
Premises;
amends 3-73
Sale or Use On
Street
Prohibited;
amends 3-80
Prohibition On
Consumption in
Certain Places;
amends Ch. 20
Streets and
Sidewalks;
amends 20-1
Sidewalk Sales
Prohibited in
General; adds
20-2 Permitted
Uses of Streets,
Side-walks,
Alleys or Public
Grounds
12
§ DL-1 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:932
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1069 10-24-2017 Amends Ch. 4
Animals and
Fowl; 4-90
Keeping of
Registered Pit
Bulls
12
1070 11-14-2017 Amends Ch. 3
Alcoholic
Beverages; 3-37
Conditions and
License Fees
12
1071 11-28-2017 Amends Ch. 23
Sales Tax; 23-12
Termination of
Tax
12
1072 11-28-2017 Amends App. D
Franchise, Art.
VIII, Cable
System
Agreement with
Midcontinent
Communications
12
1073 Zoning 12
1074 1-23-2018 Amends Ch. 8
Fire Prevention;
8-13 Fireworks-
Sale and Use;
amends 8-13.2
Sale of
Fireworks
Prohibited;
amends 8-13.4
Public Display of
Fireworks
Permitted by
City or Fair
Association
Within its Limits-
Supervised
Display Allowed-
Permit Required
12
1075 Zoning 12
1076 Not Adopted 12
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:933
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1077 2-27-2018 Amends Ch. 10
Motor Vehicles
and Traffic;
10-142
Headlamps
Required on
Motor Vehicle
12
1078 Not Adopted 12
1079 9-25-2018 Zoning 12
1080 Not Adopted
1081 8-28-2018 Amends Ch. 4
Animals and
Fowl; Replaces
Articles I, II, IV,
and V; Repeals
Article III
12
1082 Zoning 12
1083 7-10-2018 Amends Ch. 20
Streets and
Sidewalks, adds
20-2 Permitted
Uses of Streets,
Sidewalks,
Alleys or Public
Grounds (Mobile
Food Trucks)
12
1084 Zoning 12
1085 6-26-2018 Amends Ch. 5
Buildings and
Building
Regulations,
5-282 — 5-286
(Control of grass
and noxious
weeds)
12
§ DL-1 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:934
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1086 9-11-2018 Amends Ch. 20
Streets and
Sidewalks; adds
20-2 Permitted
Uses of Streets,
Sidewalks,
Alleys or Public
Grounds
(outdoor
sidewalk cafes)
12
1087 9-11-2018 Amends Ch. 18
Merchants,
Vendors and
Solicitors; 18-65
Operation
Regulations
12
1088 8-28-2018 Amends Ch. 8
Fire Prevention;
8-13.4 Public
Display of
Fireworks
Permitted by
City or Fair
Association
Within Its
Limits-
Supervised
Display Allowed-
Permit Required
12
1089 9-25-2018 Zoning 12
1090 9-25-2018 Zoning 12
1091 8-28-2018 Amends Ch. 8
Fire Prevention;
8-13.7 Penalty
12
1092 Zoning 12
1093 Repealed by
action of the
Governing Body
on March 12,
2019
12
1094 Zoning 12
1095 Zoning 12
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:935
Ordinance
Number
Adoption
Date Section
Section this
Code
Supp.
No.
1096 Not Adopted
1097 1-8-2019 Amends Ch. 16
Police; adds
16-25 Key Lock
Box System
12
1098 1-22-2019 Amends Ch. 21
Vehicles for
Hire; 21-16
Definitions and
Penalties
12
1099 3-12-2019 Amends Ch. 10
Motor Vehicles
and Traffic;
10-247 Penalties
12
1100 2-26-2019 Amends Ch. 4
Animals and
Fowl; 4-90
Keeping of
registered pit
bulls
12
1101 4-23-2019 Amends Ch. 3
Alcoholic
Beverages;
3-150
Administrative
fees and
suspension or
revocation of
license to sell
alcoholic
beverages
12
1102 4-23-2019 Amends Ch. 9
Licenses and
Business
Regulations;
adds 9-11
Special Event
Permit-required
12
§ DL-1 WILLISTON CODE § DL-1
AO:936
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Supp.
No.
1103 5-13-2019 Buildings and Building
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 5 13
1104 6-25-2019 Cemeteries Amendment Ch. 6 13
1105 8-13-2019 Offenses —
Miscellaneous
Amendment
Ch. 12 13
1106 8-13-2019 General Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 1 13
1107 8-27-2019 Vehicles for Hire
Amendment
Ch. 21 13
1108 10-8-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 13
1109 11-26-2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic Amendment
Ch. 10 13
1110 2-11-2020 Animals and Fowl
Amendment
Ch. 4 13
1111 6-9-2020 Zoning Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. Z 13
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:937