BLAI 



CODEBOOK
 


 	Chapter  1- ADMINISTRATION 	



Chapter 2 - COMMISSIONS & BORADS




Chapter 3 - MUNICIPAL OPERATIONS



Chapter 4 - HEALTH & SANITATION




Chapter 5 -TRAFFIC REGUALTIONS




Chapter 6 - POLICE REGULATIONS




Chapter 7 - FIRE REGULATIONS




Chapter 8 - PUBLIC WAYS & PROPERTY




Chapter 9 - BUILDING REGULATIONS




Chapter 10 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS




Chapter 11- ZONING REGULATIONS




Chapter 12 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS




Chapter 13 - MUNICIPAL PLANNING




Chapter 14 - TAXES & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT



Chapter 15 - REGULATIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS


CHAPTER ONE - ADMINSTRATION 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6: ARTICLE?: ARTICLES: ARTICLE9: ARTICLE 10:
ARTICLE 11:
ARTICLE 12:
ARTICLE 13:
ARTICLE 14: ARTICLE  lS:
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS ELECTED  OFFICIALS APPOINTED OFFICIALS MEETINGS
ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS & ORDERS
BONDS&OATH CORPORATE SEAL ELECTIONS
FISCAL  MANAGEMENT COMPENSATION PENSION PLAN
SOCIAL SECURITY
INITIATIVE & REFERENDUM EMINENT DOMAIN
PENAL PROVISION
 

CHAPTER TWO - COMMISSIONS & BOARDS 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6: ARTICLE?: ARTICLES: ARTICLE9: ARTICLE 10:
ARTICLE 11:
ARTICLE 12:
ARTICLE 13:
 
BLAIR PUBLIC LIBRARY
CITY PLANNING COMMISSION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT BLAIR AIRPORT AUTHORITY DOCK BOARD (REPEALED)
CITY COUNCIL COMMITTEES (REPEALED) RECREATION BOARD (REPEALED)
PARK ADVISORY BOARD
BLACK-ELKNEIHARDTPARKBOARD(REPEALED) CITIZEN ADVISORY REVIEW COMMITTEE (REPEALED) CIVIL SERVICE
BOARD OF HEALTH
PENAL PROVISION
 


CHAPTER THREE - MUNICIPAL OPERATIONS 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6: ARTICLE?: ARTICLES: ARTICLE9: ARTICLE 10:
ARTICLE 11:
ARTICLE 12:
 
WATER SERVICE GENERALLY REPEALED
UTILITIES  DISCONNECTION FIRE DEPARTMENT
POLICE RESERVE FORCE
PARKS & RECREATION GENERALLY REPEALED
CEMETERY
POLICE  DEPARTMENT SEWER SYSTEM PENAL PROVISIONS CITY TOW LOT
 
CHAPTER FOUR- HEALTH & SANITATION 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6:
 
BOARD OF HEALTH
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL & WELLS GARBAGE & REFUSE
MISCELLANEOUS  HEALTH REGULATIONS NUISANCES
VIOLATIONS BUREAU & PENAL PROVISION
 

CHAPTER FIVE - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6: ARTICLE?:
 
DEFINITIONS
MUNICIPAL  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS OPERATOR & VEHICLE  QUALIFICATIONS PARKING
BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, SNOWMOBILES & MOPEDS PROHIBITION & ENFORCEMENT
VIOLATIONS BUREAU & PENAL PROVISION
 

CHAPTER SIX - POLICE REGULATIONS 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6:
 
DOGS & CATS; DANGEROUS DOGS ANIMALS & FOWLS MISCELLANEOUS  MISDEMEANORS
VIOLATIONS  BUREAU & PENAL PROVISION RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE
ARREST & ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION
 

CHAPTER SEVEN - FIRE REGULATIONS 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES:
 
FIRES
FIRE PREVENTION EXPLOSIVE  MATERIALS FIREWORKS
VIOLATIONS BUREAU & PENAL PROVISION
 

CHAPTER EIGHT -PUBLIC WAYS & PROPERTY 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6: ARTICLE?:
 
GENERAL PROVISIONS
STREET NAMES & DESIGNATIONS BLOCK & BUILDING NUMBERS ENCROACHMENTS & EXCAVATIONS SIDEWALKS
STREET IMPROVEMENTS
VIOLATIONS BUREAU & PENAL PROVISION
 

CHAPTER NINE - BUILDING REGULATIONS 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6: ARTICLE?:
 
BUILDING  INSPECTOR BUILDING CODE HOUSING CODE PLUMBING CODE ELECTRICAL CODE
MINIMUM LIGHTING & THERMAL EFFICIENCY STANDARDS
PENAL PROVISION
 

CHAPTER TEN - BUSINESS REGULATIONS 	


 
ARTICLE 1: ARTICLE2: ARTICLE3: ARTICLE4: ARTICLES: ARTICLE6: ARTICLE?: ARTICLES: ARTICLE9: ARTICLE 10:
ARTICLE 11:
ARTICLE 12:
ARTICLE 13:
ARTICLE 14: ARTICLE lS: ARTICLE 16:
ARTICLE 17:
ARTICLE 18:
ARTICLE 19: ARTICLE20: ARTICLE21: ARTICLE22:
 
ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES PEDDLERS & HAWKERS RAILROADS
MOVING & DEMOLITION
ACCOMMODATIONS  FOR TRANSIENTS (REPEALED) TRAILER CAMPS
TAXICABS  (REPEALED)
BARBER & BEAUTY SHOPS (REPEALED) PAWNBROKERS, JUNK & SECONDHAND DEALERS AUCTIONS & AUCTIONEERS (REPEALED) THEATERS, SHOWS & ENTERTAINMENTS
PLUMBING, HEATING. WATER & WASTE TREATMENT
ELECTRICAL  WORK CONSTRUCTION  WORK CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION FEES BINGO
GAMES OF CHANCE AND/OR LOTTERIES OCCUPATION  TAX
CABLE TELEVISION
WELL DRILLER (REPEALED) TREE TRIMMERS
PENAL PROVISION
 

CHAPTER ELEVEN - ZONING REGULATIONS 	


ARTICLE 1:	ZONING REGULATIONS


CHAPTER TWELVE - SUBDIVISION REGUAL TIONS 	


ARTICLE 1:	SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS


CHAPTER THIRTEEN - MUNICIPAL PLANNING 	


ARTICLE 1:	FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
 
CHAPTER FOURTEEN -TAXES & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 	


ARTICLE 1:	SALES & USE TAX
ARTICLE 2:	ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM
CHAPTER FIFTEEN - REGUALTIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS 	 ARTICLE 1:	REGUAL TIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
ARTICLE2:	SEXOFFENDERRESIDENCY


INDEX 	
 
PREFACE



This Municipal Code of Blair, Nebraska, contains all the ordinances of the Municipality of a general nature.
A Table of Contents appears after this page, and a complete index to the subject matter included in the several chapters and sections herein will be found at the end of this volume. Convenient cross-references to the Statutes of Nebraska indicate the source of legislative power and supplement the text.
The text of the Blair Municipal Code is arranged in the same manner as the Revised Statutes of Nebraska. The number preceding the hyphen is the chapter number; immediately following the hyphen is the article number; and following that is the second number. Each section number is complete within itself indicating the number of the chapter, article, and section.
 
Chapter 1 ADMINISTRATION
Article 1. General Provisions


Sec. 1-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS; CORPORATE EXISTENCE.  The City of Blair,
Nebraska is hereby found and declared to be a City of more than five thousand (5,000) and less than one hundred thousand (100,000) inhabitants, and it shall be governed by the laws of Nebraska regulating cities of the first class and was incorporated December 12, 1868. (Neb. Rev. Stat.  §16-101)















































(END OF SECTION)
 

Article 2.  Elected Officials

Sec.1-201 ELECTED OFFICIALS; QUALIFICATIONS. All elected officers shall be qualified electors of the Municipality.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-311)

Sec. 1-202 CITY MAYOR; ELECTION AND DUTIES. The Mayor shall preside at all the meetings of the City Council and shall have the right to vote on any pending matter, legislation, or transaction when his or her vote will provide the additional vote required to create a number of votes equal to a majority of the number of members elected to the City Council.

The Mayor shall have the superintending control of all the officers and affairs of the City, and shall take care that the ordinances of the City and the provisions oflaw relating to Cities of the First Class are complied with. The Mayor may administer oaths, and shall sign the commissions and appointments of all the officers appointed in the City. The Mayor must sign all resolutions which have been passed and warrants for the payment of money when ordered by the City Council and Municipal Minutes of all meetings.

The Mayor shall have the power to approve or veto any ordinance passed by the City Council and to approve or veto any order, by-law, resolution, award or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim; Provided, any ordinance, order, by-law, resolution, award or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim vetoed by the Mayor, may be passed over the Mayor's veto by vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the members elected to the Council, notwithstanding the Mayor's veto. Ifthe Mayor vetoes the ordinance, order, by-law, resolution, contract, or any item or items of appropriations or claims, the Mayor shall return it to the City Council stating that the measure is vetoed. The Mayor may issue the veto at the meeting at which the measure passed or within seven (7) calendar days after the meeting. Ifthe Mayor issues the veto after the meeting, the Mayor shall notify the City Clerk of the veto in writing. The Clerk shall notify the City Council in writing of the Mayor's veto. The City Council may vote to override the veto at the meeting at which the measure was vetoed, or a Council member may notify the City Clerk in writing within seven (7) calendar days of the date of the written notice of the veto to place a veto override motion on the agenda at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. If a Council member neglects or refuses to notify the City Clerk of their desire for a veto override motion within the time required by this section, the veto shall stand. If the Mayor neglects or refuses to sign any ordinance, order, by-law, resolution, award or vote to enter into any contract, or the allowance of any claim, but fails to veto the measure within the time required by this section, the measure shall become effective without the Mayor's signature. The Mayor may veto any item or items of any appropriation bill or any claims bill, and approve the remainder thereof, and the item or items so vetoed may be passed by the Council over the veto as in other cases.

The Mayor  shall, from time to time,  communicate to the City Council such information  and recommend such measures as in the Mayor's opinion may tend to the improvement of the finances of the City, the police, health, comfort, and general prosperity of the Municipality and may have such jurisdiction as may be invested in the Mayor by ordinance over all places within two (2) miles of the corporate limits of the City, for the enforcement of health or quarantine ordinances and the regulation thereof.  The Mayor shall have power after conviction to remit fines and forfeitures, and to grant
 
reprieves and pardons for all offenses arising under the ordinances of the City. The Mayor shall have all other powers and duties as may be provided by the laws of the State of Nebraska and as further provided by advice of the Municipality. The Mayor shall be elected at large at the Municipal Election, and shall serve a four (4) year term of office.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-312 thru 16-314, 16-
503) (Amended by Ordinance No. 2270 3/10/2015)

Sec.1-203 CITY COUNCIL; ACTING PRESIDENT. The City Council shall elect one (1) ofits own body each year who shall be styled the President of the Council, and who shall preside at all meetings of the City Counqil in the absence of the Mayor. In the absence of the Mayor, and the President of the Council, the City Council shall elect one (1) of its own body to occupy his place temporarily, who shall be styled Acting President of the Council. Both the President of the Council and the Acting President of the Council, when occupying the position of the Mayor, shall have the same privileges as the other members of the City Council, and all acts of the President of the Council, or Acting President of the Council, while so acting, shall be as binding upon the City Council, and upon the Municipality as if done by the elected Mayor.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-402)

Sec. 1-204 CITY COUNCIL; ELECTION AND DUTIES. The members of the City Council shall be elected and serve for a four (4) year term. Two (2) members of the Council shall be elected from each ward, who shall be electors of the City and residents of the ward from which elected. One (1) member of the Council from each ward shall be elected at each election, so that terms are staggered. The City Council shall be the legislative division of the Municipal Government, and shall perform such duties, and have such powers as may be authorized by law.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01)

Sec.1-205  ELECTED OFFICIALS; OTHER OFFICES PROHIBITED.  No elected officer of
the Municipality shall hold any County office nor shall he or she be appointed to any other office created by the City Council. The acceptance of any County office by any such elective Municipal officer shall be a vacation of the Municipal office so held prior to such acceptance. (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§ 16-305)


Sec.1-206 ELECTED OFFICIALS; FAILURE TO QUALIFY. The failure of any Municipal Official to qualify within ten (10) days after the delivery to him or her by the City Clerk of a certificate of election shall be deemed a refusal to accept the office to which he or she may have been elected. In all cases of an election when the successful candidate or a candidate receiving the highest number of votes in such election shall be prevented from assuming office on account of disqualification, the incumbent shall not be entitled to hold over the term, but such office shall automatically become vacant and an appointment shall be made to fill such vacancy in the manner provided by law. An incumbent Councilmember shall be eligible for the appointment.

Sec. 1-207 CITY COUNCIL; ORGANIZATION.   City Council members of this Municipality shall take office, and commence their duties on the first (1st) regular meeting in December following their election. The newly elected Council members who have qualified as prescribed by law together with the members of the City Council holding over, shall assemble in a regular meeting at the hour and place hereinafter  prescribed  and perfect  the reorganization  of the  City Council as herein provided, and all appointive offices in which the terms of incumbents are expired shall be filled by appointment. After the said meeting has been called to order, the Municipal Clerk shall report to the



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 1, Article 2, page 2
 
City Council the names of all City Council members-elect who have qualified for their respective offices, and this report shall be spread upon the minutes of the meeting preceding the roll call. Each ward of the Municipality shall be represented by two (2) Council members. No person shall be eligible who is not at the time of his or her election an actual resident of the ward for which he or she is qualified and should any City Councilmember move from the ward from which he or she was elected, his office shall thereby become vacant. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01) (Ord. No. 1171, 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-208 thru Sec. 1-213 Repealed by Ord. No. 1078, 4/10/73.


Sec.1-214 CITY COUNCIL COMMITTEES. All Standing Committees of the City Council shall be appointed at the regular organizational meeting of the City Council as provided hereinbefore. The Council shall determine the number of Standing Committees to be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of a majority of the City Council. The determination of the City Council as to the number of Standing Committees to be appointed shall be made at the regular organizational meeting of the Council. The function of the Council Committees is to assist the Council in the adoption of policies and to assist the Administrator in formulating recommendations of the policies to the Mayor and Council.

Sec.   1-215       CITY   COUNCIL    COMMITTEES;    SPECIAL   COMMITTEES    AND
SUB-COMMITTEES. Sub-committees of the Standing Committees or Special Committees of the Council may be appointed at any meeting by the Mayor. The Mayor shall be a member ex-officio of each standing, special or sub-committee.


































City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 1, Article 2, page 3
 


























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3.  Appointed Officials


Sec. 1-301 APPOINTED OFFICIALS; ENUMERATED; APPOINTMENT AND REMOVAL; ADMINISTRATOR; ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR; APPOINTMENT.  The Municipality
shall have such departments and appointed officials as shall be established by ordinance passed by the
City Council, which shall include a City Clerk, Treasurer, Engineer, Director of Public Works, and Attorney, and such officials as may otherwise be required by law. Except as provided by law, the Mayor may, with the approval of the City Council, appoint the necessary officials, as well as an Administrator and an Assistant City Administrator, who shall perform such duties as prescribed by ordinance. Except as provided by law, the appointed officials may be removed at any time by the Mayor with approval of a majority of the Council. The office of City Administrator and Assistant City Administrator may not be held by the Mayor. The appointed Administrator and Assistant Administrator may concurrently hold any other appointive office provided for in this Section. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-308)

Sec. 1-301.01 APPOINTED OFFICIALS; TERMS. All officials appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council shall hold the office to which they may be appointed until the end of the Mayor's term of office, except the Chief of the Fire Department whose term of office shall be for one (1) year only, or until their successors are appointed and qualified, unless sooner removed. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-309)

Sec. 1-301.02 APPOINTED OFFICIALS; SIMULTANEOUS OFFICES.  The offices of City
Clerk, City Administrator, City Treasurer, and any other offices except where prohibited by law, may be held by the same person.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-308, 16-318.01)

Sec.1-302 ADMINISTRATOR; POWER; DUTIES. The City Administrator, as chief executive officer, shall be responsible for the proper administration of the personnel management system by ensuring that appointments are based on merit and fitness; maintaining a sound position classification plan; equitably administering the compensation plan; ensuring that the City is an equal opportunity employer; maintaining employee discipline; ensuring high employee productivity; maximizing employee development opportunities; ensuring fair and effective appeal and grievance procedures; fostering good employee relations; and issuing such administrative directives as are necessary to implement these rules, and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him from time to time by the Mayor and Council.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-308)

Sec. 1-302.01 ASSISTANT CITY ADMINISTRATOR; POWER; DUTIES.  In the absence of
the City Administrator, the Assistant City Administrator shall serve as the chief executive officer. The Assistant City Administrator shall have overall responsibility for assisting in the enforcement oflaws and ordinances, administration of personnel management systems, fiscal planning and management with emphasis on Human Relations and special projects, and shall also perform such other duties as may be required of the Assistant Administrator by the Administrator.
 
Sec. 1-303 CITY CLERK; DUTIES. The City Clerk shall attend the meetings of the Governing Body, and keep a correct journal of the proceedings of that body. The City Clerk shall keep a record of all outstanding bonds against the Municipality and when any bonds are sold, purchased, paid or canceled, said record shall show the fact. The City Clerk shall make, at the end of the fiscal year, a report of the business of the Municipality transacted through the City Clerk's office for the year in which he or she shall describe particularly the bonds issued, and sold during the year, and the terms of the sale with each, and every item, and expense thereof. The City Clerk shall file all official bonds after the same shall have been properly executed, and approved. The City Clerk shall make the proper certificate of passage which shall be attached to original copies of all bond ordinances hereafter enacted by the Governing Body.
The City Clerk shall issue, and sign all licenses, permits, and  occupation tax receipts authorized by law, and required by the Municipal ordinances. The City Clerk shall collect all occupation taxes, and license money except where some other Municipal officer is specifically charged with that duty. The City Clerk shall keep a register of all licenses granted in the Municipality, and the purpose for which they have been issued.
The City Clerk shall permit no records, public papers, or other documents of the Municipality kept, and preserved in the City Clerk's office to be taken therefrom, except by such officers of the Municipality as may be entitled to the use of the same, but only upon their leaving a receipt therefor. The City Clerk shall keep all the records of the office, including a record of all licenses issued by the City Clerk in a record book with a proper index. The City Clerk shall include as part of the City Clerk's records all petitions under which the Governing Body shall order public work to be done at the expense of the property subject thereto, together with references to all resolutions, and ordinances relating to the same. The City Clerk shall endorse the date, and hour of filing upon every paper, or document filed in said office. All such filings made by the City Clerk shall be properly docketed. Included in the City Clerk's records shall be all standard codes, amendments thereto, and other documents incorporated by reference, and arranged in triplicate in a manner convenient for reference.
The City Clerk shall keep, and preserve the proceedings of the Governing Body in two (2) separate, and distinct record books: the Minute Records, wherein shall be recorded the miscellaneous, and informal doings of the Governing Body; Provided the Minute Record shall not include the passage and approval of ordinances except such resolutions incorporating by reference the Ordinance Record into the Minute Record; and the Ordinance Record wherein shall be recorded the formal proceedings of the Governing Body in the matter of passing, approving, publishing, posting and certifying of ordinances. After the formalities for the legal enactment of an ordinance, as required by law, have been completed, the City Clerk shall record and spread at large in the Ordinance Record his or her ordinance minutes or printed forms. The City Clerk shall keep an accurate and complete account of the appropriation of the several funds, draw, sign, and attest all warrants ordered for the payment of money on the particular fund from which the same is payable. At the end of each month, the City Clerk shall then make a report of the amount of the warrants drawn thereon. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any citizen, official, or other person from examining any public records at all reasonable times.
The City Clerk shall deliver all warrants, ordinances and resolutions under his or her charge to the Mayor for the Mayor's signature. The City Clerk shall also deliver to officers, employees, and committees all resolutions and communications which are directed to said officers, employees,
or committees. With the seal of the Municipality, the City Clerk shall duly attest the Mayor's signature to all ordinances, deeds, and papers required to be attested when ordered to do so by the
 
Governing Body. Within thirty (30) days after any meeting of the Governing Body, unless otherwise directed, the City Clerk shall prepare and publish the substance of the proceedings in a legal newspaper of general circulation in the Municipality, and which was duly designated as such by the Governing Body; Provided, the charge for such publication shall not exceed the rates provided by the statutes of the State of Nebraska. Said publication shall be charged against the General Fund. The City Clerk shall then keep a record book with a proper index, with copies of all notices required to be published or posted by the City Clerk by order of the Governing Body, or under the ordinances of the Municipality, to which notices shall be attached the printer's affidavit of publication, if the said notices are required to be published, or the City Clerk's certificate under seal where the same are required to be posted only.
The City Clerk shall receive all objections to creation of paving districts, and other street improvements. The City Clerk shall receive the claims of any person against the Municipality, and in the event that the said claim is disallowed in part, or in whole, the City Clerk shall notify such claimant, his or her agent, or attorney by letter within five (5) days after such disallowance, and the City Clerk shall then prepare transcripts on appeals of any disallowance of a claim in all proper cases. The City Clerk may charge a reasonable fee for certified copies of any record in his or her office as set by resolution of the Governing Body. The City Clerk shall destroy Municipal Records under the direction of the Nebraska State Records Board pursuant to sections 84-1201 thru 84-1220 of the statutes of Nebraska and as may be amended from time to time; Provided, the Governing Body shall not have the authority to destroy the Minutes of the City Clerk, the permanent ordinances and resolution books or other records classified as permanent by the Nebraska State Records Board. (Neb. Rev.  Stat. §16-317,  19-1102,  19-1104, 84-1201thru84-1220,  84-712)

Sec. 1-304 (Repealed by Ordinance No.	.) Reserved for Future Use.


Sec. 1-304.01 DEPUTY CITY CLERK; DUTIES. The Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council may appoint a Deputy City Clerk who shall perform all duties and functions as are delegated to him or her by the City Clerk and City Council. In the absence of the City Clerk, he or she shall perform the duties and functions of the City Clerk.  (Ord. No. 1078, 4/10/73)

Sec. 1-304.02 CITY CLERK; PUBLICATION OF CLAIMS. The Municipal Clerk shall include in the minutes of each meeting, published as required in Section 1-322, the amount of each claim allowed, the purpose of the claim, and the name of the claimant, except that the aggregate amount of all payroll claims may be included as one item. Between July fifteenth (15th) and August fifteenth (15th) of each year, the names of all employees and their current annual, monthly, or hourly salaries shall be published and any changes in salaries or the hiring of new employees during the calendar quarter preceding the months of October, January, and April shall be published during the months of November, February, and May.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-1102)  (Ord. No. 1172, 2/24/76)

Sec.1-305 APPOINTED OFFICIALS; CITY TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City shall be custodian of and receive all money belonging to the City. The Treasurer shall keep a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the debts and credits belonging thereto. The Treasurer shall, at the end of every month, and as often as may be requested, render an account to the City Council, under oath, showing the state of the treasury at the date of such account, the amount of money remaining in each fund and the amount paid therefrom, and the balance of money in the treasury.  The Treasurer
 
shall accompany such account with a statement of all receipts and disbursements, together with all warrants retained and paid by the Treasurer, which warrants, with all vouchers held by the Treasurer, shall be filed with the Treasurer's account in the Clerk's office. The Treasurer shall produce and show all funds shown by such report to be on hand, or satisfy the Council or its committee that he or she has such funds in his or her custody or under his or her control.  Ifsaid Treasurer neglects or fails, for the space of ten (10) days from the end of every month, to render his or her account, the Treasurer's office may, by resolution of the Mayor and Council, be declared vacant; and the Mayor shall appoint and the Council confirm some person to fill the vacancy.  The Treasurer shall keep the books and accounts in such a manner as the Mayor and Council shall prescribe and shall keep a daily cash-book. All of the books and accounts of the Treasurer shall always be subject to inspection by the Mayor, members of the Council and such other persons as they may designate.  The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as are required by him or her by the laws of the City and the statutes of Nebraska. The Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the City separate and distinct from his or her own money; and the Treasurer is hereby expressly prohibited from using, either directly or indirectly, the corporation money or warrants in the Treasurer's custody and keeping same for his or her own use and benefit or that of any other person whomsoever.  Any violation of this Section shall subject the Treasurer to immediate removal from office by the City Council, and it may declare such office vacant.  The Mayor shall appoint a successor, who shall be confirmed by the City Council, to hold office for the remainder of the term.  The City Treasurer shall be required to post bond in an amount and under such terms and conditions as provided by law. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-318, 16-717, 16-719)

Sec. 1-306 CITY TREASURER; DUTIES; RECEIPTS. The Treasurer shall give every person paying money into the treasury and the Treasurer's office a receipt therefor, which shall be in duplicate, shall show the source from which such funds are derived, and shall, by distinct lines and columns, show the amount received to the credit of each separate fund, and whether same was paid in cash, in warrants, or otherwise, one (1) of which duplicates the Treasurer shall deliver to the person making such payment and the other retained by the Treasurer and file such copy with the monthly reports.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-318, 77-2209)

Sec. 1-307 CITY TREASURER; DUTIES; BOOKS. The Treasurer shall daily, as moneys are received, foot the several columns of the cashbook and of the register, and carry the amounts forward, and at the close of each year, in case the amount of money received by the Treasurer is insufficient to pay the warrants registered, the Treasurer shall close the account for that year in such register and shall carry forward the excess. Any Treasurer who shall fail regularly to enter upon the cashbook the amounts so received and receipted for, or who shall fail to keep the cashbook footed from day to day, for the space of three (3) days, shall forfeit for each offense the sum of one hundred ($100.00) dollars, to be recovered in a civil action on the Treasurer's official bond by any person holding a warrant drawn on such Treasurer, one half (1/2) to the person bringing such action, and one half (1/2) to the school fund of the County in which the action is brought. The cashbook, register and retained receipts of the Treasurer shall at all times be open to the inspection of any person in whose name any warrants are registered and unpaid.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. § 77-2210 thru 77-2212)

Sec. 1-308 Repealed by Ordinance No. 1078 04/10/1973
 
Sec 1-309 CITY TREASURER; ANNUAL REPORT; PENALTY. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to prepare and publish annually, within sixty (60) days following the close of the Municipal fiscal year, a statement of the receipts and expenditures by funds of the City for the preceding fiscal year. Not more than the legal rate shall be charged and paid for such publication. Such publication shall be made in one (1) legal newspaper of general circulation in the City. Any Treasurer failing or neglecting to prepare and publish such statement of receipts and expenditures shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined not to exceed twenty-five ($25.00) dollars, and be liable, in addition to removal from office for such failure or neglect. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-1101, 19-1103,  19-1104)

Sec. 1-310 CITY TREASURER; WARRANTS. The Treasurer shall keep a warrant register which shall show in columns arranged for that purpose, the number, date, and amount of each warrant presented and registered, the particular fund upon which the same is drawn, the date of presentation, the name and address of the person in whose name the same is registered, the date of payment, the amount of interest, and the total amount paid thereon, with the date when notice to the person in whose name such warrant is mailed. On presentation of a warrant for payment to the Treasurer when there are not sufficient moneys on hand to the credit of the proper fund to pay the same, it shall be the duty of the Treasurer to enter such warrant in the wan-ant register for payment in the order of its presentation and the Treasurer shall endorse on the warrant the words "registered for payment" with the date of registration and shall sign such endorsement, whereupon the wan-ant shall draw interest at the rate fixed by the Mayor and City Council, which rate shall be endorsed on the warrant, until notice of payment shall be given the registered owner. The Treasurer shall neither directly or indirectly contract for or purchase any City warrant at any discount whatever upon the sum due on such warrant or order, and if the Treasurer shall so contract for or purchase any such order or warrant, the Treasurer shall not be allowed in settlement the amount of such order or warrant, or any part thereof, and shall also forfeit the whole amount due on such order or warrant. (Neb. Rev. Stat. § 45-106, 77-2202, 77-2203) (Amended by Ordinance 2121 8/28/2007)

Sec.1-311 CHIEF OF POLICE; POLICEMEN; POWERS; DUTIES. TheChiefofPoliceshall
have the immediate superintendence of the police. The Police Chief and the police officers shall have the power, and it shall be their duty, to arrest all offenders against the laws ofNebraska or of the City, by day or by night, in the same manner as a Sheriff or Constable, and keep them in the City prison or other place to prevent their escape, until a trial or examination may be had before the proper officer; and they shall have the same power as a Sheriff and Constable in relation to all criminal matters arising out of a violation of a Municipal law and all process issued by the County Court in connection with a violation of a Municipal law. They shall arrest and detain any person found violating any law of Nebraska or any law of the City, until a legal warrant can be obtained. Each member of the Police Department of the City shall have the duties of becoming well informed to the ordinances of the City, or enforcing such laws, of wearing at all times while on duty the badge, uniform and insignia furnished by the City for the Police and of properly caring for same, and such further duties as shall be assigned to them by the Mayor and Council and as are otherwise provided by law.  The Chief of Police shall have custody of all Municipal property used by the City Police; shall execute the orders of the Mayor; shall be a member of the Board of Health and the Secretary and quarantine officer thereof; shall have charge of traffic control on the City streets; shall make and file or cause to be made and filed complaints for violations of the ordinances of the City; shall have charge of the City jail and the prisoners therein; and shall perform such other duties as are assigned to or required of the Police
 
Chief by the Mayor and Council or otherwise provided by law. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-225, 16-238, 16-323, 29-401)  (Amended by Ordinance 1102 12/11/73; Ordinance 1140 6/24/75)

Sec. 1-312  APPOINTED OFFICIAL; DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.   The Director of
Public Works shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council of the Municipality. The Mayor and City Council shall set and determine the compensation which shall be received by the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall be under the direct supervision, control of and shall report to the City Administrator of the Municipality and shall perform such duties as prescribed by the Mayor and City Council. The term of the office shall be that as set forth in Section 1-301.01 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. No.  1374)

Sec. 1-313 CITY ENGINEER; POWERS; DUTIES. The City Engineer shall, when requested by the Mayor or City Council, make estimates of the cost of labor and material which may be done or furnished by contract with the Municipality, and make all surveys, estimates, and calculations necessary to be made for the establishment of grades, building of culverts, sewers, electric light system, waterworks, power plant, public heating system, bridges, curbing, gutters, the improvement of streets, and the erection and repair of building, and for the purchase of motor equipment, street machinery and other mechanical equipment for the use of the City, and shall perform such other duties as the Council may require.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-320, 16-321)

Sec.  1-314	SPECIAL  ENGINEER.	The Mayor and Council may, whenever they deem it expedient, employ a special engineer to make or assist in making any particular estimate or survey. Any such estimate or survey shall have the same validity and serve in all respects as though the same had been made by the City Engineer.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-322)

Sec. 1-315 CITY ENGINEER; RECORDS. The City Engineer shall make a record of the minutes of the Engineer's surveys and all other work done for the City including sewer, extension of water system and heating system, electric light and sewerage system and power plant, and accurately make such plats, sections, profiles, and maps as may be necessary in the prosecution of any public work, which shall be public records and belong to the City and be turned over to any successor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §6-320)

Sec. 1-316 APPOINTED OFFICIALS; CITY ATTORNEY. The City Attorney shall be the advisor of the Council and City officers. The City Attorney shall commence, prosecute, and defend all suits and actions necessary to be commenced, prosecuted, or defended on behalf of the City, or that may be ordered by the Council. The City Attorney shall attend meetings of the Council and give them his or her opinion upon any matter submitted to the City Attorney, either orally or in writing as may be required. The City Attorney shall draw all ordinances, contracts and other documents requested by the Mayor and Council. The Mayor and City Council shall have the right to pay the City Attorney additional compensation for legal services performed by him or her for the City or to employ additional legal assistance other than the City Attorney and to pay for such legal assistance out of the funds ofthe City.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-319)

Sec. 1-317 CITY PHYSICIAN; DUTIES; COMPENSATION. The City Physician shall be a physician who resides permanently in the City and be a member of the Board of Health of the City and
 
shall be its medical adviser. When requested by the Mayor or City Attorney, the City Physician shall investigate all cases of injury to persons in which liability against the City may be asserted and make a written report thereof, including the circumstances causing the injury and the nature and extent of the injury. The City Physician shall perform such other duties of a medical and healthful nature as shall be assigned to the City Physician from time to time by the Mayor and Council. The City Physician shall receive no compensation as a member of the Board of Health or any salary as City Physician, but shall be allowed compensation for services so assigned pursuant hereto and rendered the City at the usual rates prevailing in the City for such services.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-238, 16-308)

Sec. 1-318 OFFICIALS; EMPLOYEES; PROPERTY. Every official and employee of the City or of any of its boards or departments shall promptly and fully account for and deliver to any successor or as otherwise directed by the Mayor and Council, all money, equipment and other property of the City which such official or employee has in their possession or has received from the City during their term of office or employment.

Sec. 1-319 COMPENSATION; CONFLICT OF INTEREST. No official of the Municipality shall be permitted to benefit from any contract to which the Municipality is a party when the consideration of the said contract is in an amount in excess often thousand ($10,000.00) dollars in any one year, and no contract may be divided for the purpose of evading the requirements of this Section. Any such interest in a contract shall void any obligation on the part of the Municipality; Provided, the receiving of deposits, cashing of checks, and buying and selling of the warrants and bonds of the Municipality shall not be considered a contract under the provisions of this Section. No official shall receive any pay or compensation from the Municipality other than his salary. The Governing Body shall not pay or appropriate any money or other valuable thing to pay a person who is not an official for the performance of any act, service, or duty which shall come within the proper scope of the duties of any official of the Municipality; Provided, that ownership ofless than one (1%) percent of the outstanding stock of any class in a corporation shall not constitute an interest within the meaning of this Section. Any person violating the terms of this Section shall be subject to the same penalties as provided by the statutes of the State of Nebraska. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-502, 18-301)

Sec. 1-320 OFFICIALS; VACANCIES. Vacancies in the City elector offices shall be filled by the Mayor and Council for the unexpired term. Notice of a vacancy, except that resulting from the death of an incumbent, shall be in writing and presented to the Council at a regular meeting and shall appear as a part of the minutes of said meeting. The Council shall at once give public notice of the vacancy by causing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City or by posting in three public places in the city the office vacated and the length of time of the unexpired term. The Mayor shall call a special meeting of the Council at which time the Mayor shall submit the name of a qualified elector to fill the vacancy for the balance of the unexpired term. The regular or special meeting shall occur upon the death of the incumbent or within four weeks after the meeting at which such notice of vacancy has been presented. The Council shall vote upon such nominee, and if a majority of the Council votes in favor of such nominee, the vacancy shall be declared filled. Ifthe nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the nomination shall be rejected and the Mayor shall at the next regular meeting submit the name of another qualified elector to fill the vacancy. Ifthe subsequent nominee fails to receive a majority of the votes, the Mayor shall continue at such meeting to submit the names of qualified electors in nomination and the Council shall continue to vote upon said nomination until the
 
vacancy is filled. The Mayor shall cast his or her vote for or against the nominee in the case of a tie vote of the Council. All Council members present shall cast a ballot for or against the nominee. Any member of the Council who has been appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council shall have the same rights, including voting, as if such person were elected.
The Mayor, in lieu of filling a vacancy in a City elected office may, as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat.
§32-568, call a special city election to fill such vacancy.
Ifvacancies exist in the offices of a majority of the members of Council, the Secretary of State shall conduct a special city election to fill such vacancies.
Any appointive official may be removed at pleasure by vote of a majority of all members of the Council. In the case of a vacancy occurring in an appointive office, the Mayor shall, at the next regular meeting of the Council, submit the Mayor's nominee to fill said vacancy which nominee shall be subject to approval by a majority vote of the Council. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-569) (Amended by Ordinance 2121 8/28/2007)

Sec. 1-321 OFFICIALS; RESIGNATION. Resignation of City officials shall bemadein writing to the Mayor and Council and no resignation shall take effect until accepted by the Mayor and Council. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-562)

Sec. 1-322 OFFICIALS; REPORT; PENALTY. Every official of the City shall promptly and properly make and file a report in detail of the transactions of his or her office or of any matters connected therewith as required by the ordinances of the City or the laws of Nebraska or when requested to do so by the Mayor and Council and any official who shall fail to do so may be removed from office by a vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the Council.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-220)

Sec. 1-323 Repealed by Ordinance No. 1488.


Sec. 1-324  Repealed by Ordinance No. 1488.






















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4.  Meetings


Sec. 1-401 MEETINGS; DEFINED. Meetings, as used in this Article shall mean all regular, special, or called meetings of a public body for the purposes of briefing, discussion of public business, formation of tentative policy, or the taking of any formal action. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1409(2)) (Amended by Ordinance 1173 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-402 MEETINGS; PUBLIC BODY DEFINED. Public Body as used in this Article shall mean:

A	The Governing Body of the Municipality.
B.	All independent boards, commissions, bureaus, committees, councils, subunits, or any other bodies, now or hereafter  created by Constitution, statute, or otherwise pursuant to law, and
C.	Advisory committees of the bodies listed above.


This Article shall not apply to subcommittees of such bodies unless such subcommittees have been given authority to take formal action on behalf of their parent body. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1409(1)) (Amended by Ordinance 1173 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-403 MEETINGS; PUBLIC. All public meetings as defined by law shall be held in a Municipal public building which shall be open to attendance by the public. All such meetings, notices thereof, procedures and closed sessions shall be conducted and held pursuant to the requirements of Section 84-1401 et seq. RRS Neb. and as may be amended from time to time. All meetings shall be held in the public building in which the Governing Body usually holds such meetings unless the publicized notice hereinafter required shall designate some other public building or other specified place. The Governing Body shall have the right to modify the agenda to include items of an emergency nature only, at such public meetings. The minutes of the Municipal Clerk shall include the record of the manner and advance time by which the advance publicized notice was given, a statement of how the availability of an agenda of the then known subjects was communicated, the time and specific place of the meetings, and the names of each member of the Governing Body present or absent at each convened meeting. The minutes of the Governing Body shall be a public record open to inspection by the public upon request at any reasonable time at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any official action on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be taken only by roll call of the Governing Body in open session. The record of the Municipal Clerk shall show how each member voted, or that the member was absent and did not vote. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408, 84-1409, 84-1411, 84-1413)  (Amended by Ordinance 1173 2/24/76)


Sec. 1-404 MEETINGS; MINUTES. Each public body shall keep minutes of all meetings showing the time, place, members present and absent, and the substance of all matters discussed. The minutes shall be public records and open to public inspection during normal business hours. Minutes shall be written and available for inspection within ten (10) working days, or prior to the next convened meeting, whichever occurs earlier, except that the City may have an additional ten (10) working days if the employee responsible for writing the minutes is absent due to a serious illness or emergency. (Neb.  Rev.  Stat.  §84-1412,  84-1413)  (Amended  by  Ordinance  1173 2/24/76)  (Amended  by
 
Ordinance 2121 08/28/2007)


Sec. 1-405 MEETINGS; VOTES. Any action taken on any question or motion duly moved and seconded shall be by roll call vote of the public body in open session, and the record shall state how each member voted, or if the member was absent or not voting. To pass or adopt any by law, ordinance, or any resolution or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number of the members elected to the council shall be required. The requirements of a roll call or viva voce vote shall be satisfied by the Municipality utilizing an electronic voting device which allows the yeas and nays of each member of the Governing Body to be readily seen by the public.
The vote to elect leadership within a public body may be taken by secret ballot, but the total number of votes for each candidate shall be recorded in the minutes. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-503, 84-1413)

Sec. 1-406 MEETINGS; NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA. The Municipal Clerk, Secretary, or other designee of each public body shall maintain a list of the news media requesting notification of meetings and shall make reasonable efforts to provide advance notification to them of the time and place of each meeting, and the subjects to be discussed at that meeting. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1411) (Amended by Ordinance 1173 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-407 MEETINGS; PUBLIC PARTICIPATION. Subject to the provisions of this Article and the Open Meetings Act, the public shall have the right to attend and the right to speak at meetings of public bodies and all or any part of a meeting of a public body, except for closed sessions called pursuant to 84-1410 RS Neb., may be videotaped, televised, photographed, broadcast, or recorded by any person in attendance by means of a tape recorder, camera, video equipment, or any other means of sonic reproduction or in writing.
It shall not be a violation of this section for any public body to make and enforce reasonable
rules and regulations regarding the conduct of persons attending, speaking at, videotaping, televising, photographing, broadcasting or recording its meetings. A body may not be required to allow citizens to speak at each meeting, but it may not forbid public participation at all meetings.
No public body shall require members of the public to identify themselves as a condition for admission to the meeting. The body may require any member of the public desiring to address the body to identify himself or herself
No public body shall, for the purpose of circumventing this Article or the Open Meetings Act, hold a meeting in a place known to the body to be too small to accommodate the anticipated audience.
No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section if it holds its meeting in its traditional meeting place which is located in this state.
No public body shall be deemed in violation of this section ifit holds a meeting outside ofthis state, if, but only if, a member entity of the public body is located outside of this state and the other requirements of 84-1412 RS Neb., are met.
The public body shall, upon request, make a reasonable effort to accommodate the public's right to hear the discussion and testimony presented  at the meeting.
Public bodies shall make available at the meeting, for examination and copying by members of the public, at least one (1) copy of all reproducible material to be discussed at an open meeting. Public bodies shall make at least one (1) current copy of the Open Meetings Act posted in the meeting room at a location accessible to members of the public. At the beginning of the meeting, the public shall be
 
informed about the location of the posted information. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §84-1408, 84-1412) (Amended by Ordinance 1173 02/24/76) (Amended by Ordinance 2121 08/28/2007)

Sec. 1-408 MEETINGS; GOVERNING BODY. The meetings of the Governing Body shall be held in the meeting place of the Municipality. Regular meetings shall be held on the second (2nd) and fourth (4th) Tuesdays of each month at the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. Special meetings may be called by the Mayor, or by four (4) members of the City Council, the object of which shall be submitted to the Council in writing. The call and object, as well as the disposition thereof shall be entered upon the journal by the Municipal Clerk. No other business shall be transacted at such meeting unless a three-fourths majority of all members of the Council are present and consent thereto and such business of an emergency nature. On filing the call for a special meeting, the Municipal Clerk shall notify the Council members of the special meeting, stating the time and its purpose. Notice of a special meeting need not be given to a Councilmember known to be out of the state, or physically unable to be present.
A majority of all members elected to the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of the absent members. An affirmative vote of not less than one half (1/2) of the elected members shall be required for the transaction of any business. At the hour appointed for the meeting, the Municipal Clerk shall proceed to call the roll of members. Ifa quorum is present the Council shall be called to order by the Mayor, if present, or if absent, by the President of the Council.  In the absence of both the Mayor and the President of the Council, the City Council members shall elect a President pro tempore.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-401, 16-402) (Amended by Ordinance 1174 02/24/76)

Sec. 1-409 MEETINGS; WITNESSES. The Council or any committee of the members thereof shall have power to compel the attendance of witnesses for the investigation of matter that may come before them. The presiding officer of the Council, or chairman of such committee for the time being, may administer such requisite oaths. The Council or committee shall have the same authority to compel the giving of testimony as is conferred on courts of justice.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-406)

Sec. 1-410 MEETINGS; ORDER OF BUSINESS. All meetings of the Council shall be called to order by the presiding officer at the time set for the meeting, whereupon the Clerk shall call the roll of Councilmen, and if there is a quorum present, the Council shall proceed to business in the following order:
1.	Reading of minutes of the last meeting or a waiver of the reading of the minutes.
2.	Presentation of monthly/annual reports by City Clerk.
3.	Reports of officers.
4.	Unfinished business of preceding meetings.
5.	New business.
6.	Reports of City officials.
7.	Presentation of and action upon claims against and of the City.
8.	Adjourn.


Sec. 1-411 MEETINGS; RULES OF CONDUCT. The business and proceedings of the meeting of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with the latest addition of Robert's Rules of Order providing that the following shall prevail if in conflict with Robert's Rules of Order.
 

1.	The presiding officer may refer back to any order of business after passing it, ifthere is no objection from any Councilmember.
2.	When a question is being put by the presiding officer, no Councilmember shall leave the Council Chambers.
3.	Upon request of any Councilmember, any motion or resolution shall be reduced to writing before being acted upon.
4.	The minutes of the meeting shall show that Councilmember who offered or introduced a motion, resolution or ordinance and the Councilmember seconding the same.
5.	The "yeas" and "nays" upon any question shall be taken and entered on the minutes on the request of any Councilmember.
6.	The Council may reprimand or censure any of its members for improper behavior as Council members.
7.	Any resolution, ordinance, or motion may be withdrawn by its introducer or mover with consent of the Councilmember seconding same, before same is voted upon.
8.	Any person not a member of the Council may address the meeting for not more than three (3) minutes. If such person speaks for more than three minutes any member of the Council may object thereto and the person shall immediately cease addressing the meeting. The time limit may be extended following such an objection by a majority vote of the Council. The presiding officer may reasonably limit the number of times during any meeting a person, not a member of the council, may address the meeting. The presiding officer may also cause any person not a member of the Council to be removed from the meeting ifthe person is disruptive to the meeting, refuses to comply with any rules governing order or conduct at the meeting, refuses to comply with any reasonable  order of the presiding officer, uses profanity in addressing the meeting, or is abusive to the Mayor and Council or other persons present  at the meeting.
9.	The presiding officer may express his or her opinion on any subject being discussed or debated by the Council.
10.	Motion for Reconsideration - A motion to reconsider a vote of the Council shall be made and taken up at the meeting where the action took place or at the next regular meeting of the Council. The motion can be made by a member of the Council who did not abstain or did not vote with the losing side; or, in other words, the maker of the motion to reconsider can be one who voted with the prevailing side, or was absent from the meeting. Unless all members of the Council who voted with the prevailing side are present or have been notified that the reconsideration will be moved, it requires a two-thirds vote to adopt the motion to reconsider. All other provisions of Robert's Rules of Order pertaining to motions to reconsider, which are not in conflict herewith, are affirmed and ratified.
11.	The rules may be suspended on the affirmative vote of five (5) members of the Council.

Sec.  1-412	APPEALS  TO  COUNCIL.	Any decision, order, rule, ruling, requirement or determination of the City Administrator, Boards, other than advisory boards, of this Code may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk and also with the officer or board being appealed from stating the matter being appealed and the ground or grounds of
 
the appeal. Upon the filing of such notice the City Clerk shall promptly notify the Mayor thereof and the officer or board being appealed therefrom shall promptly file with the City Clerk any records of such officer or board with reference to the appeal and the matter appealed from.
The filing of such notice of appeal shall stay further proceedings under or enforcement of the decision, order, rule, ruling, requirement or determination appealed from, unless the Mayor shall file with the City Clerk a written statement that, in the City Clerk's opinion,  such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, and in such case the proceedings under or enforcement of such matter appealed from may be stayed only on resolution of the City Council.
All such appeals shall be heard by the Council at its next regular meeting. Such hearings on appeal may be adjourned from time to time by the Mayor and Council. The Council shall decide such appeals within forty-five (45) days of the filing thereof and it shall take the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the City Council to reverse or set aside any such decision, order, rule, ruling, requirement or determination so appealed. The provisions of this Section shall be subject to the Sections contained herein regarding the Board of Adjustment and further shall not apply to appeal procedures under the City Personnel Manual, or as pertains to the Civil Service Commission.


































(END OF SECTION)
 

Article 5. Ordinances, Resolutions and Orders

Sec. 1-501 COUNCIL ORDINANCES; PASSAGE; PROOF; PUBLICATION. All ordinances
shall be passed pursuant to such rules and regulations as the Council may provide, and all such ordinances may be proved by the certificate of the Clerk under the seal of the City. When printed or published in book or pamphlet form and purporting to be published by authority of the City, such ordinances shall be read and received in evidence in all courts and places without further proof. The passage, approval and publication of said ordinances shall be sufficiently proved by a certificate under the seal of the City, from the Clerk thereof, showing that such ordinance was passed and approved, and when and in what paper the same was published. When ordinances are published by authority of the City Council, the same need not be otherwise published; and such book or pamphlet shall be received as evidence of the passage and legal publication of such ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in said book or pamphlet, in all courts without further proof.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-403)

Sec. 1-502 COUNCIL ORDINANCES; PASSAGE; VOTE OF MAYOR; AMENDMENTS;
REVISION ORDINANCES. All ordinances and resolutions or orders for the appropriation or payment of money shall require for their passage or adoption the concurrence of the majority of all members elected to the Council. The Mayor may vote on any such matter when his or her vote will provide the additional vote required to create a number of votes equal to a majority of the number of members elected to the Council; the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed a member of the Council. Ordinances of a general or permanent nature shall be read by title on three (3) different days unless three-fourths (3/4) of the Council vote to suspend this requirement. In case such requirement shall be suspended, such ordinance shall be read by title or number and then moved for final passage. Three-fourths (3/4) of the Council may require a reading of any such Ordinance in full before enactment under either procedure set out in this Section. Ordinances shall contain no subject which shall not be clearly expressed in the title, except as otherwise provided by law. No ordinance, or section thereof, shall be revised or amended unless the new ordinance contains the entire ordinance or section as revised or amended, and the ordinance or section so amended shall be repealed; PROVIDED,  for an ordinance revising all the ordinances of the City, the only title necessary shall be, "An Ordinance of the City of Blair, Nebraska, Revising all Ordinances of the City." Under such title all the ordinances may be revised in sections and chapters, or otherwise, and corrected, added to, and any part suppressed, and may be repealed with or without saving clause as to the whole or any part, without other title. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-404) (Amended by Ordinance No. 2271 3/10/2015)

Sec.1-503 ORDINANCES; STYLE; PUBLICATION; EMERGENCY ORDINANCES.  The
style of ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Blair," and all ordinances of a general nature shall, within fifteen (15) days after they are passed, be published in the official newspaper of the City, or in pamphlet form, to be distributed or sold, as may be provided by ordinance; and every ordinance fixing a penalty or forfeiture for its violation shall, before the same takes effect, be published at least one (1) week in the same manner as above prescribed; Provided, in cases of riots, infectious diseases, or other impending danger, or any other emergency requiring its immediate operation, such ordinance shall take effect upon the proclamation of the Mayor immediately upon its first publication as above provided.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-405)
 
Sec. 1-504 RESOLUTIONS; REQUIREMENTS FOR PASSAGE. All resolutions shall be introduced by a Councilmember. Thereupon any Councilmember may move the adoption of the resolution and upon the motion being seconded it shall be put by the presiding officer for discussion and debate. Upon completion of debate the presiding officer shall call for a vote on the motion. The vote of each Councilmember shall be recorded on the role of the Council and shall show the "yeas", "nays", and abstentions. (Ordinance 2248 6/25/13)

Sec. 1-505 ORDERS FOR PAYMENT OF MONEY; PROCEDURE. All orders for payment of money may be authorized by motion of any Councilmember duly seconded, and after discussion and debate thereon has been completed, put by the presiding officer. The roll of the Council shall be called on all such motions and the "yeas" and "nays" recorded.

Sec. 1-506 OFFICIAL NEWSPAPER. The official newspaper for the publication of notices, proceedings, minutes and reports of the City and its officers shall be a legal newspaper as defined by the laws ofNebraska, published in the City. Such official newspaper shall be designated from time to time by the Mayor with the consent of the Council. All such notices, proceedings, minutes and reports shall be published in the official newspaper of the City unless otherwise ordered by the Council.

Sec. 1-507 CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES. The Municipality shall have the power to revise the ordinances of the Municipality from time to time and publish the same in book form. The revision shall be evidenced by a general codification ordinance which shall repeal all  other ordinances in conflict and embrace as the governing law of the Municipality all provisions therein. All ordinances in force at the time of the codification shall continue in force for the purpose of all rights acquired, fines, penalties, forfeitures, and liabilities incurred.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-247)



























(END OF SECTION)



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 1, Article 5, page 2
 
Article 6.  Bonds and Oath


Sec.  1-601   COUNCIL;  MEMBERS;  BONDS:  PAYMENT  OF PREMIUMS;  AMOUNT;
CONDITIONS.	Each Councilmember, before entering upon the duties of the office, shall be required to give bond to the City in such an amount and under such terms and conditions as may be provided by law. Said bond shall be filed with the City Clerk and approved by the Mayor, and upon the approval, the City may pay the premium for such bond.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-304)



Sec. 1-602 BONDS; OFFICERS; PAYMENT OF PREMIUM. The following officers and employees of the City shall, before entering upon their duties as such, furnish proper bonds, with corporate surety to be approved by the Mayor and City Council, to secure the faithful performance of their duties, to-wit:

City Treasurer, in the amount of twenty-five thousand ($25,000.00) dollars;


All of said bonds shall be filed with the City Clerk. The Mayor and City Council may require bond from any other officer or employee of the City in such sum as they shall direct by resolution. In addition, all officers and employees of the City shall file bonds in such sums and under such terms and conditions as provided by law. All premiums on bonds required by this Section shall be paid by the City.
No City officer shall  become surety upon the official bond of another, or upon any contractor's bond, license or appeal bond given to the City, or under any ordinance thereof, or from conviction in the County Court upon violation  of any ordinance of the City.   (Neb. Rev.  Stat.
§16-219)



Sec. 1-603 OATH; MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS. All officials of the Municipality, whether elected or appointed, except when a different oath is specifically provided herein, shall, before entering upon their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath which shall be endorsed upon their respective bonds:

"I	do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State ofNebraska against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, and without mental reservation, or for the purpose of evasion; and that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office of
according to law, and to the best of my ability. And I do further swear that I do not advocate, nor am I a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am in this position I will not advocate, nor become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence. So help me God."
(Neb. Rev. Stat. §11-101)
(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 7.  Corporate Seal


Sec. 1-701 SEAL; OFFICIAL CORPORATE. The official Corporate Seal of the Municipality shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk, and shall bear the following inscription. 11 Seal, City of Blair, Nebraska, Incorporated December 12, 1868.11 The impression or representation of the seal by stamp shall be sufficient sealing in all cases where sealing is required, by law.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-115)





















































(END OF SECTION)
 

Article 8.  Elections


Sec. 1-801 ELECTIONS; GENERALLY. The Municipal primary and general election shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter Thirty-Two (32) Revised Statutes ofNebraska. Said elections shall be held in conjunction with the State Primary and General Election. Prior to February One (1) of the year in which the first (1st) such joint election takes place, the Governing Body shall receive the consent in writing of the County Board to so hold the election and such authorization shall be prescribed according to state law. The County Clerk shall have charge of the election and shall have the authority to deputize the Municipal Clerk for Municipal election purposes. Charges shall be paid to the County Clerk as set forth in Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-1203.
Commencing with the Statewide Primary Election in 1976, and every two (2) years thereafter, those candidates for Mayor and for positions on the City Council whose terms will be expiring shall be nominated at the Statewide Primary Election and elected at the Statewide General Election (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01(2), 32-505, 32-1203) (Ord. No.  1175, 2/24/76)

Sec.1-802 ELECTIONS; PRIMARYELECTION,NUMBEROFCANDIDATESFILING.  If
the number of candidates properly filed for nomination at the primary election does not exceed two
(2) for each vacancy to be filled; all candidates properly filed shall be considered nominated, and no primary election for their nomination shall be required. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01(4)) (Ord. No. 1175, 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-803 ELECTIONS; TIE VOTES. In the case of a tie vote of any of the candidates in either the primary or general election, the County Clerk shall notify such candidates to appear at his office on a given day and hour to determine the same by lot before the canvassing board, and the certificate of nomination or election shall be given accordingly. Notice to appear shall be given by certified mail. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01(6))  (Ord. No.  1175, 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-804  ELECTIONS; GENERAL ELECTION, PREPARATION OF BALLOT.   When
more than one person becomes a candidate by filing, petition, or write-in procedures for the same position in the primary, the County Clerk, in preparing the official ballot for the general election shall place thereon the names of the persons who received the greatest number of votes in the primary, but in no event shall the names of the general election ballot be more than twice the number of vacancies to be filled at the general election.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01(7))  (Ord. No. 1175, 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-805 ELECTIONS; ELECTION TO TERMS. The candidates shall be placed on the general election ballot and the candidates receiving the greatest number of votes shall be elected to terms of the longest duration, and those receiving the next greatest number of votes shall be elected to the remaining term or terms. The County Clerk shall place the names of the candidates on the general election ballot in the direct order according to the number of votes received at the primary election. Ifno primary election was held the names of the candidates shall be placed upon the general election ballot in the order of their filing. The term of office of all such members shall commence on the first regular meeting of the Council in December following their election. Any vacancy on the Council resulting from causes other than expiration of the term shall be filled by vote of the remaining members as provided in Section 1-318. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-302.01(8)) (Ord. No. 1175, 2/24/76)
 


Sec. 1-806   ELECTIONS;  PRIMARY  OR GENERAL ELECTION NOTICE.   The County
Clerk shall publish in a newspaper designated by the County Board the notice of the election no less than forty (40) days prior to the Primary or General Election. This notice will serve the notice requirement for all Municipal Elections which are held in conjunction with the County. (Neb. Rev. Stat.  §32-402.01)

 
Sec. 1-807  (Repealed by Ordinance No. 	
 
·Reserved for Future Use.
 

Sec. 1-808 ELECTIONS; PETITION CANDIDATES. Candidates for any Municipal office in the City may be nominated by petition. Such petitions shall be signed by registered voters equal in number to five (5%) percent of the votes case in the City or Ward at the most recent Municipal election. The form of such petition shall be prescribed by the Secretary of State of the State of Nebraska, shall be filed with the City Clerk, and the deadline for filing such petitions shall be sixty
(60) days prior to the statewide primary election. Within twenty -four (24) hours after the receipts for filing of a petition for nomination, the City Clerk shall notify by either registered or certified mail, the candidate so nominated, who shall within five (5) days from the filing of such petition for nomination, file with said officer his acceptance of the petition for nomination, or his name shall not be printed on the election ballot unless otherwise provided by law.  (Ord. No. 1106, 12/17/73)

Sec. 1-809 ELECTIONS; VOTER QUALIFICATIONS. All properly registered voters, who shall reside within the limits of the City and within the boundaries of their respective Ward, on or before election day, shall be entitled to vote at all Municipal elections. The County Canvassing Board shall canvas all returns at the same time and in the same manner as other returns are canvassed, and the County Clerk or Election Commissioner shall issue the certificates of nomination or election the same as all other certificates, and any neglect of any such officer to qualify within ten (10) days after delivery to her or him of such certificate shall be deemed a refusal to accept the office to which he or she may be elected. Any vacancy on the Council shall be filled as provided by law. In all cases of election, when the successful candidate or candidate receiving the highest number of votes in such election shall be prevented from assuming office on account of disqualification, the incumbent shall not be entitled to hold over the term, but such office shall automatically become vacant and an appointment shall be made to fill such vacancy in the manner provided by law. All incumbent Council members shall be eligible for the appointment.

Sec. 1-810 ELECTIONS; WARDS. Pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §32-552 et. seq. and Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-101 et. seq., the Mayor and City Council of the City of Blair, Nebraska, in an effort to make the four voting wards substantially equal in population as determined by the most recent federal decennial census, do hereby adjust and establish the boundaries of the election wards for the City of Blair Nebraska as shown on the official ward map on file in the office of the city clerk.

Sec. 1-811 ELECTIONS; RECALL PROCEDURE. Any or all of the members of the City Council and the Mayor of the Municipality may be removed from office by the registered voters of the Municipality. An affidavit shall be made by one (1) or more registered voters and filed with the Municipal Clerk, stating the name and office of the officer or officers sought to be removed.   A
 

petition demanding that the questions of removing such officer or officers be submitted to the registered voters shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk. Such petition for the recall of any or all such officers shall, if such officer was elected at large, be signed by registered voters equal in number to at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the total number of votes cast at the last preceding regular Municipal election, or if such officer was elected from a ward, the petition shall be signed by registered voters of such ward equal in number to at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the total number of votes cast in such ward at the last preceding regular Municipal election.  The signatures to such petition need not be appended to any one (I) paper. Such petition papers shall be issued, signed and filed as provided for by the statutes of Nebraska.
No recall petition shall be filed against members of the City Council or the Mayor within six
(6)	months after he or she takes his or her office, nor within six (6) months after a recall election has failed to remove him or her.









































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 9.  Fiscal Management


Sec. 1-901  FISCAL MANAGEMENT; FISCAL YEAR The fiscal year of the Municipality for the purposes of taxation and appropriations shall begin the first (1st) day in August of each year. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-701)

Sec. 1-902 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; ANNUAL AUDIT. The Governing Body shall cause an audit of the Municipal accounts to be made by an independent and qualified accountant as expeditiously as possible following the close of the fiscal year. Such audit shall be made on a cash or accrual method at the discretion of the Governing Body. The said audit shall be completed, and the annual audit report made not later than six (6) months after the close of the fiscal year unless an extension of time shall be granted by a written resolution adopted by the Mayor and City Council. The accountant making the audit shall submit not less than three (3) copies of the audit report to the Governing Body. All public utilities or other enterprises which substantially generate their own revenue shall be audited separately, and the results of such audits shall appear separately in the annual audit report, and such audits shall be on an accrual basis and shall contain statements and materials which conform to generally accepted accounting principles. The audit report shall set forth a financial position and results of financial operations for each fund, or group of accounts of the Municipality as well as an opinion by the accountant with respect to the financial statements. Two (2) copies of the annual audit report shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk, and shall become a part of the public records of the Municipal Clerk's office, and will at all times thereafter be open for public inspection. One (1) copy shall be filed with the Auditor of Public Accounts. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-2901 thru 19-2909)

Sec. 1-903 FISCAL MANAGEMENT;  BUDGET; BUDGET PROCEDURE.  The Nebraska
Budget Act is incorporated herein by reference for the purpose of proper budget preparation. The preparation and adoption of said budget shall conform in all respects to said Act.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§13-502 thru  13-514)


Sec. 1-904 FISCAL MANAGEMENT;  APPROPRIATION.   The City shall within the last quarter of each fiscal year pass an ordinance to be termed  "The Annual Appropriation  Bill," in which corporate authorities may appropriate such sums of money as may be deemed necessary to defray all necessary expenses and liabilities of the City, not exceeding in the aggregate the amount of tax authorized to be levied and revenue available during the then ensuing year.  In such ordinance there shall be specified the object and purpose for which such appropriations are made and the amount or amounts appropriated for each object or purpose.  (This financial information probably will be the same as the final approved budget.) No further appropriations shall be made at any other time within such fiscal year, unless the proposition to make such appropriations has been sanctioned by a majority of the legal voters of the City, either by a petition signed by them or at a general or special election duly called therefor.	All appropriations shall end with the fiscal year for which they are made; Provided, the fund arising from road taxes and bridge taxes shall be deemed especially appropriated for street repair purposes; and the income arising from the operation of the water and sewer systems shall be deemed especially appropriated to the payment of the current expenses of and to the cost of improvements and extensions and additions to said systems respectively, and shall not be included in the Annual Appropriation  Ordinance.  Nothing in this ordinance contained shall be construed to
 
prohibit the Council from appropriating other money in the Annual Appropriation Bill for the use of streets, grades and bridges, and for water and sewer systems; Provided, the sums so appropriated in the aggregate do not exceed the maximum of tax allowed to be levied and collected as fixed by the laws of Nebraska.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-704)

Sec. 1-905  FISCAL MANAGEMENT; FINANCIAL STATEMENT.  The Mayor and Council
shall cause to be published  semi-annually a statement of the receipts of the City and the sources thereof and an itemized account of the expenditures and the financial condition of the City. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-722)

Sec. 1-906 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; EXPENDITURES. The Mayor and Council shall not have the power to appropriate, issue, or draw any order or warrant on the Municipal Treasurer for money, unless the same has been appropriated or ordered by ordinance or the claim for the payment of which such order or warrant is issued has been allowed according to law, and any transfer or division of the money or credits from any of the funds to another fund or to a purpose other and different from that for which proposed except as provided herein shall render any Councilman voting therefor or any officer of the corporation participating therein guilty of a misdemeanor and any person shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined twenty-five ($25.00) dollars for each offense, together with costs of prosecution.
Should any judgment be obtained against the Municipality, the Mayor and the Finance Committee on finances, with the sanction of the City Council, may borrow a sufficient amount to pay the same for a period of time not to extend beyond the close of the next fiscal year, which sum and interest thereon, shall, in like manner be added to the amount authorized to be raised in the general tax levy of the next year and embraced therein. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-706)

Sec.1-907  FISCAL MANAGEMENT; DEPOSITORIES.  The City Treasurer shall deposit, and at all times keep on deposit, for safekeeping, in state or national banks, of approved and responsible standing, all money collected, received or held by him as such City Treasurer.  Such deposits shall be subject to all regulations imposed by law or adopted by the City Council for the receiving and holding thereof.  The fact that a stockholder, director, or other officer of such banking institution shall also be serving as Mayor, member of the City Council, or as any other officer of such Municipality, shall not disqualify such bank from acting as a depository for such Municipal funds. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-712)

Sec. 1-908  FISCAL MANAGEMENT;  CERTIFICATES OF DEPOSIT; TIME DEPOSITS;
SECURITY REQUIRED. The City Treasurer may, upon resolution of the Mayor and Council authorizing the same, purchase certificates of deposit from and make time deposits in banks selected as depositories of City funds under provisions herein. The certificates of deposit purchased and time deposits shall bear interest, and shall be secured as set forth herein; Provided, that the penal sum of such bond or the sum of such pledge of assets shall be reduced in the amount of the time deposit or certificate  of deposit  insured by the Federal Deposit  Insurance  Corporation.   (Neb. Rev.  Stat.
§16-713)


Sec. 1-909 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; DEPOSITORY BOND. For the security of the fund so deposited, the City Treasurer shall require each depository bank to give bond for the safekeeping and payment  of such deposits and the accretions thereof, which bond  shall run to the City and be
 
approved by the Mayor. Such bond shall be conditioned that such a depository shall, at the end of every quarter, render to the Treasurer a statement in duplicate, showing the several daily balances, the amount of money of the City held by it during the quarter, the amount of the accretion thereto, and how credited. The bond shall also be conditioned that the depository shall generally do and perform whatever may be required by the provisions herein and faithfully discharge the trust reposed in such depository. Such bond shall be as nearly as practicable in the form provided by the laws ofNebraska; Provided, no person in any way connected with any depository bank, as officer or stockholder, shall be accepted as a surety on any bond given by the bank of which he is an officer or stockholder. Such bond shall be deposited with the City Clerk.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-714)

Sec. 1-910   FISCAL MANAGEMENT;  DEPOSITORY  SECURITIES.   In lieu of the bond
required herein, any bank making application to become a depository may deposit as security with the City Clerk, United States government bonds, bonds of the State of Nebraska, or of any state whose bonds are purchased by the Board of Educational Lands and Funds of this state for investment of the Permanent School Fund, warrants of the State of Nebraska, County bonds, Municipal bonds or school district bonds of any County, City, Village or school district in the State of Nebraska issued under the direction of and with the approval of the Auditor of Public Accounts, bonds and debentures issued either singly or collectively by any of the twelve (12) federal land banks, the twelve (12) intermediate credit banks, or the thirteen (13) banks for cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit Administration, or warrants of the County or any City, Village or school district in the County; Provided, that the penal sum of said bond or the sum of said pledge of assets shall be of the value equal to or greater than the amount of the deposit in excess of that portion of said deposit insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. The depository bank furnishing securities above described shall have the right to substitute other approved securities herein provided for in lieu of securities already pledged ifit so desires at any time. (Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-715) (Ord. No. 1179, 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-911 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; MAXIMUM DEPOSITS. The Treasurer shall not have on deposit in any bank at any time more than the maximum amount of the bond given by said bank if the bank gives a surety bond, nor in any bank giving a personal bond, more than one half (1/2) of the amount of the bond of such bank; and the amount so on deposit at any time with any bank shall not in either case exceed the paid-up capital stock and surplus of such bank, nor more than ninety (90%) percent of the par value of the securities furnished by said bank in cases where the bank deposits approved securities in lieu of a bond. The City Treasurer shall not be liable for any loss sustained by reason of the failure of any such bonded depository whose bond shall have been duly approved by the Mayor as herein provided, or which has, in lieu of a surety bond, deposited approved securities as herein provided.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-716)

Sec. 1-912  FISCAL MANAGEMENT;  LAWFUL TRANSFER OF FUNDS.  Each City fund
shall be strictly devoted to the purpose for which it is created and shall not be diverted therefrom; Provided, however, when the City Council, by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the members, shall declare the expenditure of any fund for the purpose for which it was created to be unwise and impracticable or where the purpose has been fully accomplished and the whole fund or an unexpired balance thereof remains, and no indebtedness has been incurred on account of such fund which has not been fully paid,  such fund  may be transferred  to  any other  fund  of the  City by the  affirmative  vote  of
 
three-fourths (3/4) of all the members of the Council.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-721)


Sec. 1-913 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; INVESTMENT OF FUNDS. Whenever the City shall have accumulated a surplus in its General Fund in excess of its current needs, or shall have accumulated a sinking fund for the payment of its bonds and the money in such sinking fund shall exceed the amount necessary to pay the principal and interest of any such bonds which become due during the current year, the Mayor and Council are authorized to invest such surplus in its General Fund, in excess of current needs, or such excess in its sinking funds, in any securities in which the Board of Educational Lands and Funds of Nebraska is authorized by law to invest the educational funds of the State, including bonds and debentures issued either singly or collectively by any of the twelve (12) federal land banks, the twelve (12) intermediate credit banks, or the thirteen (13) banks for cooperatives under the supervision of the Farm Credit Administration. When any warrant of the City shall have been presented for payment and the same is not paid for under direction of the Mayor and Council, purchase and take up such registered warrant with the sinking funds in the hands of the Treasurer and hold such warrant for the benefit of the fund so invested until the same is paid in its order, as provided by law.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §77-2341, 77-2355)

Sec. 1-914 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; CLAIMS. All claims against the City, including claims for personal injury but not including officers' salaries and interest upon public debts, must be filed with the City Clerk. Upon the filing of any such claim, the party shall state therein his post office address; and, upon the disallowance of any such claim, it will be the duty of the City Clerk to notify the claimant, his agent or attorney by letter mailed to such address within five (5) days after such disallowance.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. § 16-726)

Sec. 1-915  (Repealed by Ordinance No. 1488.) Reserved for Future Use.


Sec. 1-916 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; WARRANTS. Upon allowance ofa claim by the Council, the order for the payment thereof shall specify the particular fund or appropriation out of which it is payable as specified in the Annual Appropriation Bill and no order or warrant shall be drawn in excess of eighty-five (85%) percent of the current levy for the purpose of which it is drawn unless there shall be sufficient money in the Treasury to the credit of the proper fund for its payment, and no claim shall be audited or allowed except an order or warrant for the payment thereof may legally be drawn. All warrants drawn upon the Treasury must be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk and shall state the particular fund or appropriation to which the same is chargeable, the person to whom payable, and for what particular object. No money shall be otherwise paid that has not been drawn upon such warrant.  Such warrants may be delivered immediately when so drawn.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-718)


Sec. 1-917 TAXES; ROAD. All money arising from the levying of road tax against or upon property in the City shall belong to the City and shall be expended upon the streets and grades in the City.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-711)


Sec. 1-918 TAXES; PAYMENT. City warrants shall be received forthe City general tax. City taxes levied for other special purposes shall be paid by warrants drawn upon and payable out of the particular fund on account of which they are tendered. Lawful money of the United States, checks.
 
drafts, credit cards, charge cards, debit cards, money orders, electronic funds transfers, or other bills of exchange may be accepted in payment of any city tax levy, penalty, fine, license, fee or assessment of whatever kind or nature, whether general or special. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §77-1702) (Amended by Ordinance 2121 08/28/2007)

Sec. 1-919 (Repealed by Ordinance No.--. Reserved for Future Use.

Sec. 1-920 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; CONTRACTS; APPROPRIATION.  No contract shall
be made by the City Council or any committee or member thereof and no expense shall be incurred by any of the officers or departments of the City, whether the object of the expenditure is ordered by the City Council or not, unless an appropriation shall have been previously made concerning such expense, except as otherwise provided by law.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-501)

Sec. 1-921 FISCAL MANAGEMENT; CONTRACT VOTE. On the passage or adoption of every resolution or order to enter into a contract, or accepting of work done under contract, by the Mayor or Council, the "yeas" and "nays" shall be called and entered upon the record. To pass or adopt any by-law, ordinance, or any such resolution, or order, a concurrence of a majority of the whole number of the members elected to the Council shall be required. The Mayor may vote on any such matter when his vote shall be decisive and the Mayor shall, for the purpose of such vote, be deemed to be a member of the Council.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-503) (Ord. No. 1179, 2/24/76)

Sec. 1-922 LETTINGS; BIDS. In advertising for bids for road contract work, public improvements work, or for supplies, construction, repairs, and improvements and in all other cases where bids for supplies or work for any character whatsoever, are received for the City or any ofits departments or agencies, there shall be fixed not only the day upon which such bids shall be returned, received, or opened, but also the hour at which such bids shall close, or be received, or opened, and it shall be provided that such bids shall be immediately and simultaneously opened in the presence of the bidders or representatives of the bidders when the hour is reached for the bids to close; Provided, that where bids are being opened on more than one (1) contract, the officials having charge of the opening of such bids may, if they deem it advisable, award each contract as the bids are opened. (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§73-101)


Sec. 1-923 LETTINGS; RESIDENT BIDDER. When a public contract is to be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, a resident bidder shall be allowed a preference over a nonresident bidder from a state which gives or requires a preference to bidders from that state. The preference shall be equal to the preference given or required by the state of the nonresident bidder. Resident bidder as used herein shall mean any person, partnership, association, or foreign or domestic corporation authorized to engage in business in the State of Nebraska and who shall have met the residence requirements of the state of the nonresident bidders, necessary for receiving the benefit of that state's preference law on the date when any bid for a public contract is first advertised or announced, or shall have had bona fide establishment for doing business within this State for the length of time established by the state of the nonresident bidders, necessary for receiving the benefit of that state's preference law on the date when any bid for a public contract is first advertised or announced. Any contract entered into without compliance with this section shall be null and void. The provisions of this Section shall not apply to any contract for any project upon which federal funds would be
 
withheld because of these provisions.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §73-101.01, 73-101.02)


Sec.1-924 LETTINGS; FAIR LABOR STANDARDS. In awarding contract for public works, all contractors bidding shall be required to file with the City a statement that they are complying with, and will continue to comply with, fair labor standards in the pursuit of their business and in the execution of the contract on which they are bidding. There shall be written into each and every contract for public works, in addition to such other provisions as are necessary and prescribed by law, a provision that in the execution of such contract fair labor standards shall be maintained. (Neb. Rev. Stat.  §73-102)

Sec. 1-925 LETTINGS; BIDDER DISQUALIFICATION. A showing in a public hearing by interested parties, to the satisfaction of the letting authority, that any contractor bidding upon public works and having filed the statement as required herein, has not complied with fair labor standards in the pursuit of his business or occupation, shall be the basis for disqualification of the low bid, in which case the awarding authority shall let the bid to the next lowest responsible bidder.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§73-103)


Sec. 1-926  LETTINGS; FAIR LABOR STANDARDS DEFINED.   "Fair Labor Standards" as
used herein shall be construed to mean such a scale of wages and conditions of employment as are paid and maintained by at least fifty (50%) percent of the contractors in the same business or field of endeavor as the contractor filling such statement.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §73-104)

Sec. 1-927 LETTINGS; CONTRACT ADVERTISING. Before the Council shall make any contract in excess of ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars for general improvements, such as water extensions, sewers, public heating systems, bridges or work on streets, any motor or other mechanical equipment, including parking meters and street machinery, or any other work or improvement where the cost of such improvement shall be assessed to the property, an estimate of the cost thereof shall be made by the City Engineer and submitted to the Council and no contract shall be entered into for any such equipment, for any price exceeding ten thousand ($10,000.00) dollars without advertising, for bids. In advertising for bids for any such work, or for the purchase of such equipment, the Council may cause the amount of such estimate to be published herewith. Such advertisement shall be published at least ten (10) days in some newspaper of general circulation published in the City; Provided, that in case of a public emergency resulting from infectious or contagious diseases, destructive windstorms, floods, snow, war, or an exigency or pressing necessity or unforeseen need calling for immediate action or remedy to prevent a serious loss of or serious injury or damage to life, health, or property, estimates of costs and advertising for bids may be waived in the emergency ordinance when adopted by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Council and entered on record. Ifafter advertising for bids as provided in this Section, the Governing Body receives fewer than two (2) bids on a contract for any work or improvement, or ifthe bids received by the Governing Body contain a price which exceeds the estimated cost of the project, the Governing Body shall have the authority to negotiate a contract in an attempt to complete the proposed project at a cost commensurate with the estimate given.
If the materials are of such a nature that, in the opinion of the manufacturer and with the concurrence of the Governing Body, no cost can be estimated until the  materials have been manufactured or assembled to the specific qualifications of the purchasing City, the Governing Body
 
may authorize the manufacture and assemblage of such materials and may thereafter approve the estimated cost expenditure when it is provided by the manufacturer. The bidding requirements herein may be waived by the Governing Body when materials or equipment are purchased at the same price and from the same seller as materials or equipment which have formerly been obtained pursuant to the State ofNebraska bidding procedures under state law.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-321)

Sec. 1-928 LETTINGS; VIOLATIONS. It shall be unlawful for any officer or person who may be in charge of any bids referred to herein prior to the time fixed for the simultaneous opening, to open prior to such time, or otherwise disclose to any bidder the contents, amount, or other details of any rival bid.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §73-105)















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 10.  Compensation


Sec. 1-1001 COMPENSATION; MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.  Salaries ofall
Municipal officers and employees shall be set by ordinance of the Governing Body and will be available for public inspection at the office of the City Clerk.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-310)

Sec. 1-1002 COMPENSATION; CHANGE IN SALARY. The emoluments of any elected official shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he or she was elected, except that when there are officers elected to the Council or to a Board or Commission having more than one (1) member  and  terms  of  one  (1) or  more  members  commence  and  end  at  different  times,  the compensation of all members of such Council, Board or Commission may be increased or diminished at the beginning of the full term of any member thereof.  No person who shall have resigned or vacated any office shall be eligible to the same during the time for which he or she was elected when, during the same time, the emoluments have been increased.  He or she may hold office at a greater salary after the term of office, during which he or she resigned,  has expired.	(Neb. Rev.  Stat.
§16-326)








































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 11.   Pension Plan


Sec. 1-1101 PENSION PLAN; ELIGIBILITY. All full time or appointed employees with the exception of policemen and firemen, are to be eligible to participate under the Pension Program. The plan so created was effective July 1, 1966, and this date may be hereinafter referred to as "effective date." The eligibility, requirements, terms, vesting, and other conditions are set forth in the Pension Plan as adopted by the Governing Body and as may be amended

Sec. 1-1102  PENSION PLAN; CONTINUANCE AND AMENDMENT OF PLAN.  It is the
expectation of the Municipality that it will continue this plan and the payments of its contributions hereunder indefinitely, but the same is not assumed as a contractual obligation of the Municipality and the right is reserved to the Municipality by action ofits Mayor and Council at any time to discontinue this plan and its contributions hereunder, and the contributions under the plan for employees of each department of the Municipality shall be paid only from funds appropriated for, or otherwise duly available for the payment of such expenses of such department.
The Municipality may at any time amend this plan, but no such amendment shall have the affect of revesting in the Municipality any part of the funds theretofore contributed hereunder, nor to reduce the value of pension or other benefits theretofore accrued to any member or beneficiary by reasons of contributions theretofore made; but subject to the foregoing limitations, the Municipality shall have the power to amend this plan in any manner in which it seems desirable, including, but not by way oflimitation, the right to increase or diminish or modify contributions to be made by it or by members to any class of employees or beneficiaries.

Sec. 1-1103 PENSION PLAN; EFFECTIVE DATE. The effective date of the pension program will be July 1, 1966.

Sec. 1-1104 PENSION PLAN; POLICE DEPARTMENT. All full time policemen or policewomen shall be eligible to participate under the Police Pension Plan subject to the laws of the State of Nebraska, and as may be amended which are hereby incorporated by this reference. The eligible policemen or policewomen shall also participate subject to specific terms and conditions as may be adopted by the Governing Body as allowed by the State laws pertaining thereto.


















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 12.  Social Security


Sec. 1-1201 SOCIAL SECURITY; ACCEPTANCE OF SYSTEM. The Municipality hereby accepts for itself and on behalf  of its officials, appointees, and employees, except such as are hereinafter excluded from the provisions hereof, their dependents and survivors, the provisions, benefits and protection of the Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance System, hereinafter designated the "System", established by Title II of Social Security Act, the same being Public Law 734 (81st) Congress, Second Session, H.R. 6000, and to be cited as the "Social Security Act Amendment of 1950."
The term "employee" as used herein shall mean an employee as defined by said Social Security Act and shall include both officers and appointees of the Municipality.
The employees or classes of employees, of this Municipality shall include all such employees as are hereby determined to be within and entitled to the benefits and protection of said system.
Any employee of the Municipality occupying a position not authorized for coverage by applicable State or Federal laws or regulations of the Federal administrative agency is excluded. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §68-601 thru 68-631)

Sec. 1-1202 SOCIAL SECURITY; CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS.  The Mayor is hereby
authorized and directed to enter into such contracts and make such agreements and stipulations with the administrator of said system in and for the State ofNebraska, or such other State Agency for the purpose that may hereafter be designated or created, as may be deemed necessary or expedient by said administrator, or other State Agency authorized in the provisions, as the case may be, or as required by general law, State or Federal, or any applicable regulations of said State or Federal Agency, to extend the benefits and protection of such system to the eligible employees of the Municipality, their dependents and survivors. Such contracts, agreements, or stipulations shall be executed in duplicate by the Mayor and attested by the signature of the Municipal Clerk with the seal of the Municipality attached thereto, one (1) copy thereof to be filed with and become a part of the permanent records of the Municipality. Such agreement shall be made retroactive to January first (1st), 1951, in all respects.

Sec. 1-1203 SOCIAL SECURITY; WITHHOLDINGS. Withholdings from the compensation of eligible employees of the Municipality are hereby authorized, and the Municipality shall impose upon such employees as to services covered, such withholdings to be made in amounts and at such times as may be required by general law, State or Federal, and applicable regulations promulgated with respect thereto by State or Federal administrative agencies.

Sec. 1-1204 SOCIAL SECURITY; RECORDS AND REPORTS. The Municipal Treasurer shall keep such records and make such reports relevant to the administration of the Social Security Act as may be required by general law, State or Federal, or as provided by regulations promulgated by either the State or Federal Administrator of the system.






(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 13.  Initiative and Referendum


Sec. 1-1301 INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM. The electors of the Municipality shall have the right to commence initiative and referendum procedures as provided by law. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §18- 2523 thru  18-2531)























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 14.  Eminent Domain

Sec. 1-1401 EMINENT DOMAIN; PROCEDURE. The Governing Body may, after negotiations in good faith have failed, begin condemnation actions for the acquisition of property within the Municipality. Such procedure shall be prescribed by State law and damages shall be paid to the condemnee according to the provisions therein.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §76-701 thru 76-724)




















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 15.  Penal Provision

Sec. 1-1501 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State ofNebraska,  Section 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly.




















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter2 COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Article 1. Blair Public Library

Sec. 2-101 LIBRARY; ESTABLISHED. The Public Library and reading room now existing in the City are hereby continued and shall be perpetually kept and maintained by the City and shall be known as the Blair Public Library.

Sec. 2-102 LIBRARY; USE AND PURPOSE. The library and reading room shall be forever freeto the use of the inhabitants of the City, subject always to such reasonable regulations as the Library Board may adopt to render such library of use to the inhabitants of the City. The Library Board may exclude from the use of the library and reading rooms any person who shall willfully violate or refuse to comply with rules and regulations established for the government thereof

Sec. 2-103 LIBRARY BOARD; MEMBERS. A Library Board of seven (7) members shall be appointed from the citizens at large, of which Board, neither the Mayor nor any member of the City Council shall be a member. The seven members shall all serve four (4) year staggered terms expiring on June 30 of the even numbered years, except one of the two appointed as a result of expanding the board from five (5) members to seven (7) members, shall be two (2) years and all subsequentterms being fora term of four years. In case of vacancies by resignation, removal or otherwise, the City Council shall fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. No member shall receive any pay or compensation for any services rendered as a member of the Board. The members of the Library Board, shall be appointed by a majority vote of the members of the City Council and said appointments shall be made at the last regular meeting of the City Council in June of any year in which a term or terms expire. Such board shall be advising and shall make recommendations to the Governing Body as matters pertaining to the use and operation of the library, as may be required by the Governing Body. (Amended by Ordinance 2062 04/25/2006)

Sec. 2-104 LIBRARY BOARD; ORGANIZATION. The Library Board shall, at the first (1st) meeting in July of each year organize by electing from their number a Chairman, Secretary, and such other officers as may be necessary. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for any meeting of the Board. (Amended by Ordinance 2062 04/25/2006)

Sec. 2-105 LIBRARY BOARD; RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Library Board shall, upon the approval of the Mayor and City Council, have the power to make and adopt such by-laws and rules and regulations for its own guidance and for the government of the library and reading room as it may deem expedient.

Sec. 2-106   LIBRARY  BOARD;  FUNDS.	The Library Board shall have exclusive control of expenditure of all money donated to the Library.
 
Sec. 2-107 LIBRARY BOARDS; REPORTS. The Library Board shall on or before the second (2nd) Monday in June of each year make a report to the Mayor and City Council of the condition ofits trust as of June first (1st) of each year showing all moneys received or expended; the number of books and periodicals on hand, newspapers and current literature subscribed for or donated to the reading room; the number of books and periodicals obtained by purchase, gift or otherwise obtained during the year and the number lost or missing; the number of and character or books loaned or issued with such statistics, information and suggestions as it may deem of general interest or as the City Council may reqmre.

















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2.  City Planning Commission

Sec. 2-201 CITY PLANNING COMMISSION; MEMBERS. The City Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members who shall represent, insofar as possible, different professions or occupations in the Municipality and who shall be appointed by the Mayor by and with the approval of three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Council. Two (2) such members may be residents of the area over which the City is authorized to exercise extraterritorial zoning and subdivision regulations. All members of the Commission shall serve as such without compensation and shall hold no other Municipal office except when appointed to serve on the Board of Adjustment pursuant to state law. The term of each member shall be three (3) years. Three (3) members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council as aforesaid each year.
Vacancies occurring on the Planning Commission shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor
and confirmation by the Council for the unexpired terms in the same manner as original appointments. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-925)

Sec. 2-202 CITY PLANNING COMMISSION; ORGANIZATION. The Planning Commission shall elect its Chairman from its members and create and fill each other offices as it may determine. The term of the Chairman shall be one (1) year, and he or she shall be eligible for re-election. The Commission shall hold at least one ( 1) regular meeting in each month. The Commission shall adopt rules for transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-927)

Sec. 2-203   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION;  PURPOSE; DUTIES; CONTRACTS.   The
Planning Commission of the City of Blair shall make and adopt plans forthe physical development of the City, including any areas outside its boundaries, which, in the Commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of such Municipality, and including a comprehensive development plan as defined in Section 19-903 of the Revised Statutes of Nebraska for 1943, as amended. In adopting said plan, said Commission may prepare and adopt such implemental means as a capital improvement plan, subdivision regulations, building codes and zoning ordinances. In preparing said plans, said Commission may consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utilities civic organizations, educational institutions and citizens with relation to the promulgation and implementation of the comprehensive development plan and its implemental programs. The Planning Commission shall have the power to delegate authority to any group to conduct studies and make surveys for the Commission and to make preliminary reports on its findings and hold public hearings before submitting its final reports. The Mayor and city Council of the City of Blair shall not hold public meetings or take action on matters relating to the comprehensive development plan, capital improvements, building codes, subdivision development or zoning until it has received the recommendation of the Planning Commission. The Governing Body may set a reasonable time within which the recommendation isto be received.
The Planning Commission may, upon approval and authorization of the governing body,
in its own name, make and enter into contracts with public or private bodies, receive contributions, bequests, gifts or grant funds from public or private sources. Itmay expend the funds appropriated to it by the City, employ agents and employees, acquire, hold and dispose of property, make arrangements consistent with its program, conduct or sponsor studies or planning work for any public body or appropriate agency, receive grants, remunerations or reimbursement for such studies or work and it may conduct public hearings, summon witnesses, administer oaths and compel the giving oftestimony. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-929)
 

























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3.  Board of Adjustment

Sec. 2-301	BOARD  OF ADJUSTMENT.	The Governing Body shall appoint the Board of Adjustment which shall consist of five (5) regular members plus one ( 1) additional member designated as an alternate who shall attend and serve only when one of the regular members is unable to attend for any reason. Each member of the Board shall serve a term of three (3) years, unless reappointed, and shall be removable only for good and sufficient cause by the Governing Body upon written charges and after a public hearing. The members of the Board shall serve without compensation and may be required, in the discretion of the Governing Body, to give a bond in a sum set by resolution of the Governing Body, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. One ( 1)member ofthe Board of Adjustment shall be at the same time a member of the Planning Commission at all times. Upon the loss of membership on the Planning Commission the said member shall also immediately lose his membership on the Board of Adjustment and shall result in the appointment of another planning commissioner to the Board of Adjustment. The Board shall organize at its first (1st) meeting in June of each year and elect from its membership a chairman and secretary. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep complete and accurate minutes of all Board meetings and to file the same at the office of the Municipal Clerk for examination at any reasonable time by the public. The Board of Adjustment shall be funded from time to time out of the General Fund by the Governing Body. Meetings of the Board shall be held at such times as the Governing Body may designate, or at such other times as the chairman may, in his or her discretion call a meeting. Special meetings may be also held upon the call of any three (3) members of the Board. A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum forthe purpose of doing business. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Regulations (Chapter 11). The Chairman, or in his absence the acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-907, 19-908)

Sec. 2-302 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; POWERS. The Board may, subject to such appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be established by the Governing Body, have the following powers:

A.	To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by an administrative official based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Regulations;

B. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Regulations, requests for interpretations of any map, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the Board is authorized by such regulation to pass;

C.	Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a specific piece of property at the time of the enactment of a regulation, or by reason of exceptional, topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the strict application of this regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties, to, or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property, to authorize, upon an appeal relating to the property, a variance from such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship, if such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution pertaining to zoning regulations. No such variance shall be authorized by the Board unless it finds that:
 
1.	The strict application of the Zoning Regulations would produce undue hardships;
2.	Such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity;
3.	The authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance;
4.	And the granting of such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable and
exceptional hardship as distinguished from variations for purposes of  convenience, profit or caprice.

D.	No variance shall be authorized unless concern for the intended use of the property is not of so general or recurring a nature as to make reasonable practicable the formulations of a general regulation to be adopted as an amendment to the ordinance. In exercising the above-mentioned powers such Board may, in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Regulations, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may take such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of any such administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under the Zoning Regulations of the Municipality or to effect any variation in the Zoning Regulations  of the Municipality.

E.	The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to interpret the provisions of the Zoning Regulations of the Municipality in any such way as to carry out its intents and purposes and to adopt from time to time such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of said Zoning Regulations. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-910)

Sec. 2-303 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; APPEALS. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the Municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of any zoning regulation or any regulation relating to the location or soundness of structure. The appeal shall be filed with the Municipal Clerk and accompanied by a filing fee as set forth in an appendix hereto. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the Board, by filing with the officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal istaken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with her or him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in her or his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record on application on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
 

Sec. 2-304  BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT; APPEALS TO DISTRICT COURT.  Any person or
persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board, or bureau of the Municipality, may present to the district court a petition duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of such illegality. Such petition must be presented to the court in accordance with Section 19-912, Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as now existing or hereafter amended.












































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4. Blair Airport Authority

Sec. 2-401 BLAIR AIRPORT AUTHORITY; ESTABLISHED. Pursuant to the City's Airport Authorities Act, Section 3-501 et seq. R.R.S. Neb., as amended, the City of Blair, Nebraska, hereby establishes and creates the Airport Authority of the City of Blair as an Airport Authority pursuant to the City's Airport Authorities Act. Said Airport Authority shall be managed and controlled by a Board which shall have the full and exclusive jurisdiction and control over all facilities owned or hereafter acquired by the City of Blair for the purpose of aviation operation, air navigation, and air safety operation. Said airport authority board shall be a body corporate and politic constituting a public corporation and an agency of the City of Blair.

Sec. 2-402 BOARD MEMBERS; APPOINTMENT. Said airport authority board shall consist of five (5) members which shall be selected as follows:

A. The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint one (1) member who shall serve until his or her successor, elected at the first general City election following such appointment, shall qualify and take office.

B.	The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint two (2) members who shall serve until their successors, elected at the second general City election following such appointment, shall qualify and take office.

C.	The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint two members who shall serve until their successors, elected at the third general City election following such appointment, shall qualify and take office.

D.	Upon the expiration of the terms of such appointed officers, members of the Board shall be nominated and elected in the manner provided by law for the election of officers of the City of Blair and shall take office at the same time as the officers of the City of Blair.

Sec. 2-403 BOARD MEMBERS; QUALIFICATIONS; TERMS. Members of such Board shall be residents of the City of Blair and, except for members initially appointed, shall serve for terms of six (6) years.

Sec. 2-404 BOARD MEMBERS; VACANCIES. Any vacancy on such Board shall be filled by temporary appointment by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, until a successor can be elected at the next general City election to serve the unexpired portion, if any, of the term.

Sec. 2-405 BOARD MEMBERS; REMOVAL. A member of such Board may be removed from office for incompetence, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. An action for the removal of such officer may be brought, upon resolution of the City Council, in the District Court of Washington County, Nebraska.

Sec. 2-406 BOARD MEMBERS; COMPENSATION. The members of said Airport Authority Board hereby created shall not be entitled to compensation for their services but shall be entitled to reim­ bursement of expenses paid or incurred in the performance of the duties imposed upon them bythe City's Airport Authorities Act to be paid as provided in Section 23-112 R.R.S. Neb. for county officers and
 
employees.

Sec. 2-407 BOARD MEMBERS; QUORUM. A majority of the members of the Airport Authorities Board then in office shall constitute a quorum.

Sec. 2-408 BOARD MEMBERS; DELEGATION OF DUTIES. The Board may delegate to one or more of the members, or to its officers, agents, and employees, such powers and duties as it may deem proper.

Sec. 2-409 TERM OF EXISTENCE. The Airport Authorities Board and Airport Authority of the City of Blair, Nebraska, and its corporate existence shall continue only for a period of twenty (20) years from the date of the appointment of the members thereof, and thereafter until all its liabilities have been met and its bonds have been paid in full or such liabilities and bonds have otherwise been discharged. When all liabilities incurred by the Authority of every kind and character have been met and all its bonds have been paid in full or such liabilities and bonds have otherwise been discharged, all rights and properties of the authority shall pass to and be vested in the City of Blair.

Sec. 2-410 JURISDICTION. The Airport Authority of the City of Blair shall have and retain full and exclusive jurisdiction and control over all projects in its jurisdiction with the right and duty to charge and collect revenue therefrom for the benefit of the holders of any of its bonds or other liabilities. Upon the Authority ceasing to exist, all its remaining rights and properties shall pass to and vest in the City of Blair.

Sec. 2-411 POWERS. The Airport Authority of the City of Blair shall have all of the powers set forth in Section 3-504 R.R.S. Neb. and as may be subsequently granted by amendmentthereto and granting additional authority to Airport Authorities established under the City's Airport Authorities Act of the State ofNebraska.





















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 5.  Dock Board

Repealed by Ordinance Number 1488 Passed September 27, 1988














Article 6.  City Council Committees

Transferred to 1-214 & 1-215
















Article 7.  Recreation Board

Repealed by Ordinance No. 1687 Passed February 22, 1994















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 8.  Park Advisory Board

Sec. 2-801  PARK ADVISORY BOARD, APPOINTMENT, TERMS.  The Park Advisory Board
shall consist of six (6) members, all of whom shall be resident freeholders of the Municipality. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the City Council. Said members shall serve for a term of three (3) years, and two (2) appointments to said Board shall be made by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council each year, that appointment to be effective on the second (2nd) Monday of each year.
The members of the Park Advisory Board shall hold their first (1st) meeting following the second (2nd) Monday in January of each year. They shall organize by electing one (1) of their members as chairman. Four (4) members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for meetings. The members of the Board shall serve without monetary salary.

Sec. 2-802 PARK ADVISORY BOARD, DUTIES AND POWERS. The members of the Board shall have charge of all the parks belonging to the Municipality and shall have the power to establish rules for the management, care, and use of the same. It shall be their duty to recommend the lay out, improvement, and beautification of all grounds and buildings now owned or hereafter acquired for public parks. It shall further be the responsibility of the Board to study, investigate, counsel and develop and/or update as directed by the Mayor and City Council, a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas of public property. Such plan may be presented as directed by and to the Mayor and City Council and upon their acceptance and approval shall constitute the official Comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City of Blair. The Board when requested by the Mayor and City Council, shall consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special matter of question coming within the scope of its work.
The Municipality by and through the Park Advisory Board shall have the right to plan, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the right of way of all streets, alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes and all public parks and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
The Board may remove or cause or order to be removed any trees, or part thereof, which is located on public right of way or public parks or land and which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. The Governing Body shall have the power to accept or reject any (a) grant or devise of real estate, (b) gift or bequest of money or other personal property, or (c) other donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playground or recreational purposes.
All of the powers of the Board shall be subject to the advise, consent, and approval of the Governing Body.








(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 9.  Black-Elk Neihardt Park Board

Repealed by Ord. No. 1488 September 27, 1988























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 10. Citizen Advisory Review Connnittee

Sec. 2-1001 CITIZEN ADVISORY REVIEW COMMITTEE. Repealed by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006 - See Sec. 14-201thru14-210.

Sec. 2-1002   CITIZEN ADVISORY  REVIEW  COMMITTEE;  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Repealed by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006 - See Sec. 14-201thru14-210.

















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 11. Civil Service

Sec. 2-1101 CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM; GENERALLY. There is hereby created a Civil Service Commission for the City as provided for by Section 19-1827 Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, with the powers and duties as set forth in Sections 19-1827to 19-1847 of the Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska. Such Civil Service Commission shall function pursuant to the provisions of State law applicable thereto.

Sec. 2-1102 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION; RULES AND REGULATIONS. The members
of the Civil Service Commission shall make suitable rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of Sections 19-1827to 19-1847 of the Reissue Revised Statutes ofNebraska. Suchrulesand regulations shall provide in detail the manner in which examinations may be held, appointments, promotions, transfers, reinstatements, demotions, suspensions, and discharges may be made and for any other matters which may be considered desirable to further carry out the general purposes of Sections 19-1827 to 19-1847 of the Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, or found to be in the interest of good personnel administration. Such rules and regulations, and any amendments thereto, shall be printed, mimeographed or multigraphed for free public distribution and may be changed from time to time. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §19-1830)

Sec. 2-1103	CIVIL SERVICE; REQUIREMENTS FOR CIVIL SERVICE POSITION APPLICANTS.
(1)	An applicant for a position of any kind under Civil Service shall be able to read and write the
English Language, meet the minimum job qualifications of the position as established bythe Mayor, and be of good moral character. An applicant shall be required to disclose his or her past employment history and his or her criminal record, if any, and submit a full set ofhis or her fingerprints and a written statement of permission authorizing the Mayor to forward the fingerprints for identification. Prior to certifying to the Mayor the name of the persons eligible for the position or positions, the Commission shall validate the qualifications of such persons.
(2)	The Mayor shall require an applicant, as part of the application process, to submit a full set of his or her fingerprints along with written permission authorizing the Mayor to forward the fmgerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation through the Nebraska State Patrol for identification. The fingerprint identification shall be solely for the purpose of confirming information provided by the applicant.
(3)	Any fingerprints received by the Commission or Mayor pursuant to a request made under subsection (2) of this section and any information in the custody of the Commission or Mayor resulting from inquiries or investigations made with regard to those fingerprints initiated by the Commission or Mayor shall not be a public record within the meaning of Sections
84-712 to 84-712.09 RS Neb. and shall be withheld from the public by the lawful custodians or such fingerprints and information shall only be released to those lawfully entitled to the possession of such fingerprints and information. Any member, officer, agent, or employee of the Commission, Mayor or Municipality who comes into possession of fingerprints and information gathered pursuantto subsection
(2) of this section shall be an official within the meaning of Section 84-712.09 RS Neb. (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§19-1831)


(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 12.  Board of Health

Sec. 2-1201 BOARD OF HEALTH; MEMBERS; QUORUM. The Board of Health shall consist of five (5) members: The Mayor, who shall be Chairman, a physician who shall be medical supervisor, the Chief of Police, who shall be Secretary and Quarantine Officer, the President of the Council and one
(1)	other citizen.  A majority of such Board shall constitute a quorum.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-238)

Sec.  2-1202	BOARD OF HEALTH; POWERS. The Board of Health shall enact rules and regulations, which shall have the force and effect oflaw, to safeguard the health of the people of the City and prevent nuisances and unsanitary conditions and enforce them and provide fines and punishments for the violation thereof Said Board of Health shall have the power and shall make all needful rules and regulations relative to matters of sanitation of the City, including the removal of dead animals, the sanitary conditions of the streets and alleys and vacant grounds and of stock yards, cattle and hog pens, wells, cisterns, privies, water closets, cesspools, stables and all buildings and places not specified where filth, nuisances or offensive matter is kept or is liable to or does accumulate, and it may regulate, suppress and prevent the occurrence of nuisances and enforce all laws of the State and ordinances of the City relating to same or to matters of sanitation of the City.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-238)

Sec. 2-1203 BOARD OF HEALTH; RECORDS. The Board of Health shall keep a record ofits transactions, orders, notices and actions, which record shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be a part of the City records and available to the public.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-238)

Sec.  2-1204  BOARD OF HEALTH; ABSENCE OF MEDICAL ADVISER.  In the event of the
absence or disability of the Medical Adviser of the Board of Health, the Mayor may appoint some other physician to act in his or her place during such absence or disability and who shall have all of the powers and duties of such medical adviser.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-238)






















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 13.  Penal Provision

Sec. 2-1301 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty ofa Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the Statutes of the State ofNebraska,  Sec. 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly.




















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter3 MUNICIPAL OPERATIONS
Article 1. Water Service Generally

Sec. 3-101 MUNICIPAL WATER; OPERATION AND FUNDING. The Municipality owns and operates the Municipal Water Department. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the Municipal Water Department may each year levy atax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. Under the direction of the City Administrator, the Director of Public Works shall have the direct management and control of the Municipal Water Department and shall faithfully carry out the duties of her or his office. The Governing Body shall set the rates to be charged for water usage by resolution. Said water rates shall be appended to the Municipal Code of the City of Blair by appendix designated "Water Usage Rates" and a copy of said rates shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair, Nebraska, for public inspection at any reasonable time. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-675, 16-681) (Amended by Ord. No. 1327, 6/8/82)

Sec. 3-102 MUNICIPAL WATER; DEFINITIONS. The following definitions shall be applied throughout this Article. Where no definition is specified, the normal dictionary usage of the word shall apply. The definitions are as follows, to-wit:

CONSUMER The term "consumer" is hereby defined to be any person, firm or entity who has entered into a water contract with the Municipality in which the Municipality agrees to furnish water to such person, firm or entity within the corporate limits of the Municipality.

MAIN The term "main" is hereby defined to be any pipe other than a supply or service pipe that is used for the purpose of carrying water to, and dispersing the same in, the Municipality.

SUPPLY PIPE The term "supply pipe" is hereby defined to be any pipe tapped into a main and extending from there to a point at or near the lot line of the consumer's premise where the stop box is located

STOP BOX The term "stop box" is hereby defined to be the equipment which is installed at or near the lot line of the consumer's premise used for the purpose of shutting off the water supply to the consumer's premise. The term "stop box" is also commonly referred to as a shut-off, curb stop, or corporation stop.

SERVICE PIPE The term "service pipe" is hereby defined to be any pipe extending from  h stop box at or near the consumer's lot line to and beyond the lot line of the consumer to   the locations on consumer's premise where the water is to be disbursed.

SEPARATE PREMISE The term "separate premise" is hereby defined to be more than one
(1)	consumer procuring water from the same service or supply pipe. The second (2nd) premise may be a separate dwelling, apartment, building, or structure used for a separate business.
 

Sec. 3-103 MUNICIPAL WATER; CONSUMER'S APPLICATION. Every person or persons desiring a supply of water must make application therefor to the City Clerk. The Municipality may require any applicant to make a service deposit in such amount as has been set by the Governing Body and placed on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)

Sec.3-104 MUNICIPAL WATER; SERVICE TO NON-RESIDENTS. Service may be obtained outside of the corporate limits of the City of Blair ifthe individual desiring such service applies for said service on an individual basis and such application is approved by the Governing Body. The meter for said service shall be located at the City limits and responsibility for the installation, repair and maintenance of all water pipe outside of the City limits to be assumed by the customers served. All materials and installation and repair procedures shall be approved by the Director of Public Works. The expense of and the materials for the installation  of the meter and all water pipe and appurtenances necessary. All of said materials and appurtenances shall be conveyed without consideration to the City in return for which the City will assume perpetual maintenance of the water pipe within the City limits.

Sec. 3-105 MUNICIPAL WATER; WATER CONTRACT. The Municipality, through its Water Department, shall furnish water to persons within its corporate limits whose premises abut a street or alley in which a main now is or may hereafter be laid. The Municipality may furnish water to persons within its corporate limits whose premises do not abut a street or alley in which the main is now or may hereafter be laid and may also furnish water to persons whose premises are situated outside the corporate limits of the Municipality, as and when, according to law, the Governing Body may see fit to do so. The rules, regulations, and water rates hereinafter named in this Article shall be considered a part of every application hereafter made for water service and shall be considered a part of the contract between every consumer now or hereafter served. Without further formality, the making of application on the part of any applicant or the use or consumption of water service by present consumers thereof and the furnishing of water service to said consumer shall constitute a contract between the consumer and the Municipality, to which said contract both parties are bound. Notwithstanding any provision hereof, the Governing Body may from time to time as deemed necessary increase or decrease the rate charged the consumers. Such adjustment shall in no way affect the contract established hereby. Ifthe consumer shall violate any of the provisions of said contract or any reasonable rules and regulations, the Director of Public Works or his agent may cut off or disconnect the water service from the building or premise or place of such violation in compliance with Section 3-301. No further connection for water service to said building, premise, or place shall again be made without an order of said Director or his agent.

Sec.3-106 MUNICIPAL WATER; INSTALLATION PROCEDURE. In making excavations in streets, alleys, or sidewalks for the purpose of installing pipe, or making repairs, the paving, stones, and earth must be removed and deposited in a manner that will occasion the least inconvenience to the public and provide for adequate drainage. No person shall leave an excavation made in the street, alley, or sidewalk open at any time without a barricade, and during the night, warning lights. After service pipes and supply pipes are laid, the public right of way, streets, alleys, and sidewalks shall be restored to good condition. Ifthe excavation in any street, alley, or sidewalk is left open or unfinished for a period of forty-eight (48) hours or more, the Utilities Department may finish or correct the unfinished work, and all expenses so incurred shall be charged to the consumer. All installations or repairs of pipes require inspection by the Building Inspector. The inspection shall be made before pipes are covered. It is the consumer's responsibility to notify the Building Inspector at least 24 hours in advance of the time the work  is ready  for inspection.    All  installation  shall be  done under  the supervision and strictly in
 
accordance with the rules, regulations, and specifications prescribed for such installation approved by the Governing Body.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)

Sec. 3-107 MUNICIPAL WATER; REPAIRS. Repairs to the service pipe and stop box shall be made by and at the expense of the consumer. Repairs to any supply pipe with a diameter of one and one half inches or less and the main shall be made by the Municipality.  Repairs to any supply pipe with a diameter in excess of one and one half inches shall be made by and at the expense of the consumer. All water meters shall be kept in repair by the Municipality at the expense of the Municipality. When meters are worn out, they shall be replaced and reset by the Municipality at the expense of the Municipality; Provided that ifthe consumer permits or allows a water meter to be damaged, injured, or destroyed through his own recklessness, carelessness, or neglect so that the water meter must be repaired or replaced, the Director of Public Works shall bill and collect from the consumer the cost of such meter repair or replacement in the same manner as water charges are collected. Permitting a water meter to be damaged or destroyed by freezing shall always be considered negligence on the part of the consumer. All water meters shall be tested at the consumer's request at the expense of the consumer a reasonable number of times; Provided, that ifthe test shows the water meter to be running two percent (2%) or more fast, the expense of such test shall be borne by the Municipality. The Municipality reserves the right to test any water meter at any time. The Municipality shall have the right to replace the meter on the consumer's water service fixtures at Municipal expense. Should a consumer's meter fail to register properly, the consumer shall be charged for water during the time the meter is out of repair on the basis of the monthly consumption duringthe same month of the preceding year; Provided, that ifno such basis for comparison exists, the consumer shall be charged such amount as may be reasonably fixed by the Director of Public Works.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)

Sec. 3-108 MUNICIPAL WATER; INSTALLATION EXPENSE. The consumer shall employ a licensed plumber and pay the cost of installation and the cost of the supply pipe and the service pipe from the main to the place of disbursement. The cost of the installation of the stop box shall be paid by the consumer. The consumer shall purchase from the City the stop box or shall, before installation, obtain approval of any such items not purchased from the Municipality. The City will provide the meter, and such meter shall remain property of the City. The consumer will pay a tap fee in such sum as is set by the Governing Body and the amount of said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled, "Permit, License, and Application Fees." The extension of commercial mains into unsupplied territory, within the corporate limits, may be made by means of water extension districts. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681) (Amended by Ord. No. 1328, 6/8/82)

Sec. 3-109 MUNICIPAL WATER; REMOTE READOUTS. All new dwelling units in the City applying for water service shall be required to obtain, from the City, and install remote readout devices.

Sec. 3-110 MUNICIPAL WATER; MINIMUM RATES. All water consumers shall be liable for the minimum rate provided by ordinance unless and until the consumer shall, by written order, direct the Director of Public Works to shut off the water at the stop box, in which case he or she shall not be liable thereafter for water usage and charges until the water is turned on again.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-681)

Sec. 3-111 MUNICIPAL WATER; WATER BILLS. Water bills shall be due and payable monthly in a manner approved by the Governing Body. The Water Department shall charge each customer for the amount of water consumed since the last meter reading together with any other charges, properly itemized, due the Water Department, and shall collect same from the respective customer.  Bills shall be
 
due on the first (1st) day of each month and shall be payable by the tenth (10th) of each month. Bills paid on or before the tenth (10th) day ofeach month shall be allowed a discount of fifteen (15%) percent of the  gross monthly bill. Bills not paid by the fifteen (15th) day of each month shall be deemed delinquent. Upon being deemed delinquent, as herein defined, the disconnection procedure set out in Section 3-301 shall be commenced.

Sec. 3-112 MUNICIPAL WATER; LIEN. In addition to all other remedies, if a customer shall for any reason remain indebted to the Municipality for water service furnished, such amount due, together with charges in arrears, shall be considered a delinquent water charge which is hereby declared to be a lien upon the real estate for which the same was used. Such lien shall be assessed against the real estate and collected in the manner provided in and pursuant to the requirement of Sec. 16-682 RRS Neb. as it now exists or as it may be amended in the future.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-682)

Sec. 3-113 MUNICIPAL WATER; SINGLE PREMISE. No consumer shall supply water to a separate premise or allow anyone to take water from his or her premise. It shall further be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or by means of any contrivance or device to divert the water from the service pipe so that the water will not pass through the meter or while passing through said meter to cause the meter to register inaccurately. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-682)

Sec. 3-114 MUNICIPAL WATER; RESTRICTED USE. The Governing Body may order a reduction in the use of water or shut off the water on any premise in the event of a water shortage due to any good and sufficient cause. The Municipality shall not be liable for any damages caused by shutting off the supply of water of any consumer while the system or any part thereof is undergoing repairs or when there is a shortage of water due to circumstances over which the Municipality has no control.

Sec. 3-115 MUNICIPAL WATER; FIRE HYDRANTS. All hydrants for the purpose of extinguishing fires are hereby declared to be public hydrants, and it shall be unlawful for any person other than members of the Municipal Fire Department under the orders of the Fire Chief, orthe Assistant Fire Chief; or members of the Water Department to open or attempt to open any of the hydrants and draw water from the same, or in any manner to interfere or tamper with the hydrants.

Sec. 3-116 MUNICIPAL WATER; POLLUTION. It shall be unlawful for any person to pollute or attempt to pollute the source of water for the supply of or any part of the Municipal Water System.

Sec. 3-117	MUNICIPAL WATER;  MANDATORY  HOOK-UPS.	All persons within three hundred (300) feet of a water main shall be required, upon notice of the Governing Body to hook-up with the Municipal Water System.

Sec. 3-118   MUNICIPAL WATER; WATER  SERVICE CONTRACTS.   Contracts for water
service are not transferable. Any person wishing to change from one location to another shall make a new application and make a new contract.  Ifany consumer shall move from the premise where service is furnished, or if the said premise  is destroyed by fire or other casualty, he shall at once inform the Water Department who shall cause the water service to be shut off at the said premise. Ifthe consumer should fail to give such notice, he or she shall be charged for all water used on the said premise until the Water Department is otherwise advised of such circumstances.

Sec. 3-119  MUNICIPAL WATER; INSPECTION.   The Director of Public Works, or his or her
 
duly authorized agents, shall have free access, at any reasonable time, to all parts of each premise and building to, or in which, water is delivered for the purpose of examining the pipes, fixtures, and other portions of the system to ascertain whether there is any disrepair or unnecessary waste of water. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring the department to make the inspections or relieve the customer from any charges for water which may be occasioned by a leak or waste of water.

Sec. 3-120 MUNICIPAL WATER; DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, injure, or deface any building, machinery, apparatus, fixture, attachment, or appurtenance of the Municipal Water Department. No person may deposit anything in a stop box or commit any act tending to obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above mentioned property.

Sec. 3-121 MUNICIPAL WATER; LICENSED PLUMBER.  It shall be unlawful for any plumber or pipefitter to do any work upon any of the pipes or appurtenances of the Municipal Water System orto make any connection with or extension of the supply pipes of any consumer taking water from the said system until such plumber or pipefitter shall have first procured a license and permit from the Municipality. All plumbing shall be done in the manner required by the Governing Body. The said Licensed Plumber shall be at all times subject to the inspection and approval of the Building Inspector and it shall be further unlawful to cover or conceal willfully any defective or unsatisfactory plumbing work. Any pipe, solders, or flux used in the installation or repair of any residential or non-residential facility which is connected to the water supply system shall be lead free. For the purposes of this section lead free shall mean:

1.	Solders and flux - not more than two-tenths (.2%) percent lead, and
2.	Pipe and pipe fittings - not more than eight (8%) percent lead. (Neb. LB 383, Nebraska State Legislature.)



Sec. 3-122. MUNICIPAL WATER; UNSAFE PHYSICAL CONNECTION TO WATER DISTRIBUTION   SYSTEM;   PROHIBITED;   POTENTIAL   BACK   FLOW  HAZARDS;
CUSTOMER ASSESSMENT. No customer or other person shall cause, allow, or create any physical connection between the municipal water distribution system and any pipes, pumps, hydrants, tanks, steam condensate returns, engine jackets, heat exchangers, other water supplies or any other connection whereby potentially unsafe or contaminating materials may be discharged or drawn into the municipal water system.
At least one time every five (5) years, customers of the municipal water distribution and supply system shall be required to assess and report potential back flow and back siphonage hazards to the Municipality on a form supplied by the Municipality to the customer. The customer shall take any steps necessary for protection of public health and safety as determined by the Director of Public Works.

Sec. 3-123 MUNICIPAL WATER; BACK FLOW PREVENTION DEVICES REQUIRED; MUNICIPAL  INSTALLATION  AND  MAINTENANCE;   TESTING.	A  customer  of  the
Municipal Water Department may be required by the Director of Public Works to install and maintain a properly located back flow prevention device at the customer's expense appropriate to the potential hazards set forth in Title 179, Nebraska Department of Health.
The Director of Public Works shall require the application based on his opinion of whether such installation will protect the municipal water distribution system from potential back flow and back
 
siphonage hazards.
Such customer shall annually certify to the Municipality that the back flow prevention device has been properly tested and is functioning properly. Any decision of the Director of Public Works requiring installation and maintenance of a back flow prevention device may be appealed to the City Council.
The installation of a properly located back flow prevention device shall be installed at the time any new meter is installed or at the time any existing meter is replaced.






















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2.

(Article 2 of the Blair Municipal Code is repealed by Ord. No. 1364, 3/18/84)
























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3.  Utilities Disconnection

Sec.  3-301	UTILITIES  DISCONNECTION;  PROCEDURES  AND  STANDARDS.	The
following procedures and standards are adopted for the disconnection of utility service provided by the City of Blair to its customers for the reason of nonpayment by its customers of the charges made for the utility service, or for failure to comply with the rules and regulations and the contractual arrangements with the Department of Utilities:

1.	A demand letter shall be sent to each customer who has failed to remit the amount due for utility service before the fifteenth (15th) day of each month. Said demand letter shall inform the customer that unless payment of the amount due is made before the twenty-fifth (25th) day of the month, the City of Blair will initiate formal procedures to disconnect the utility service made to the consumer.

2.	Ifpayment in full of the delinquent bill is not received by the twenty-fifth (25th) day of the month following the issuance of the demand letter or unless some arrangements have been made for payment of the bill, notice shall be given to the customer informing him or her that utility service will be disconnected within ten (10) days of the date of the letter, if payment on the bill is not made, arrangements are not made for the payment of the bill, or unless a conference is requested concerning the disconnection. Ifsaid notice is sent by first class mail, the envelope shall be marked conspicuously, "IMPORTANT NOTICE	CONCERNING   UTILITY   DISCONNECTION."   In  the   event  the
Department of Utilities is aware that the customer is a recipient of welfare as notified by the County Welfare Department, the notice shall be sent by certified mail to the customer with a copy of the notice of proposed termination being sent to the County Welfare  Department.

3.	The notice to the customer shall include the following:

a)	The reason for the proposed disconnection;
b)	A statement that the utility service will be disconnected unless the customer either pays the bill or reaches an agreement concerning payment of the bill with the Department of Utilities;
c)	The exact date the water will be discontinued if no action is taken by the customer.
d)	A statement that the customer may contact the office of the Department ofUtilities concerning any inquiry or complaint;
e)	A statement that the customer may request a conference concerning any dispute over the proposed disconnection and that no disconnection of service can be made until the conclusion of the conference;
f)	A statement advising the customer that if a certificate of a physician in the State of
Nebraska	certifying	that	the	customer's	household	has	an
 
illness or handicap which would cause an inunediate and serious health hazard if a utility service was discontinued, disconnection of the service may be postponed or prevented. The statement shall further advise the customer, that if such a certificate is filed with the Utilities Department, the disconnection will be postponed for a period of thirty (30) days, and that only one (1) postponement may be received by the customer for each incident of nonpayment of a delinquent account;
g)	A statement that the cost of the reconnection of the utility service will be borne by the customer;
h)	A statement that the customer may arrange for an installment payment plan of the bill;
i)	A statement that customers who are welfare recipients shall contact their case worker concerning possible assistance in payment of their utility bill.

4.	Ifthe customer requests a conference, the employee designated by the utility shall notify the customer in writing of the time, place, and date scheduled for the conference. Said conference shall be held within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the customer's request. The conference shall be informal and no rules of evidence shall apply. Said designated employee shall determine whether or not the disconnection should be made or shall determine any other arrangements for payment of the bill which may avoid termination of the service. In the event the customer contacts the Department ofUtilities prior to the scheduled conference and shows a valid reason why he cannot attend the hearing as scheduled, all reasonable  efforts shall be made to reschedule the hearing.

5.	The Director of Public Works is hereby designated as the utility employee to hear and decide all matters pertaining to the dispute and the requested conference and he or she shall reduce his or her decision to writing including the supporting reasons therefore and serve a copy ofhis or her decision on the customer either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. In the event the decision is made to disconnect the customer's service, the statement sent or delivered to the customer shall include a statement informing the customer that he or she can appeal the decision to the City Administrator and that any appeal must be made within ten (10) days of the date of the conference decision as provided hereinbelow.

6.	The customer shall have the right to an appeal from an adverse decision of the utility employee conference to the City Administrator. Upon notice of an appeal, the City Administrator shall designate a time, place and date for such hearing and shall notify the customer of the scheduling of the hearing and shall forward a copy of the hearing procedures to the customer. No disconnection of service shall be made pending the determination by the City Administrator on the merits of the case.



7.	After determination by the City Administrator of whether disconnection should be made or other arrangements be made concerning payment of the bill, the City Administrator's decision shall be mailed or delivered to the customer. Ifat any stage the customer fails to respond to notices as provided hereinabove, said utility service shall be disconnected without further notice to the customer.
 
8.	If at any time during the procedures as specified hereinabove, the customer remits all sums owed to the City of Blair for utility service; all procedures shall then be canceled.

Sec. 3-302   UTILITIES DISCONNECTION;  APPEALS HEARING, PROCEDURES.	The
following procedures are established for appeal hearings by the City Administrator for disconnection hearings of utility service to the customers of the Utilities Department:

1.	Any customer prosecuting an appeal to the City Administrator of a conference where a decision of the disconnection of utility services shall have the right to present witnesses, offer evidence, confront and cross-examine such witnesses that shall appear and testify at the hearing and said customer shall further have the right to have a record of the proceedings made at the customer's own expense.

2.	The customer shall have the right to examine and copy no less than three (3) business days prior to such appeal hearing all utility files and records pertaining directly to the dispute or utilized in any way in reaching the decision to disconnect utility service.

3.	The hearing shall be governed by the "Nebraska Rules of Evidence" which shall be interpreted without strict technical construction. Itbeing the intention that all questions ofinterpretational rulings and subjective rulings shall be made in favor of the customer.



4.	Upon commencement of the hearing, the customer shall have the right to make an opening statement if the customer desires, which shall be followed by an opening statement by the Director of Public Works or his agent if so desired.

5.	The customer shall first present his or her case as to why disconnection of the services shall not be made and shall be limited in his or her presentation in time only if a gross abuse of the hearing privileges is taking place. The customer shall be entitled to testify on his or her behalf if customer so desires, and if he or she does, customer shall be subject to cross-examination by the Director of Public Works. All other witnesses called by the customer in his or her behalf shall also be subject to cross-examination by the Director of Public Works. The City Administrator may also ask any questions of any witnesses within the scope of cross-examination.

6.	After the customer has called all of his or her witnesses and presented any other evidence he or she wishes, the Director of Public Work's personnel shall then present such testimony or other evidence deemed necessary. After each witness has testified in behalf of the Utilities Department the customer shall have the right to cross-examine said witness.

7.	Upon the conclusion of the Department of Utility's case, the customer shall have the right to present any rebuttal evidence he or she deems necessary and upon conclusions of the customer's rebuttal evidence, the Department of Utilities shall have the right to present any rebuttal they deem necessary.

8.	Upon conclusion of the presentation of all of the evidence, the customer shall have the
 
right to make a closing statement which shall be followed by the presentation of the closing statement, if any, by the Director of Public Works. Upon conclusion of the argument of the Director of Public Works the customer shall have the right to make a rebuttal argument.

Sec. 3-303 UTILITIES DISCONNECTION; THIRD PARTY NOTICE PROCEDURES.  The
following procedures are established for the notice to third parties designated by customers of the municipality's utilities for notice of disconnection of utility service:

1.	Any customer may designate a third party to be given notice in the event the customer's utility service is to be discontinued. Said designation shall be made on the appropriate form provided by the Department for that purpose.

2.	In the event any customer of the municipality's utilities who has designated a third party is being sent notice of a proposed disconnection of their utility service, the same notice shall also be sent to the designated third party who shall be placed in the position of the customer for the purpose of making payment on the bill, provisions for payment thereof, or requesting allowed conferences.

3.	The designation of the third party shall remain in effect until the designation is revoked in writing by the customer.

Sec.  3-304	UTILITIES  DISCONNECTION;   DEPOSITS  RENTAL  PROPERTY  AND
CONTRACTORS. The following policies and procedures are established by the City of Blair concerning utility deposits on residential multi-family dwelling units, mobile home parks and individual residential family rental property.

I.	Utility deposits for three (3) or more rental units consisting of multi-family dwelling units, individual residential homes or mobile homes with common ownership shall be made by the owner according to the terms and conditions ofeither one (I) of the options set forth hereinbelow.  Said options being:

a)	Said owner may deposit the sum of fifty ($50.00) dollars per meter for each of the individual rental units when said rental units are unoccupied or when a deposit is not on file with the municipality. Utility service will be supplied to the rental unit only during such time as there is a deposit on file so that a deposit shall be required in the event said owner wishes service to the unit to be continued during vacancy of the unit. Said deposit shall be returned to the owner at such time as a deposit for said rental unit is received by the municipality from the renter of said unit.

b)	A property owner may remit a floating deposit for continued service during a vacancy in such rental property. Ifthe owner has one to three units the deposit shall be $50.00 for such purpose. Ifthe owner has four or more units the deposit shall be
$100.00 for such purpose. The owner may request a refund of such deposit at any time. Ifthe property owner does not place a floating deposit under this Section the owner shall post a regular deposit for continuation of service during any and each vacancy.
 

2.	The owner of said residential units shall notify the municipality in writing of his or her election of either deposit policies as set forth in paragraph one ( 1) hereinabove.

3.	Contractors constructing residential dwelling units within the City of Blair which have three (3) or more deposits on file for construction sites may also elect to remit to the Department of Utilities a deposit for each construction site according to the deposit requirements set forth in paragraph l .a. hereinabove or they may elect to make a fifty ($50.00) dollar deposit according to the terms and conditions set forth in paragraph l.b. hereinabove. Said election made by the contractors shall be made in writing and filed with the Department of Utilities.

Sec. 3-305 UTILITIES, DISCONNECTION; ACCOUNT CREATION OR MODIFICATION
FEE, OWNERS, RENTERS. At the time any new account is established for any customer of the municipal water works or sanitary sewer system that own or occupy the premises to be served and for which the bill is rendered, said customer shall remit to the City an account creation fee in the amount of
$25.00 which shall be paid prior to the establishment of service for said account. At any time said
account is modified by changing location of the service or reestablishment of service following voluntary customer disconnection of five (5) months or less, said customer shall remit to the City an account modification fee in the amount of $15.00 which shall be paid prior to the establishment of service at the new location or reestablishment  of service.


















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4. Fire Department

Sec. 3-401 FIRE DEPARTMENT; ESTABLISHED. The Volunteer Fire Department shall continue and shall be and constitute the Fire Department of the Municipality. All members of said Department shall be first recommended by the Chief of the Department for membership to the Mayor and Council and confirmed as such members by the Mayor and Council.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§ 16-222)

Sec. 3-402 FIRE DEPARTMENT; RULES. The Department may adopt its own rules and regulations for the appointment of members thereto, but all such appointments for membership in the Department must first be approved by the Mayor and Council of the City. If a person applies to the Fire Department and the Fire Chief denies the application, the person may appeal to the Mayor for appointment as outlined in the Blair Fire Department Constitution and Bylaws. (Amended Ordinance 2376  11/27/2018)

Sec. 3-403 FIRE DEPARTMENT;  OFFICERS; CONFIRMATION;  REMOVAL.   The Fire
Department shall have a Chief who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council. The Department shall also have a First Assistant Chief, a Second Assistant Chief, up to four (4)  Fire Captain(s), an Assistant Chief of Emergency Medical Services, up to two (2) Emergency Medical Services' Captain(s), President, Vice President, Secretary, Treasurer,  and a Sergeant of Arms who shall be elected at the annual meeting of the Department held on the first Thursday of December of each year. A list of such elected officers shall be certified and filed by the Secretary of the Department with the City Clerk at or before the next regular meeting of the City Council following the Department elections. All of such officers, after appointment by the Mayor and upon being confirmed by the City Council, shall thereupon take office commencing on January 2nd_ The Fire Chief, First Assistant Chief, Second Assistant Chief, Fire Captain(s), an Assistant Chief of Emergency Medical Services, and Emergency Medical Services' Captain(s) are Fireground Officers and shall serve a two (2) year term. The President, Vice President, Secretary, Treasurer, and Sergeant of Arms are Administrative Officers and shall serve a one (1) year term. If any of the Fireground Officers or Administrative Officers are not appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, there shall be a vacancy for that position, which shall require the Fire Department to elect a different person to the vacant position. Any subsequent elected Fireground Officer or Administrative Officer so elected, shall be forwarded to Mayor for his or her approval with the confirmation of the City Council. Any of said officers may be removed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council at any time, and any vacancy so created or otherwise occurring shall be filled by the Fire Department according to Fire Department Bylaws, Chapter Three titled Limitation on Offices and Vacancies and must be appointed by the Mayor with the confirmation of the City Council. (Amended Ordinance 2376 11/27/2018)

Sec. 3-404 FIRE CHIEF. The Fire Chief shall have supervision and control of the members of the  Fire  Department  during  the time  they  are  on  duty;  shall  have  charge  and  control  of the equipment and property of the Department and the use thereof; shall be invested with the powers of a City Policeman  while  in the  active performance  of his  or her  duties; shall preserve  and maintain order during fires and supervise and control all persons present at or near any fire; shall take all proper means for the extinguishment of fires and protection of property at or in the
 
vicinity of fires; shall see that all fire equipment and property is property cared for and kept in proper working condition; shall make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council of needed repairs; replacements and additions to such property; shall have the right and power to call to his or her aid and assistance any private person whenever needed in the performance of his or her duties; shall, as often as directed by the Mayor and City Council, inspect of cause to be inspected by a member or members of the Department any and all buildings and premises within the City for conditions likely to cause fires or explosions and to make recommendations for the alleviation and correction of such conditions found and, in the event such corrections are not made within a reasonable time, to report such conditions and facts to the State Fire Marshal or other proper officer; and shall enforce all laws and ordinances with relation to the prevention of fire, the storage and use of explosives, inflammables, the installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment, the maintenance, construction and regulation of fire escapes, the means and adequacy of exit in case of fires in schools, churches, theatres and other public buildings or premises in which considerable numbers of persons congregate, and the investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires. In the absence or disability of the Chief of the Fire Department all of his or her powers and duties shall be exercised and held by the First Assistant Chief, or, in the absence of both the Chief and the First Assistant Chief, by the Second Assistant Chief.

Sec. 3-405 FIRE DEPARTMENT; MEMBERS; DUTIES. It shall be the duty of all members of the Department to respond promptly to all fire alarms, to report to the fire station and accompany the fire apparatus to the scene of a fire, to remain on duty until excused by the Chief of other Officers of the Department in charge and to obey the orders and instructions of the Chief or other Officer in charge.

Sec. 3-406 FIRE DEPARTMENT; RULES AND REGULATIONS.  The Fire Department may
adopt rules and regulations for its operation and government, but the Fire Department Constitution and Bylaws shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council. Ifthe Fire Department amends its Constitution and Bylaws, a copy of the Amended Constitution and Bylaws must be presented to the City Council for approval within seven (7) days of the Fire Department adopting said amendment( s). If Fire Department's proposed amendments will only be valid if the Mayor and City Council approve of said amendments. The Constitution and Bylaws of the Blair Volunteer Fire Department approved by Blair City Council Resolution 2018-31 shall remain in full force and effect until modified pursuant to this Ordinance. (Amended Ordinance 2376 11/27/2018)

Sec. 3-407 FIRE DEPARTMENT;  PRACTICE DRILLS AND HOSE TESTING.   The Fire
Department shall hold a practice drill at least once a month, and all fire hose of the Department shall be pressure tested at least once during each calendar year.

Sec. 3-408 FIRE DEPARTMENT; ROSTER. The Secretary of the Department shall on April first (1st) and October first (1st) of each year make and file in the office of the Clerk of the District Court of Washington County, Nebraska, a certified copy of the roster of the Department and a further certified copy thereof shall be filed with the City Clerk.  The City Council shall
approve and authorize, under the seal of the City, a certificate of exemption of such members from poll tax, jury duty and militia duty, as provided by law.
 
Sec. 3-409 FIRE DEPARTMENT; UNLAWFUL ACTS. It shall be unlawful for any person, unless directed to do so by a member of the Fire Department, to drive any vehicle over any unprotected hose of the Department; to in any manner hinder or interfere with the Department in extinguishing a fire or to hinder fire apparatus in traveling to or from a fire or fire drill; to at any time handle, molest, interfere with or damage any fire engine, apparatus or equipment or to knowingly or willingly make or give any false alarm of fire or to operate the fire siren or other fire alarm without bona fide belief of the existence of a fire.

Sec. 3-410 FIRE DEPARTMENT; CLOSING OF STREETS. The Officer in charge of the Department, while on fire call, shall have the right to close to general traffic any street, alley or thoroughfare in the City.

Sec. 3-411 FIRE DEPARTMENT; RESCUE SQUAD. There is hereby established a Rescue Squad which shall be a subdivision of the Fire Department, and which shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the Fire Department and the laws of the State of Nebraska.

(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 5.  Police Reserve Force

Sec. 3-501 POLICE RESERVE FORCE DEFINITIONS. When used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meaning defined below. Where no definition is given, the term or terms shall have their normal dictionary meaning.

ACTIVE SERVICE The term "Active Service" shall mean those duties and services performed by a member of the Police Reserve Force of the City when such member is activated as provided in Section 3-504.

CHIEF  The term "Chief" shall mean the Chief of Police of the City of Blair, Nebraska. MEMBER  The term "Member" shall mean any member of the Police Reserve Force of the City.
RESERVE   The term "Reserve" shall mean the Police Reserve Force established pursuant to this
Article.

TRAINING SERVICE The term "Training Service" shall mean the activities of a member of the Police Reserve Force of the City when such member is attending training sessions, for which he or she is not paid.

Sec.	3-502	POLICE	RESERVE	FORCE;	COMPOSITION,	SUPERVISION;
SECRETARY-TREASURER. The members of the Police Reserve Force shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council, and shall be removable at any time by the Mayor subject to the approval of the City Council. The Reserve shall consist of such number of members as shall from time to time be determined by the Mayor and City Council. The members shall be under the direction of the Mayor or Chief of Police. One ( 1)member, in addition to his other duties, shall serve as Secretary-Treasurer of the Reserve and shall keep all books, records and accounts. The Secretary-Treasurer shall present all books, records and accounts of the Reserve for audit when requested to do so by the Mayor or City Council.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-1438)

Sec. 3-503 POLICE RESERVE FORCE; QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS; RULES AND
REGULATIONS.	The Nebraska Commission on Law Enforcement and Criminal Justice shall establish minimum physical, mental, educational, and moral qualifications for all members ofthe Police Reserve Force. The Commission shall also establish minimum training standards and be responsible for providing such training for all members.
Individuals appointed to the Police Reserve Force shall receive training through or under the supervision of the Nebraska Law Enforcement Training Center and shall achieve the minimum training standards within one ( 1) year from the date of appointment. Such training may be provided by the Nebraska Law Enforcement Training Center through regional workshops, training sessions, or similar means of instruction anywhere in the State.
The City Council shall adopt and publish a Reserve Force Manual setting forth the minimum qualifications, training standards, and standard operating procedures for such Force and such higher qualifications, standards, and operating procedures as may actually be used.
The Police Reserve Force may adopt its own rules and regulations to govern its operations in matters not involving police training and active duty. Each member shall, before membership, take an oath to support the City, County, State and Federal Government.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-1439)
 

Sec.  3-504	POLICE RESERVE FORCE; OFFICER'S RIGHTS AND DUTIES WHEN ACTIVATED;  WEAPON;  SUBORDINATE  TO REGULAR  FORCE OFFICERS.	Police
Reserve officers, upon being activated by the Mayor or the Chief of Police, and while on assigned duty, shall be vested with the same rights, privileges, obligations, and duties of any other peace officer of this State.
No person appointed to the Reserve Force may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer until he has been approved by the City Council. After approval, he may carry a weapon only when authorized by the Chief of Police and when discharging official duties as a duly constituted peace officer.
Police Reserve officers shall be subordinate to regular force officers; shall not serve as a peace officer unless under the direction of regular officers; and when serving with regular force officers shall wear no insignia of rank. The Police Department shall appoint a regular force officer as the Reserve Force Coordinating and Supervising Officer. Such regular officer shall report directly to the Chief of Police.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-1443)

Sec. 3-505  POLICE RESERVE FORCE; UNIFORMS, BADGES AND EQUIPMENT.   The
uniform and equipment to be worn and carried by the Reserve shall be prescribed by the Chief of Police and approved by the Mayor and City Council.
The City shall pay one half (112) of the cost of the original uniform (one (1) short sleeve shirt,
one (1) long sleeve shirt, one (1) pair of pants and one (l)jacket). All costs of cleaning and repair must be paid by the member, plus one half (112) of the original cost of the uniform. Uniforms must be neat and clean when reporting for active service or training sessions.
Badges, insignias and other equipment used by the Police Reserve Force shall be purchased by the City and shall be the property of the City. Upon separation from the Reserve, all members shall return such equipment to the Chief of Police. Any City property not returned to the Chief must be replaced at the member's expense.

Sec. 3-506  POLICE RESERVE FORCE; COMPENSATION GENERALLY.   Each Reserve
Officer shall be paid a minimum of one ($1.00) dollar per year. Reserve members shall be paid on an hourly pay scale set by ordinance for the time spent on active service only. A member shall be an employee of the City for the time during which the Mayor, Acting Mayor or Chief of Police has placed the member on active service. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize or permit a Reserve Officer to become eligible for participation in any pension fund or retirement system created by the laws of the State of Nebraska to which regular Police Officers may become members.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§81-1441, 81-1442)

Sec. 3-507  POLICE RESERVE FORCE; HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL BENEFITS.  Hospital
and medical assistance shall be provided by the Mayor and City Council to members of the Reserve Force who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties. Such benefits shall be provided in the same manner as those benefits provided for a full-time Police Officer. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-1441)

Sec. 3-508	POLICE  RESERVE  FORCE;  MINIMUM  DUTY  TIME.	To  be  eligible  for
membership in the Reserve, each applicant must indicate his willingness and shall be available to serve a minimum of eight (8) hours per month in the public service.

Sec. 3-509   POLICE RESERVE  FORCE;  SUPPLEMENTARY  CAPACITY  ONLY.	The
 
Reserve shall be deemed to be a part of the police services of the City Police Department; Provided that the City Council shall not reduce the authorized size of the Police Department because of the establishment or utilization of Reserve Officers.
Reserve Officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular force and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of peace officers without first complying with all requirements for such regular peace officers.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-1445)

Sec. 3-510 POLICE RESERVE FORCE; BOND REQUIRED. No appointment of a Police Reserve Force member shall be valid until a bond in the amount of two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars, payable to the City, has been filed with the City Clerk by the individual appointed, which bond shall be in conformity with the requirements of State law. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-1444)

Sec. 3-511 POLICE RESERVE FORCE; IMPERSONATING A MEMBER.  Itshall be unlawful
for any person to falsely impersonate or represent himself to be a member or to wear, use or possess any of the uniforms, badges or equipment used by the Reserve, unless he is authorized to do so.































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 6.  Parks and Recreation Generally

Sec. 3-601  MUNICIPAL PARKS AND RECREATION; OPERATION AND FUNDING.  The
Municipality owns and operates the Municipal Parks and other recreational areas through the Park Advisory Board and the Park Foreman. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the care, management, and maintenance of the Municipal Park may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the corporate limits that is subject to taxation. The Board shall recommend rules and regulations for the efficient management of the Municipal Parks and other recreational areas of the Municipality. The Board shall not enter into a contract of any nature which involves an expenditure of funds, unless the contract has been approved by resolution of the majority of the members of the Governing Body prior to the contractual agreement.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-695 thru 16-697)

Sec. 3-602 MUNICIPAL PARKS; INJURY TO PROPERTY.  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or willfully cut down, injure, or destroy any tree, plant, or shrub. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any sodded or planted area, or injure or destroy any building, structure, equipment, fence, bench, table, or any other property of the Municipal Parks and recreational areas. No person shall commit any waste on or litter the Municipal Parks or other public grounds.

Sec. 3-603 MUNICIPAL PARKS; ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED. It shall be
unlawful to possess or consume alcoholic beverages including beer in the Municipal Parks or on other Municipally owned property.

Sec. 3-604 MUNICIPAL PARKS; VEHICLES REGULATED. It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized vehicle of any kind or description in the Municipal parks, except upon established, improved roadways or other areas of the parks designated for such use.

Sec.  3-605	MUNICIPAL  SWIMMING  POOL;  OPERATION  AND  FUNDING.	The
Municipality owns and manages the Municipal Swimming Pool. The Governing Body, for the purpose of defraying the cost of the management, maintenance, and improvements of the Swimming Pool may each year levy a tax not exceeding the maximum limit prescribed by State law, on the actual valuation of all real estate and personal property within the Municipality that is subject to taxation. The revenue from the said tax shall be known as the Swimming Pool Fund and shall include all gifts, grants, deeds of conveyance, bequests, or other valuable income-producing personal property and real estate from any source for the purpose of endowing the Swimming Pool. The Swimming Pool Fund shall at all times be in the custody of the Municipal Treasurer. The City Administrator shall supervise the Swimming Pool operations. The Administrator shall have the power and authority to hire and supervise the Swimming Pool Manager and such employees as he or she may deem necessary.

Sec. 3-606  MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL; ADMISSION CHARGE.  The City may, forthe
purpose of defraying the expenses involves in maintaining, improving, managing, and beautifying the Swimming Pool, make a reasonable admission charge for the use by any person of the Municipal Swimming Pool. The said charges shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and shall also be posted in a conspicuous place at the Municipal Swimming Pool for public inspection. Such rates may be structured for classes of persons in a reasonable manner; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to permit or allow discrimination on the basis of race, creed, color, or national origin in the classification of persons for admission charges. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-697.01)
 

Sec. 3-607  MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL; RULES AND REGULATIONS.  The City shall
have the power and authority to enact bylaws, rules, and regulations for the protection of those using the Swinuning Pool and for the efficient management thereof They may provide suitable penalties for the violation of such by-laws, rules, and regulations.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-697.01)















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 7.

(Repealed by Ordinance No.	). Reserved for Future Use.
























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 8.  Cemetery

Sec. 3-801 CEMETERY; ESTABLISHMENT; OPERATION. The Cemetery owned by the City and now existing and located in Section Twelve (12), Township Eighteen (18) North, Range Eleven (11), East of the Sixth (6th) Principal Meridian in Washington County, Nebraska, is hereby continued and shall be known as the Blair Cemetery.

Sec. 3-802 CEMETERY LOTS; CONVEYANCE OF TITLE. The City may convey cemetery lots owned by it by certificates signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk under the seal of the City, specifying that the person to whom the same is issued is the owner of the lot or lots described therein by number as laid down on the plat or maps of the cemetery for the purpose of interment. Such certificate shall vest in the proprietor, his or her heirs and assigns, a right in fee simple of such lot for the sole purpose ofinterment, under the regulations of the City Council. Such certificate shall be entitled to be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the County without further acknowledgment, and such description of lots shall be deemed and recognized as a sufficient description thereof (Neb. Rev. Stat.  §16-243)

Sec. 3-803 CEMETERY LOTS; FUNDS FROM SALE. All proceeds from the sale of cemetery lots shall be delivered to the City Treasurer and credited by her or him to the General Fund.

Sec. 3-804 CEMETERY; RULES AND REGULATIONS. The Governing Body may establish rules and regulations for the operation, regulation and maintenance of the Cemetery and such rules and regulations shall be available for public inspections at the office of the City Clerk during regular business hours.

Sec. 3-805 CEMETERY; UNLAWFUL ACTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, mar, write upon or otherwise injure any monument design, decoration or other thing within the cemetery grounds or to pick any flowers or break any trees, shrubs or plants therein. It shall further be unlawful for any person to trespass upon any cemetery lot, carry any firearms  or to carry or consume any alcoholic liquor within said cemetery grounds.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-245)



















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 9.  Police Department

Sec. 3-901 POLICE DEPARTMENT: GENERALLY. The Governing Body of the Municipality may from time to time establish rules and regulations that shall govern the operations and conduct ofthe police department. The Governing Body shall further have the authority and power to set and establish the positions and operational requirements of the Municipal Police Department subject to any requirements and conditions of the statues of the State of Nebraska.



















































(END OF SECTION)
 

Article 10. Sewer System

Sec. 3-1001 MUNICIPAL SEWER DEPARTMENT; DEFINITION OF TERMS. Unless the
context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this Article shall be as follows:


APPROVING AUTHORITY The term "Approving Authority" shall mean the Governing Body or its duly authorized deputy, agent or representative.

BIOLOGICAL OXYGEN DEMAND The term "Biological Oxygen Demand" (BOD) shall mean and include the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

BUILDING OR HOUSE DRAIN The term "Building Drain" and "House Drain" shall mean and include that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, or other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

BUILDING  SEWER	The term "Building Sewer" shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

CHLORINE REQUIREMENT The term "Chlorine Requirement" shall mean the amount of chlorine, in parts per million by weight, which must be added to sewage to produce a specified residual chlorine content, or to meet the requirements of some other objective, in accordance with procedures set forth in "Standard Methods".

COMBINED SEWER The term "Combined Sewer" shall mean a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

GARBAGE The term "Garbage" shall mean and include solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 1/10/76)

INDUSTRIAL WASTES The term "Industrial Wastes" shall mean the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

MUNICIPALITY  The term "Municipality" shall mean the City of Blair, Nebraska.


NATURAL OUTLET The term "Natural Outlet" shall mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)
 
NORMAL  SEWAGE	The term "Normal Sewage" shall mean sewage not exceeding maximum tolerance of contamination of 300 milligrams per liter BOD or 350 milligrams per liter of Suspended Solids.

PARTS PER MILLION The term "Parts Per Million" shall mean a weight-to-weight ratio; the parts-per-million value multiplied by the factor 8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.

PERSON The term "Person" shall mean any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

pH The term "pH" shall mean the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE The term "Properly Shredded Garbage" shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/.pa 10/76)

PUBLIC SEWERS The term "Public Sewer" shall mean a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

QUARTER OR PERIOD The terms  "Quarter or Period" shall mean any three-month period which is consistent with the normal meter reading dates for that particular book or area within the Municipality.

SANITARY SEWER The term "Sanitary Sewer" shall mean a sewer which carried sewage and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

SERVICE CHARGE The term "Service Charge" shall mean the basic assessment levied on all users of the public sewer system whose waste does not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal sewage.

SEWAGE The term "Sewage" shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may be present. (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2110176)

SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT The term "Sewage Treatment Plant" shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)





City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 2
 

SEWAGE WORKS The term "Sewage Works" shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

SEWER The term "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

SEWERAGE The term "Sewerage" shall mean the system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection, transportation and pumping of sewage and industrial wastes.

SHALL  The term "Shall" is mandatory; the term "May" is permissive.

SLUG The term "Slug" shall mean any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four
(24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)


STANDARD METHODS The term "Standard Methods" shall mean the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent editions of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water, Sewage and Industrial Waste", published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation.

STORM DRAIN The term "Storm Drain" (sometimes termed "Storm Sewer") shall mean a sewer which carried storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

SURCHARGE The term "Surcharge" shall mean the assessment in addition to the service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal sewage.

SUSPENDED SOLIDS The term "Suspended Solids" shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

WATER COURSE The term "Watercourse" shall mean a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

WINTER PERIOD The term "Winter Period" shall mean each of the three (3) winter quarters consisting of three (3) months each which end respectively on the first (1st) day of February, March and April with such separate quarters being dependent upon the particular area of the City which is scheduled for meter reading in the months specified.








City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 3
 

Sec. 3-1002  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; FUNDING, RATES, BILLINGS, RECORDS,
AND  SURCHARGE.	There is hereby established a fund exclusively for the construction, maintenance, extension and operation of the Sewage Disposal Works of the Municipality and all expenses directly related thereto. The rates and charges for the use of the Municipal Sewer and Sewage Disposal Works shall be based upon the water usage for each water user whose waste is discharged into the sanitary sewers of the City of Blair. The City Council of the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall from time to time as necessary, set and.establish the rates and charges for said use of the Municipal Sewer and Sewage Disposal Works by resolution. Said rates and charges shall be appended to the Municipal Code of the City of Blair by an appendix designated "Sewer Rates and Charges." The rates and charges set by the City Council shall be computed as a percentage of the applicable monthly water charge of the current water rates, as specified herein. The monthly water charge for commercial and industrial users shall be the actual water charge made for the billing period to the consumer and the monthly water charge for residential users shall be the average water charge made for the months of December, January and February for the immediately preceding December, January and February. Such funds so collected shall be kept separate from any other fund, and a record of the receipts and disbursements along with sinking funds and/or unpaid obligations shall be part of this record. This record shall be made a part of the report by the Clerk and Treasurer of the City on a monthly basis. The minimum sewer fee shall be made on all single residences or single dwelling units when water usage during the preceding winter period for such residence or dwelling unit does not exist.
Multiple dwellings served by one (1) common water meter shall have each apartment or living unit that is provided with cooking facilities counted as one (1) unit with the total units multiplied by the minimum monthly sewer use fee to establish the minimum sewer use fee to be applied to the units involved.
Two (2) or more commercial or industrial users served by a common water meter shall have the number of users so served multiplied by the minimum monthly sewer use fee to establish the minimum monthly sewer use fee to be applied to such users.
Residential dwelling units that are served from a water meter common to a commercial or industrial user shall be considered a commercial user for purposes of establishing sewer use fees.
Water which is not metered by the City of Blair shall not be permitted to enter the sanitary sewer system of the City of Blair unless special permission has been granted by the governing body. Individual cases where unmetered water enters into the sanitary sewer system of the City of Blair shall be considered on an individual basis and the user shall be considered on an individual basis and the user may be required at his or her expense to install a water meter which shall be used for the purposes of determining the sewer use fee only.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1327, 6/8/82)

Sec. 3-1003 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; SERVICE CHARGE. Sewer service charges shall be payable at the City Offices at the same time that the water bills become due, and payments for water service shall not be accepted without payment also of sewer service charges.

Sec. 3-1004   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; DELINQUENT  PAYMENTS.   Such charges
levied in accordance with the ordinance shall be a debt due to the City and shall be a lien upon the property. Ifthis debt is not paid within thirty (30) days after it shall be due and payable, it shall be deemed delinquent and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the City against the property owner, the person using the service or both.



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 4
 


Sec. 3-1005  SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; RIGHT TO DISCONTINUE SERVICE.  In the
event of failure to pay sewer service or surcharges after they become delinquent, the City shall have the right to discontinue water service, or to remove or close sewer connections and enter upon the property for accomplishing such purposes.
The expense of such discontinuance, removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring service, shall likewise be a debt due to the City and a lien upon the property and may be recovered by civil action in the name of the City against the property owner, the person using the service or both.

Sec. 3-1006 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; RESTORATION OF SERVICE. Water or sewer
service shall not be restored until all charges, including but not limited to the expense of removal, closing and restoration, shall have been paid.

Sec. 3-1007 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; CHANGE OF OWNERSIDP OR OCCUPANCY.
Change of ownership or occupancy of premises found delinquent shall not be cause for reducing or eliminating these penalties.

Sec. 3-1008 SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM; DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS RELIEVED
FROM PERSONAL LIABILITY. The City shall hold harmless the Director of Public Works or duly authorized agent while acting upon directives of the approving authority, when acting in good faith and without malice, from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to any person or property as a result of any act required by this Chapter or by reason of any act or omission of the Director of Public Works, or duly authorized agent while acting upon directive of the approving authority, in the discharge of his duties hereunder. Any suit brought against the director because of any such act or omission in the carrying out of the provisions of this Chapter shall be defended by the municipality through final determination of such proceedings.

Sec. 3-1009  SANITARY SUPPLY SYSTEM; DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.  No person
shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct or any other applicable charge. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1010 PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; UNLAWFUL DEPOSIT OF WASTES. It shall
be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City of Blair or within two (2) miles of the corporate limits thereof, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1011 PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF UNTREATED
SEWAGE. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City of Blair, or within two (2) miles of the corporate limits thereof, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Article.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)




City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 5
 

Sec. 3-1012 PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; CESSPOOLS, PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS
PROHIBITED. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1013  PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED; MANDATORY HOOK-UP.  The owner of all
houses, buildings, or properties used for human employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way inwhich there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the City, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Article within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so; Provided that said public sewer is within one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of the property line.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1014 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL; WHEN APPLICABLE. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 3-1013, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this Article.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 3-1013 a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this Article, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to said sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean gravel, dirt, or other appropriate fill.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1015 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PERMIT REQUIRED, FEE. Before
commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the municipality. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the City, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the Building Inspector. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the City at the time the application is filed.   The amount of said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution, and the amount of said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "Permit, License, and Application Fees. 11     (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)  (Amended by Ord. No. 1328, 6/8/82)

Sec. 3-1016  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PERMIT, WHEN EFFECTIVE;
INSPECTIONS. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Building Inspector when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the Building Inspector. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)






City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 6
 

Sec. 3-1017   PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL  SYSTEM; SPECIFICATIONS.   The type,
capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Public Health of the State of Nebraska. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities when the area of the lot is less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to the surface or any natural or artificial drainage way. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1018 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; MAINTENANCE.  The owner shall
operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1019 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
No statement contained in this Code Book shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Municipal health requirements of the Health Board. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1020 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; PERMIT REQUIRED. No unauthorized
person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the Municipality. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec.  3-1021     BUILDING   SEWER  INSTALLATION;   CLASSIFICATION;   PERMIT
APPLICATION FEE. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Building Inspector. A permit and inspection fee as may be from time to time be set by resolution shall be appended to the municipal code as part of an appendix entitled "Permit, License and Application Fee", shall be paid to the Municipality at the time the application is filed.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10176)

Sec. 3-1022 BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; EXPENSE. All  costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1023  BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; SINGLE PREMISE.   A separate and
independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another or an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)






City of Blair Municipal Code                                                            Chapter 3, Article 10, page 7
 

Sec. 3-1024  BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; USE OF EXISTING SEWERS.    Old
building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the Building Inspector  and the Director of Public Works to meet all requirements of this Article.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1025  BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; CONSTRUCTION CODES.  The size,
slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice NO. 9 shall apply.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and the W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the Building Inspector before installation. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1026   BUILDING  SEWER INSTALLATION;  UNLAWFUL  CONNECTION.   No
person shall make connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in tum is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1027  BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; INSPECTIONS.  The applicant for the
building sewer permit shall notify the Building Inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the Building Inspector or his representative.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1028  BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION; EXCAVATIONS.   All excavations for
building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored as good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of the work. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec.  3-1029     PROHIBITED  DISCHARGES;   STORM-WATER,   SURFACE  WATER,
GROUNDWATER, COOLING WATER AND PROCESS WATER. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof run off, subsurface drainage, including interior and exterior foundation drains, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial waters to any sanitary sewer, except as may be specifically authorized by the Governing Body.
Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are



City of Blair Municipal Code                                                            Chapter 3, Article 10, page 8
 

specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the Director of Public Works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, on approval of the Director of Public Works to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1030 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; FLAMMABLE, TOXIC, CORROSIVE AND OBSTRUCTIVE SUBSTANCES; PRELIMINARY TREATMENT. No
person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:

1.	Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas.

2.	Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/Las CN in the wastes as discharges to the public sewer.

3.	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the municipal sewage system.

4.	Solid or vicious substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, or hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.

5.	Any waters or wastes having:
(a)	a five (5) day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight, or,
(b)	containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids, or,
(c)	having an average daily flow greater than two (2%) per cent of the average sewage flow of the Municipality, or,
(d)	a chlorine requirement greater than demanded by normal sewage as evaluated
by the Municipality.

Where necessary in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to:

(a)	reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by weight, or
(b)	reduce the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight, or
(c)	control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes, or



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 9
 

(d)	reduce the chlorine requirement to conform with normal sewage.

Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the Department of Public Works and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained inwriting. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)


Sec. 3-1031 HAZARDS AND PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS AS
DETERMINED BY THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Director of Public Works that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director of Public Works will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.  The substances prohibited are:

1.	Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees C).

2.	Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (0 and 65 degrees C).

3.	Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor three-fourths (3/4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works.

4.	Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
5.	Any water or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,  and  similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an  excessive  chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment plant exceeds the limits established by the Director of Public Works for such materials.

6.	Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the Director of Public Works as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of State, Federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.




City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 10
 

7.	Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the Director of Public Works in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.

8.	Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.

9.	Materials which exert or cause:

(a)	Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids, (such as but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate).
(b)	Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions).
(c)	Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment process.
(d)	Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined herein.
10.	Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1032 DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; REJECTION,  PRETREATMENT,  CONTROL  OF DISCHARGE  RATE  OR USE  FEE
SURCHARGE. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in Section 3-1031, and which in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage system, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director of Public Works may:
1.	Reject the wastes,
2.	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers,
3.	Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge and/or
4.	Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of Section 3-1033.
Ifthe Director of Public Works permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director of Public Works, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1033 HAZARDOUS AND PROHIBITED SUBSTANCES; SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
PERMITTED; USE FEE SURCHARGE. No statement contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waster of an unusual strength or character may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2110/76)



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 11
 

Sec. 3-1034 GREASE, OIL AND INTERCEPTORS,  STATEMENT OF INTENT.
The intention of the City Council in passing this ordinance is:
1.	To prevent the introduction of excessive amounts of fats, oil, grease, and sand into the City's sewer system.
2.	To prevent clogging or blocking of the City's sewer system due to the accumulation of fats,
oil, grease, and sand.
3.	To eliminate the City's liabilities due to possible damage to residences and commercial buildings.
4.	To protect human health and the environment.
5.	To facilitate the City's compliance with applicable state and federal laws. (Amended by Ordinance No. 2261 06/24/2014)

Sec. 3-1034.01. DEFINITIONS
The Defined words and phrases in this section shall have the meanings there ascribed to them for the purpose of this article unless the context in which they appear clearly indicates otherwise.
1.	"City Administrator" means the City Administrator of the City of Blair, Nebraska, or any other City employee designated by the City Administrator to enforce the provisions of this Article.
2.	"Facility" in the singular or plural, refers both to food service facilities and transportation
service establishments, unless a modifying word or words indicate that a different meaning is intended.
3.	"FOG" means fats, oil, and grease, a term which generally refers to animal and vegetable
glycerides discharged from food processing and serving industries. These substances are detectable and can be measured using standard analytical techniques. They are generally referred to as grease or greases.
4.	"Food Courts" means designated areas, generally found at shopping malls, shopping centers,
and amusement parks that contain several food service facilities with different owners that share seating space and plumbing facilities.
5.	"Food Service Facility" means a facility that prepares and/or packages food for sale or
consumption. These include but are not limited to restaurants, food processing facilities, food manufacturers, seafood packing plants, bakeries, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches, schools, dairies, slaughter houses, meat packers, food courts, caterers and theme parks.
6.	"Gray Water" means all of the liquid and particles suspended in the liquid in a trap after
lighter-than-water materials have risen to the top and heavier-than-water materials have sunk to the bottom.
7.	"Grease" means animal and vegetable glycerides  discharged from food processing  and
serving industries.
8.	"Grease Trap" means a device to which grease and food wastes are directed from the food service facility operations.  It functions to separate and retain waterborne greases and solid food particles prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer system. It also collects solids and grease from kitchen floor drains.
9.	"Owner" means the owner, and, ifthe owner does not operate the facility, the operator of a food service facility or transportation service establishment.




City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 12
 

10.	"Sand and Oil Trap" means a device to which sand and oil wastes are directed from the transportation service establishment operations. It functions to separate and retain waterborne sand and oil particles prior to the wastewater exiting the trap or interceptor and entering the sanitary sewer system.
11.	"Sanitary Sewer Overflow" means the backing up and overflowing of the sewer system as a result of clogging or the obstruction of flow in the City's sewer system due to the discharge of wastewater with excessive fats, oil, greases and sand.
12.	"Sampling Port" means an opening allowing access to a location where samples can be
collected and analyzed.	The sampling port shall be between the trap and the point of discharge to the City sewer system.
13.	"Sewage system" means the publicly owned wastewater treatment plants or sewer systems of the City of Blair, including but not limited to all the collector system piping, lines, manholes, lift stations and treatment plants.
14.	"Transportation Service Establishments" means an automotive, truck, or heavy machinery repair and/or maintenance shop, car or truck wash, truck terminal, commercial or industrial transportation equipment manufacturing or maintenance facilities that have tanks, wash racks or any other sand and oily liquid waste discharges indirectly or directly to the City's public sanitary sewer system.
15.	"Trap" in the singular or plural, refers to both a grease trap, sand trap and oil trap, unless a
modifying word or words indicate that a different meaning is intended. (Amended by Ordinance No. 2261 06/24/2014)

Sec. 3-1034.02. TRAPS; REQUIRED
1.	General Requirements
A.	Grease traps are required at all food service facilities directly or indirectly connected to the  City's Sewage system. All fixtures within such a food  service facility, including but not limited to kitchen sinks, dishwashers, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other source deemed by the City Administrator to be a source of FOG or which may introduce FOG into the sewer system, must be connected to a grease trap. In no case shall FOG be directly introduced into the Sewage system. A grease trap shall function to provide a quiescent, broad surface area that provides sufficient retention time for natural buoyancy of the FOG particles to separate from effluent and to retain FOG particles within the structure. Grease traps may be located underground and outside of a food service facility and shall have at least one (1) inspection hatch on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning, and maintenance. Grease traps shall be designed to collect, contain, or remove food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the Sewage system. All grease traps shall be designed and installed in accordance with sound engineering principles and according to the City specifications and shall fulfill all requirements of the City's codes.
B. Sand and oil traps are required at all transportation service establishments directly or indirectly connected to the City's Sewage system. All fixtures within such a transportation service establishment deemed by the City Administrator to be a source of sand and/or oil that may be introduced into the sewer system shall be connected to



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 13
 

a sand and oil trap. In no case shall sand or oil be directly introduced into the Sewage system. The sand and oil trap shall function to provide a quiescent, broad surface are that provides sufficient retention time for natural settling of the sand particles to separate from effluent and to retain sand and oil particles within the structure. Sand and oil traps may be located underground and outside of a transportation service establishment and shall have at least one (1) inspection hatch on the top surface to facilitate inspection, cleaning and maintenance. Sand and oil traps shall be designed to collect, contain, or remove sand and oil from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the Sewage system. All sand and oil traps shall be designed and installed in accordance with sound engineering principles and according to the City specifications and must fulfill all requirements of the City's codes.
2.	Existing facilities that do not have traps, shall install the required traps on or before December 31, 2014.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2261 06/24/2014)

Sec. 3-1034.03. REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAPS
1.	All traps shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning by the user and for inspection by the City Administrator.
2.	All traps shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and water-tight
3.	The owner shall ensure that all traps work properly and effectively.
4.	All traps shall fully comply with all applicable provisions of the municipal code and any other applicable City regulations.
5.	The owner shall be solely responsible for the cost and completion of tap cleaning inspection, and maintenance, and repairs.
6.	Pumping of all traps shall be performed when, in the case of a grease trap the total volume of captured FOG and food sludge in a grease trap or, in the case of a sand and oil trap, the total volume of captured sand and oil displaces twenty percent (20%) or more of the volume of the trap means emptying it and cleaning the side walls, cross pipes, and inlet and outlet pipes.
7.	All traps shall be opened, inspected, and maintained a minimum of once per month.
8.	Traps may be inspected by the City Administrator as often as deemed necessary to assure compliance with this article. Such inspections may be unannounced. The City Administrator may review the facilities' records on proper pumping, cleaning, maintenance and disposal activities and may order the facility to make such changes or repairs as necessary to comply with the provisions of this article.
9.	The owner shall be solely responsible for the cost and completion of all repairs of traps.
Repairs required by the City Administrator  shall be completed within twenty-one  (21) calendar days from the date of receipt of written notice of required repairs.
10.	The owner shall be responsible for the lawful disposition of all grease, sand, oil and materials removed from traps.
11.	The owner shall maintain records of all trap cleaning, maintenance, disposal, and repair, and shall make all records available to the City Administrator on demand.  Such records shall



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 14
 

include the date and time of the event recorded as well as the date the record was created and shall include the amount of material pumped, the repair conducted, or similar description of the recorded event. All records shall be signed by the authorized owner or operator, or a representative of the owner or operator. If cleaning and maintenance are done by facility owners, and shall be made available to the City Administrator upon demand. All required written records shall be maintained for three (3) years from the date the record was created.
12.	No chemicals, enzymes, emulsions, live bacteria, or other grease cutters or additives to grease traps shall be used without the prior written approval of the City Administrator.  Ifthe City Manger's approval to apply such additives is requested, the City Administrator shall be furnished the discretion of the City Administrator.
13.	No grease, sand, or oil sources shall be connected directly to sewer lines or be allowed in any other manner to bypass the trap.
14.	Sewage shall not be allowed to pass through a trap.
15.	Access covers or manholes shall be clearly identifiable and provided over each trap. The manhole shall have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, the removal of grease, sand, oil, and other materials, and gray water sampling activities. The location of the trap shall be kept free and clear of debris. Blocking or covering the access to manholes is prohibited. The owners or designated representatives (facility Administrators) of the food service facilities or transportation service establishments shall open access covers or manhole covers at the request of the City Administrator.
16.	Traps shall be designed and maintained so as to prevent surface water or groundwater from entering trap through leaks in the plumbing or cracks in the trap itself.
17.	Under the sink grease traps shall be cleaned at a minimum of once per week, or more often as necessary, to prevent pass-through of grease and other solids into the City's Sewage system. Facilities with under the sink traps are subject to the same record keeping requirements as indicated above.
18.	FOG, sand or oil shall not be discharged directly to the City's Sewage system, storm sewer system or any other location not designated by the City Administrator for the reception of such materials.
19.	A sampling port shall be installed in a location approved by the City Administrator to allow sampling by the City Administrator. The sampling port shall be located between the trap and the discharge point to the sewer system.
20.	The owner shall allow the City Administrator ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the  facility for the purpose of trap inspections, observations, records examination, measurements, sampling, testing and any other function deemed necessary under this article.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2261 06/24/2014)


Sec. 3-1034.04. INSPECTION AND MONITORING
1.	All facilities may be inspected by the City Administrator as often as deemed necessary to assure compliance with this article. Such inspections may be unannounced. The City Administrator may review the records required by this article and may order such changes or repairs as necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. Inspections will not be limited to traps but shall include all equipment and operations that may result  in the generation of FOG, sand and oil. Other pertinent data and documentation will be subject to verification at the time of inspection.



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 15
 
2.	The City Administrator may:
A.	Sample and analyze wastewater discharge from food service facilities and transportation service establishments at any time to determine compliance with all provisions of the municipal code.
B.	Measure grease/sand gray water level in the traps at any time for pumping violations.
C.	Determine the adequacy of all traps, based on review of all pertinent information regarding grease, sand and oil trap performance and facility operations, and may order the installation of an appropriate trap.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2261 06/24/2014)

Sec.   3-1034.05.	PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE TRANSPORTATION OF MATERIAL REMOVED FROM TRAPS
1.	All persons transporting FOG, sand and oil removed from traps shall:
A.	Comply with all applicable local, state and federal regulations.
B. Lawfully dispose of all material removed from traps.
C.	Accurately maintain for a period of three (3) years the following records:
1)	Name and address of business where the grease, sand and oil trap(s) was pumped out and cleaned.
2)	Name of business owner(s), date of pumping and volume of waste.
3)	As to each shipment of material removed from traps:
a)	Vehicle license number of the vehicle used in the shipment.
b)	The driver's name.
c)	The date of delivery.
d)	A signed manifest.  By signing a manifest, the driver certifies to the accuracy of information on the manifest.
2.	The City Administrator  may inspect all vehicles used in the transportation  of material
removed from traps.
3.	Persons transporting material removed from traps shall clean up spills or accidental releases on streets in the City of Blair.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2261 06/24/2014)


Sec. 3-1034.06. VIOLATIONS
The violation of any provision of Section 1034 shall be a Class III Misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State of Nebraska Section 28-106, and upon conviction shall be fined accordingly. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate violation. (Amended by Ordinance No. 2261 06/24/2014)

Sec. 3-1034.07. SEVERABILITY
It is declared to be the intent of the City of Blair that if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision of this article shall be declared invalid, the remainder of this article shall be construed as not having contained such section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision and shall not be affected by such holding. (Amended by Ordinance No. 2261 06/24/2014)

Sec. 3-1035 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT OR FLOW-EQUALIZATING  FACILITIES;
MAINTENANCE BY OWNER.  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 16
 
provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec.  3-1036    CONTROL  MANHOLES/SAMPLING   STATIONS;  WHEN  REQUIRED;
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE. When required by the Director of Public Works, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director of Public Works. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1037 CONTROL MANHOLES/SAMPLING STATIONS; METHOD. All measurements,
tests, and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Article, shall be detem1ined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.  Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage system and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property.	(The particular  analyses involved will  determine  whether  a twenty-four  (24) hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained :from twenty-four
(24) hour composites of all outfalls where pH's are determined :from periodic grab samples.) (Ord. No. 1166 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1038 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE; INSPECTIONS GENERALLY. The Director
of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,   observation, measurement, sampling, and testing   in accordance with the provisions of this Article.  The Director of Public Works or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76) Sec. 3-1039	COMPLIANCE  WITH ARTICLE;  INSPECTIONS;  INJURY LIABILITY.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Section 3-1038 above, the Director of Public Works or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1040 COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE; INSPECTIONS; EASEMENTS. The Director
of Public Works and other duly authorized employees of the City shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage system lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 17
 
pertaining to the private property involved.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1041  VIOLATION: NOTICE AND LIABILITY.  Any person found to be violating any provision of this Article except Section 3-1009 shall be served by the City with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.  The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in this Section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each violation. Each twenty-four (24) hour period in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall become liable to the City for
any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City by reason of such violation.   (Ord. No.  1166, 2/10/76)

Sec. 3-1042 SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. The invalidity of any Section, clause, sentence, or provisions of this Article shall not affect the validity of any other part of this Article which can be given effect without such invalid part or parts.  (Ord. No. 1166, 2/10/76)































(END OF SECTION)









City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 3, Article 10, page 18
 
Article 11.  Penal Provisions

Sec. 3-1101 VIOLATION; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State ofNebraska, Section 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly.




















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 12.  City Tow Lot

Sec. 3-1201   TOWING OF VEHICLES AUTHORIZED.   Whenever the city clerk, police, city public works director, parks & recreation director, or other authorized city representative  determines that any vehicle, or parts thereof, causes inuninent danger to public health, safety of welfare, or is in violation of city ordinances or state statutes, he may cause the inunediate removal of the vehicle or parts thereof at the expense of the owner or person in control of the land on which such vehicle,  or parts thereof, is found, or at the expense of the owner of the vehicle or at the expense of both of them. Whenever any vehicle is found coming under the provision of this section, the same shall be removed by a police officer and taken by him, or others acting under his supervision and direction, to the City Tow Lot designated for such purpose.

Sec. 3-1202  REMOVAL, IMPOUNDING, AND RETURN OF VEHICLES.  The Chief of Police
and every police officer are authorized to remove and impound any automobiles or vehicles illegally parked or stalled on snow emergency routes or illegally parked elsewhere or seized during the conunission of a crime or traffic offense. The chief of police shall notify the owner of any such vehicle that the vehicle has been removed and impounded. Notification shall be made by hand delivery or by mailing written notice to the owner at the address shown on registration records of the county treasurer.

No person shall recover any vehicle removed in accordance with this section except as provided in this section. Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be allowed to recover it from the place where it has been placed or impounded, he shall present to a member of the police department evidence of his identity and right to possession of the vehicle, shall sign a receipt for its return, shall pay the cost of removal, and shall pay any cost of storage accrued. Until paid, these charges constitute a lien on the vehicle, which may be enforced in the same manner as a storage lien.

It shall be the duty of the police department to keep a record of each vehicle removed in accordance with this section. The record shall include a description of the vehicle, its license number, the date and time of its removal, where it was removed from, its location, the name and address of its owner and last operator, if known, its final disposition, and the parking violation involved.

"Vehicle" defined. For purposes of this section, the term "vehicle" shall be defined to include, in addition to the definition of vehicle by state statute, any mobile home, travel trailer, boat, boat trailer, pontoon, pontoon trailer, car trailer, utility trailer, pickup camper, horse trailer, stock trailer or machinery of any kind not in the inunediate use.

This section shall be supplemental to any other provisions of law granting a member of the police department authority to remove vehicles.

Sec. 3-1203  ILLEGAL PARKING ON PRIVATE LOTS/CONDITION OF VEHICLES.  Any
person parking a motor vehicle on private property lot without the consent of the owner or tenant authorized to give permission shall be guilty of an infraction; and the vehicle shall be subject to being towed away at the request of such lot owner or tenant. Any person found guilty under this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for infractions.  Ifthe identity of the operator of a motor vehicle in violation of this section cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such infraction. When any law enforcement officer observes or is advised that a motor vehicle may be in violation of this action, he shall make a determination as to whether a violation has in fact occurred and if so shall personally serve or attach to
 
such motor vehicle a citation directed to the owner or operator of such vehicle, which shall set forth the nature of the violation. Any person who refuses to sign the citation or otherwise comply with the command of the citation shall be punished by R.R.S. 1943 §29-426.

It shall be unlawful to park or store on private property lot any vehicle that is not in a condition ready for use, or to permit the parking of any abandoned, junked or partially disabled vehicle on any private property lot.

Sec. 3-1204 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES. All vehicles which are in the custody of the city but are not owned by the city and are no longer desired by the city shall be disposed of as provided in this section, unless otherwise provided by law.

A vehicle and its contents shall be towed away at owner's expense and disposed of in the manner provided for the disposition of abandoned vehicles under state law.

With respect to a vehicle seized as a nuisance or as litter, a notice shall be sent tot eh last registered owner stating that the vehicle and contents must be claimed within five days of the date of the notice. If the vehicle and contents remain unclaimed after the five days, then they shall be considered abandoned, and they may thereafter be disposed of in the same manner as an abandoned vehicle under state law.

A vehicle held for investigatory purposes but not longer needed, and the contents of such vehicle, shall be disposed of in the manner described in Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-1903.01, as amended.

Written notice shall be mailed or given to the legal owner of the property, if known.  The notice shall state that  if the property is not claimed within 30 days of the notice, it may thereafter be sold or otherwise disposed of Ifthe identity of the lawful owner is in dispute, the city may require that the property not be disposed of until a court order is obtained directing such disposition. Ifthe lawful owner of the property is unknown, then the property may be sold or disposed of not claimed within 30 days of the date the city no longer needed or desired the property.

A claimant may reclaim a vehicle only upon payment to the city of any applicable administrative fees, towing fees, storage charges, or other fees. A receipt itemizing such fees shall be given tot eh claimant upon request.

The proceeds received from the sale of any property under this section shall be placed in the general fund of the city, unless otherwise provided by state or federal law.
(This entire article added by Ordinance 2006 05/25/2004)







(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter4

HEALTH AND SANITATION

Article 1. Board of Health

Moved to Boards and Connnissions, Sec. 2-1201, et. seq.



















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2.  Private Sewage Disposal and Wells

Sec. 4-201 PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM; PERMIT. No earth pit toilet, outdoor toilet, septic tank, tile field, leaching pit or sewage disposal system shall be constructed within the City unless a permit in writing has been issued by the City Council for the same. No permit shall be issued for the construction of any type of private sewage disposal system in any location where a practicable connection to the public sewer system of the City can be made.

Sec. 4-202 WELLS; PERMITS. (Repealed by Ord. No. 1322, 2/23/82)

Sec. 4-203 PERMITS; CONDITION PRECEDENT. No permit as required by Section 4-201 shall be issued unless the applicant or applicants therefor have, prior to the making of said application, a permit or certificate of compliance issued by the State of Nebraska for the construction of the same. (Amended by Ord. No. 1322, 2/23/82)

Sec. 4-204 PLUMBING; WELL PERMIT. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, entity or corporation to dig, drill or construct a well within the Municipal limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska, without first having obtained a permit therefor from said City. The application for said private wells shall be obtained from the City Clerk of the City of Blair, Nebraska, and shall set forth the location of the proposed well, the intended use of the water to be derived therefrom, the depth of the proposed well, the size and type or nature of casing to be installed in said well, a description of the pumping equipment to be utilized in said well, the name and address of the individual or company which will drill the well, and any other pertinent information as required by the City. Said application shall be accompanied with an application fee as set and determined by the City Council and which fee shall be nonrefundable inthe event the application is denied. The provisions hereof shall also apply to the drilling of any test wells within the Municipal limits of the City of Blair. (Ord. No. 1322, 2/23/82)

Sec. 4-205 PRIVATE WELLS; LOCATION AND USAGE. No well shall be drilled within the City of Blair, Nebraska, which said well would be located within twenty-five (25) feet from any private or public sewer line, within twenty-five (25) feet of any public water line, within fifty (50) feet of any septic tank, nor within one hundred (100) feet of any disposal field or lateral system. (Ord. No. 1322, 2/23/82)

Sec. 4-206 PRIVATE WELLS; CROSS-CONNECTIONS PROHIBITED. No cross-connections
between a private well plumbing system and the Municipal Water System, or the Municipal Sewer System, of the City of Blair shall be allowed or made by any person, persons, corporation, or any other entity. The Director of Public Works of the City of Blair, Nebraska, and the Building Inspector of the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall inspect the drilling and installation of the plumbing system in any private well to determine that no cross-connections exist. In the event a cross-connection is found to exist, the use of said private well shall be permanently discontinued and the owner, tenants, or lessee of the premises shall be liable for any and all damages to the City Water System and the users thereof as a result of the cross-connection.   (Ord. No.  1322, 2/23/82)

Sec.   4-207	PRIVATE   WELLS;	SPECIFICATIONS	AND   DENIAL	OF   PERMIT
APPLICATIONS. The City Council shall have the power and authority to refuse the issuance of any well drilling permits ifthe plan submitted therewith shows an improper construction or in the event the proposed well driller does not have proper equipment or if it appears that such well may endanger, impair,  or in any way  interfere  with the  Municipal  Water  or  Sewer Systems of the  City of Blair,
 
Nebraska.  (Ord. No. 1322, 2/23/82)

Sec. 4-208 PRIVATE WELLS; USAGE. Permits shall be issued for the drilling of private wells where the use of the water is to be in water circulating heat pumps and irrigation purposes for laws and gardens and no other uses shall be permitted or allowed. No water derived from private wells shall be allowed to utilize or alter either the surface or underground Municipal storm sewer system or the Municipal  Sanitary Sewer System without specific authorization of the Governing Body, which authorization may include the requirement of a periodic fee for such usage.  (Ord. No. 1322, 2/23/82)

Sec. 4-209 PRIVATE WELLS; REGISTRATION. All private water wells within the Municipal limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall be registered with the City Clerk within sixty (60) days following the passage of this Section. The registration of said existing private water wells shall be in writing and shall set forth the location of the well, the use of the water from the well, the depth of the well, the size and nature and type of casing installed in the well, and a description of the pumping equipment used in said well. No private water well whether existing or drilled after the passage of this Section may be modified in any manner without application for a well permit as set forth in this Section and compliance with all other terms hereof    (Ord. No.  1322, 2/23/82)

Sec. 4-210 PRIVATE WELLS; CANCELLATION OF PERMIT. The City Council of the City of Blair, Nebraska, may order the discontinuance of the use of any private water well where it has good cause and reason to believe that the public health and welfare is endangered by the use of said well. After notice to the owner of said well by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, which said notice shall be send to the owner no less than ten (10) days prior to a hearing, the City Council may hold a hearing for the purpose of determining whether said permit should be canceled or revoked. Such permit or renewal thereof may be revoked or canceled by the City upon any violation of the terms and provisions of this Section by the permittee or any of his or her successors.   (Ord. No.  1322, 2/23/82)

Sec. 4-211 PRIVATE WELLS; PERMISSION TO ENTER UPON PREMISES.  The granting of
a well permit or the renewal thereof by the City of Blair and the acceptance thereof by the drilling of a well on the permittee's premises shall constitute consent by said permittee for the Director of Public Works or any of his agents or employees to enter upon the premises upon which the well is located in order to take any action required by this Section or in order to determine the existence of any violation under this Section.  (Ord. No.  1322, 21123/82)

Sec. 4-212 PRIVATE WELLS; NONCOMPLIANCE. In the event of noncompliance with any of the terms of this article, the City of Blair shall have the right to prohibit the use of said wells which are constructed in noncompliance herewith, which are being used for purposes other than those allowed herein, or for existing wells where no registration has been made in compliance herewith. This remedy shall be in addition to any and all other remedies contained herein or which the City of Blair has by law and this section shall not be a limitation or restriction on any additional remedies or rights of the Municipality.




(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3.  Garbage and Refuse

Sec. 4-301 GARBAGE AND REFUSE; DEFINITIONS. As used in this Article, the term "garbage" shall include all food waste and refuse, both vegetable and animal, from kitchens, households, restaurants, food stores and other commercial establishments for the preparation, consumption, sale, dealing in, storage and processing of foods and food products.
As used in this Article, the term "refuse" shall include tree and shrub trimmings, leaves, grass,
weeds, garden vegetation, waste paper, scrap lumber, ashes, scrap plaster and other building materials, packing boxes, cartons, excelsior, waste hay, waste straw, combustible packing materials and refuse, broken glass, tin cans and containers, surgical or sanitary dressings and pads and other waste materials from hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes and old people's homes and waste articles, substances and materials.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1311, 10/27/81)

Sec. 4-302  GARBAGE AND REFUSE; BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
A.		It shall be unlawful to burn garbage, tree and shrub trimmings, leaves, grass, weeds, garden vegetation, or other refuse and combustible material within the limits of the City either in open and unconfined or closed burning on private or public property, except that the Chief of the Fire Department and the City Administrator may issue a special permit for the burning of buildings or structures which have either been condenmed or which are being burned in a practice exercise for the Fire Department of the City.
B.	It shall be unlawful to keep, store or maintain in any building or on any premises, any waste, refuse, debris, rubbish, garbage or other loose combustible material, except recognized and permitted fuels, in such manner or in such quantities as will substantially and excessively increase the danger of fire on such premises and endanger adjacent premises within the municipal limits.
C.	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, burning of refuse may be allowed in commercial or industrial incinerators which shall meet the following requirements:
1.	All incinerators shall be provided with approved feed and draft doors.
2.	All stacks, vents, port and other openings shall be provided with steel mesh covers to retain burning embers and flying ash, and the openings in said screen mesh shall not
be greater than 0.50 square inches.  Ash space, properly confined to prevent	scattering
of hot ashes shall be provided in incinerators in an amount equal to or   more   than one-fourth (114) of the combustion volume of the device, and adequate provisions for removal of ashes shall be provided.
3.	All incinerators shall be provided with draft doors or protected openings of sufficient area to insure proper combustion in the device.   Air shall be admitted under the fuel bed  in  all types  of incinerators  in proper  amount  and further provisions  made that  a
minimum of twenty-five (25%) per cent of the total air of  combustion  be  admitted above the fire bed to insure complete burning of gases and to destroy noxious  odors arising from such combustion.
4.	Grates, when used, shall be provided with a minimum of fifty (50%) per cent openings and shall be so constructed to retain all burning embers. Air openings around or above fuel bed shall have an area of not less than twenty-five (25%) per cent at the effective grate opening.
5.	Construction and fire safety provisions of incinerators which are an integral part of a building or structure shall conform to the standards prescribed by the National Board of Fire Underwriters  and the American  Gas Association's  Specifications for gas
 
burning equipment.
6.	Incinerators shall be sized in such manner as to be adequate to handle the disposal problem to which they are applied. Grossly undersized incinerators which are
a nuisance in operation may be condenmed and removed.
7.	Incinerators as defined under this Section shall be those totally enclosed within the building or structure, and specifically shall exclude portable units such as wire
basket, light metal and light refractory and further specifically excluding "burn barrels".
8.	No private or home incinerators shall be allowed hereunder. Wood burning fire places or stoves for decorative or heating purposes shall not be considered incinerators for the purpose of this section.
D.	Notwithstanding any other provisions contained herein, the City Council may, designate a period not to exceed a total of nine (9) days during the month of April and a total of nine (9) days during the month of November for burning with a permit each year and authorize the City Fire Chief to issue burning permits within the City of Blair city limits during the designated time periods. During the designated periods of burning with a permit, it shall be permissible to burn only tree trimmings less than one-half ( 1/2) inch in diameter, shrubs, grass and weed trimmings, leaves and garden vegetation. Such burning shall only be permitted during the hours of eight (8:00) o'clock a.m. to sundown on the dates designated. (Added by Ordinance 2138 03/25/2008; Amended by Ordinance 2210 10/11/2011)
E.	During the approved burning with a permit periods, it shall be unlawful to;
I.	Allow any burning on the public right of way including but not limited to streets and alleys,
2.	Allow any smoke generating debris to continue to generate smoke past the designated time deadlines.
3.	To leave any fire, whether actively burning or smoldering, unattended,
4.	Not to have water immediately available within fifteen (15) feet of the fire until all fire is fully extinguished
(Added by Ordinance 2138 03/25/2008; Amended by Ordinance 2210 10/11/2011)
F.	Violations of these Sections shall be subject to Section 4-602 (Violations Bureau) and carry fines  as set forth in Section 4-603 of the Municipal Code. (For Penalties also refer to Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule) (Added by Ordinance 2138 03/25/2008; Amended by Ordinance 2210 I 011112011)

Sec. 4-303   GARBAGE AND REFUSE.	All garbage and solid waste except grass and leaves generated and derived within the corporate limits shall be deposited and disposed of at the Douglas County Landfill located near Elk City, Nebraska. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose or dump garbage or solid waste except grass and leaves at any other place or site other than said Douglas County Landfill or the municipal collection center for garbage and solid waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to comingle grass and leaves with solid waste as defined hereinafter. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose or dump grass and leaves in any landfill or at any other site not specifically designated or properly licensed or authorized for depositing grass and leaves.
For the purpose or this section, solid waste is defined as follows:  Solid waste shall have the same meaning as Sec. 81-1502(26) R.R.S. Neb. and shall further include but not be limited to garbage, trash, rubbish, and junk as set forth in Sec. 81-1502 et seq. R.R.S. Neb. specifically excluding, however, grass and leaves which are hereby specifically excluded.
 
Sec. 4-304 GARBAGE AND REFUSE, GRASS AND LEAVES, AUTHORIZED HAULERS. It
shall be unlawful for any person for hire or other consideration to collect, transport, or dispose of any garbage, solid waste, or grass and leaves as defined in Sec. 4-303 generated or derived within the municipal limits without a license or other authority from the municipality.

Sec. 4-305	GARBAGE AND REFUSE; FAILURE TO KEEP GARBAGE IN CONTAINER.
The failure or neglect of any person to place, deposit or keep garbage emanating from his home, building or place of business in a container as required by this Chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful.

Sec. 4-306 GARBAGE CONTAINERS; TIGHT-FITTING LIDS OR COVERS REQUIRED;
CAPACITY; NUMBER REQUIRED; WHERE PLACED. It shall be the duty of every owner, manager, householder, tenant and occupant of any dwelling, trailer house or building, and the owner or manager of any hospital or business house of any kind to provide storage of trash or garbage which shall be watertight and shall have a tight-fitting cover or lid, which covers or lids shall remain on such containers at all times except when container is being filled or emptied. Garbage and trash may be placed in the same container. The number of containers required for each unit shall be established by the amount of garbage and trash normally produced during a collection period. Such containers shall be kept or placed, if inside, on the ground floor, accessible to the collectors and, if outside, at the rear of the lot and accessible to collectors, but not on any street, alley or public place. Such containers must be so arranged that they cannot be turned over. In case of dispute as to the place where such containers are to be kept, then such place is to be determined by the City Administrator or someone designated by him for such duty. All garbage and other refuse material as defined above, but excluding mowings from lawns, trees or other tree limbs and refuse building materials, shall be, by the owners, tenants, managers and producers thereof, placed in such containers and such containers shall at all times be kept clean and in a sanitary condition by the respective owners, tenants, managers, or producers of such garbage and other refuse materials.

Sec.	4-307	GARBAGE  CONTAINERS;   NONMETAL  CONTAINER  PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTION. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to maintain, use, keep or allow to exist on the premises occupied by or belonging to such person nonmetal garbage container. Provided, however, such containers may be constructed of serviceable synthetics.

Sec.  4-308	GARBAGE   CONTAINERS;   PERFORATED   OR  LEAKY   CONTAINER
PROHIBITED. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to maintain, use, keep or allow to exist on the premises occupied by or belonging to such person perforated or leaky garbage containers.

Sec.  4-309	GARBAGE   CONTAINERS;   BUSINESS,   COMMERCIAL   AND  MULTI­
PLE-DWELLING AREAS. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to maintain in the business, commercial or multiple-dwelling areas any container for trash, papers, refuse or any inflammable material that does not prevent the scattering, leaking, blowing or the exposure thereof to fire.

Sec. 4-310 GARBAGE AND REFUSE; BURNING PROHIBITED. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to burn within the City, any garbage,  as defined herein. (Amended by Ord. No. 1311, 10/27/81)
 



















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3.  Garbage and Refuse

Sec. 4-301 GARBAGE AND REFUSE; DEFINITIONS. As used in this Article, the term "garbage" shall include all food waste and refuse, both vegetable and animal, from kitchens, households, restaurants, food stores and other commercial establishments for the preparation, consumption, sale, dealing in, storage and processing of foods and food products.
As used in this Article, the term "refuse" shall include tree and shrub trimmings, leaves, grass,
weeds, garden vegetation, waste paper, scrap lumber, ashes, scrap plaster and other building materials, packing boxes, cartons, excelsior, waste hay, waste straw, combustible packing materials and refuse, broken glass, tin cans and containers, surgical or sanitary dressings and pads and other waste materials from hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes and old people's homes and waste articles, substances and materials.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1311, 10/27/81)

Sec. 4-302  GARBAGE AND REFUSE; BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
A.		It shall be unlawful to burn garbage, tree and shrub trimmings, leaves, grass, weeds, garden vegetation, or other refuse and combustible material within the limits of the City either in open and unconfined or closed burning on private or public property, except that the Chief of the Fire Department and the City Administrator may issue a special permit for the burning of buildings or structures which have either been condenmed or which are being burned in a practice exercise for the Fire Department of the City.
B.	It shall be unlawful to keep, store or maintain in any building or on any premises, any waste, refuse, debris, rubbish, garbage or other loose combustible material, except recognized and permitted fuels, in such manner or in such quantities as will substantially and excessively increase the danger of fire on such premises and endanger adjacent premises within the municipal limits.
C.	Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, burning of refuse may be allowed in commercial or industrial incinerators which shall meet the following requirements:
1.	All incinerators shall be provided with approved feed and draft doors.
2.	All stacks, vents, port and other openings shall be provided with steel mesh covers to retain burning embers and flying ash, and the openings in said screen mesh shall not
be greater than 0.50 square inches.  Ash space, properly confined to prevent	scattering
of hot ashes shall be provided in incinerators in an amount equal to or   more   than one-fourth (114) of the combustion volume of the device, and adequate provisions for removal of ashes shall be provided.
3.	All incinerators shall be provided with draft doors or protected openings of sufficient area to insure proper combustion in the device.   Air shall be admitted under the fuel bed  in  all types  of incinerators  in proper  amount  and further provisions  made that  a
minimum of twenty-five (25%) per cent of the total air of  combustion  be  admitted above the fire bed to insure complete burning of gases and to destroy noxious  odors arising from such combustion.
4.	Grates, when used, shall be provided with a minimum of fifty (50%) per cent openings and shall be so constructed to retain all burning embers. Air openings around or above fuel bed shall have an area of not less than twenty-five (25%) per cent at the effective grate opening.
5.	Construction and fire safety provisions of incinerators which are an integral part of a building or structure shall conform to the standards prescribed by the National Board of Fire Underwriters  and the American  Gas Association's  Specifications for gas
 
burning equipment.
6.	Incinerators shall be sized in such manner as to be adequate to handle the disposal problem to which they are applied. Grossly undersized incinerators which are
a nuisance in operation may be condenmed and removed.
7.	Incinerators as defined under this Section shall be those totally enclosed within the building or structure, and specifically shall exclude portable units such as wire
basket, light metal and light refractory and further specifically excluding "burn barrels".
8.	No private or home incinerators shall be allowed hereunder. Wood burning fire places or stoves for decorative or heating purposes shall not be considered incinerators for the purpose of this section.
D.	Notwithstanding any other provisions contained herein, the City Council may, designate a period not to exceed a total of nine (9) days during the month of April and a total of nine (9) days during the month of November for burning with a permit each year and authorize the City Fire Chief to issue burning permits within the City of Blair city limits during the designated time periods. During the designated periods of burning with a permit, it shall be permissible to burn only tree trimmings less than one-half ( 1/2) inch in diameter, shrubs, grass and weed trimmings, leaves and garden vegetation. Such burning shall only be permitted during the hours of eight (8:00) o'clock a.m. to sundown on the dates designated. (Added by Ordinance 2138 03/25/2008; Amended by Ordinance 2210 10/11/2011)
E.	During the approved burning with a permit periods, it shall be unlawful to;
I.	Allow any burning on the public right of way including but not limited to streets and alleys,
2.	Allow any smoke generating debris to continue to generate smoke past the designated time deadlines.
3.	To leave any fire, whether actively burning or smoldering, unattended,
4.	Not to have water immediately available within fifteen (15) feet of the fire until all fire is fully extinguished
(Added by Ordinance 2138 03/25/2008; Amended by Ordinance 2210 10/11/2011)
F.	Violations of these Sections shall be subject to Section 4-602 (Violations Bureau) and carry fines  as set forth in Section 4-603 of the Municipal Code. (For Penalties also refer to Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule) (Added by Ordinance 2138 03/25/2008; Amended by Ordinance 2210 I 011112011)

Sec. 4-303   GARBAGE AND REFUSE.	All garbage and solid waste except grass and leaves generated and derived within the corporate limits shall be deposited and disposed of at the Douglas County Landfill located near Elk City, Nebraska. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose or dump garbage or solid waste except grass and leaves at any other place or site other than said Douglas County Landfill or the municipal collection center for garbage and solid waste. It shall be unlawful for any person to comingle grass and leaves with solid waste as defined hereinafter. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose or dump grass and leaves in any landfill or at any other site not specifically designated or properly licensed or authorized for depositing grass and leaves.
For the purpose or this section, solid waste is defined as follows:  Solid waste shall have the same meaning as Sec. 81-1502(26) R.R.S. Neb. and shall further include but not be limited to garbage, trash, rubbish, and junk as set forth in Sec. 81-1502 et seq. R.R.S. Neb. specifically excluding, however, grass and leaves which are hereby specifically excluded.
 
Sec. 4-304 GARBAGE AND REFUSE, GRASS AND LEAVES, AUTHORIZED HAULERS. It
shall be unlawful for any person for hire or other consideration to collect, transport, or dispose of any garbage, solid waste, or grass and leaves as defined in Sec. 4-303 generated or derived within the municipal limits without a license or other authority from the municipality.

Sec. 4-305	GARBAGE AND REFUSE; FAILURE TO KEEP GARBAGE IN CONTAINER.
The failure or neglect of any person to place, deposit or keep garbage emanating from his home, building or place of business in a container as required by this Chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful.

Sec. 4-306 GARBAGE CONTAINERS; TIGHT-FITTING LIDS OR COVERS REQUIRED;
CAPACITY; NUMBER REQUIRED; WHERE PLACED. It shall be the duty of every owner, manager, householder, tenant and occupant of any dwelling, trailer house or building, and the owner or manager of any hospital or business house of any kind to provide storage of trash or garbage which shall be watertight and shall have a tight-fitting cover or lid, which covers or lids shall remain on such containers at all times except when container is being filled or emptied. Garbage and trash may be placed in the same container. The number of containers required for each unit shall be established by the amount of garbage and trash normally produced during a collection period. Such containers shall be kept or placed, if inside, on the ground floor, accessible to the collectors and, if outside, at the rear of the lot and accessible to collectors, but not on any street, alley or public place. Such containers must be so arranged that they cannot be turned over. In case of dispute as to the place where such containers are to be kept, then such place is to be determined by the City Administrator or someone designated by him for such duty. All garbage and other refuse material as defined above, but excluding mowings from lawns, trees or other tree limbs and refuse building materials, shall be, by the owners, tenants, managers and producers thereof, placed in such containers and such containers shall at all times be kept clean and in a sanitary condition by the respective owners, tenants, managers, or producers of such garbage and other refuse materials.

Sec.	4-307	GARBAGE  CONTAINERS;   NONMETAL  CONTAINER  PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTION. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to maintain, use, keep or allow to exist on the premises occupied by or belonging to such person nonmetal garbage container. Provided, however, such containers may be constructed of serviceable synthetics.

Sec.  4-308	GARBAGE   CONTAINERS;   PERFORATED   OR  LEAKY   CONTAINER
PROHIBITED. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to maintain, use, keep or allow to exist on the premises occupied by or belonging to such person perforated or leaky garbage containers.

Sec.  4-309	GARBAGE   CONTAINERS;   BUSINESS,   COMMERCIAL   AND  MULTI­
PLE-DWELLING AREAS. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to maintain in the business, commercial or multiple-dwelling areas any container for trash, papers, refuse or any inflammable material that does not prevent the scattering, leaking, blowing or the exposure thereof to fire.

Sec. 4-310 GARBAGE AND REFUSE; BURNING PROHIBITED. It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to burn within the City, any garbage,  as defined herein. (Amended by Ord. No. 1311, 10/27/81)
 



















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4.  Miscellaneous Health Regulations

Sec. 4-401 CONTAGIOUS OR INFECTIOUS DISEASES; PARENT'S DUTIES; CONTROL.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or person having custody of any child or children to fail, neglect or refuse to secure proper medical attendance at the illness of such child or children within said City from any contagious or infectious disease. The Board of Health shall have control of all contagious, infectious or malignant diseases and the care, treatment, regulation and prevention thereof within the City.

Sec.  4-402	RULES  AND  REGULATIONS  OF  STATE  DEPARTMENT  OF HEALTH;
INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE. Three (3) copies of the most recent rules and regulations relating to public health published by the Department of Health of the State ofNebraska and adopted by said State Board of Health shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk and the same are hereby incorporated by reference into this Codebook insofar as the same applyto Cities of the First Class.








































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 5.  Nuisances

Sec. 4-501 NUISANCES, GENERALLY DEFINED. A nuisance consists in doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either:

1.	Injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others.
2.	Offends decency.
3.	Is offensive to the senses.
4.	Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage any stream, public park, parkway, square, street, or highway in the Municipality.
5.	In any way renders other persons insecure in life or the use of property, or
6.	Essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property, or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-240, 18-1720) (Ord. No. 1181, 2/24/76) (Penalties refer to Sections 4-601 through 4-603 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 4-501.01 STREAMS,  LITTER; SPECIFICALLY DEFINED. For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:

STREAMS: Streams shall include all streams, creeks or water courses within the City of Blair, Nebraska, including, but not limited to, Cauble Creek and South Creek, including all of their branches and watercourses leading thereto, and specifically including the channel of the same. Streams are further defined as any depression or draw two feet below the surrounding lands and having a continuous outlet to a stream, creek, watercourse or river.

LITTER: Inaddition to any other definition oflitter contained in this Code, litter shall also include, for the purposes of this Article only, concrete, stone, gravel, crushed rock or stone, sand, dirt and similar earthen materials. (Penalties refer to Sections 4-601 through 4-603 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 4-501.02 LITTERING ON CITY PROPERTY.	It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, deposit, leave or permit any litter to be left, deposited or placed on any Blair City owned property at any time whether or not the property is open to the public. (Penalties refer to Sections 4-601 through 4-603 or Addendum to the Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2164 05/12/2009)

Sec. 4-502 NUISANCES; SPECIFICALLY DEFINED. The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving, or permitting of any of the following specific acts, omissions, places, conditions, and things are hereby declared to be nuisances:

1.	Any odorous, putrid, unsound or unwholesome grain, meat, hides, skins, feathers, vegetable matter, or the whole or any part of any dead animal, fish, or fowl.
2.	Privies, vaults, cesspools, dumps, pits or like places which are not securely protected from flies or rats, or which are foul or malodorous.
 

3.	Filthy, littered or trash-covered cellars, houseyards, barnyards, stable-yards, factory-yards, mill yards, vacant areas in rear of stores, granaries, vacant lots, houses, buildings, or premises.
4.	Animal manure.
5.	Liquid household waste, human excreta, garbage, butcher's trimmings and offal, parts offish or any waste vegetable or animal matter in any quantity. Provided, nothing herein contained shall prevent the temporary retention of waste in receptacles in a manner provided by the Municipality.
6.	Tin cans, bottles, glass, cans, ashes, small pieces of scrap iron, wire metal articles, bric-a­
brac, broken stone or cement, broken crockety, broken glass, broken plaster, and all trash or abandoned material, unless the same be kept in covered bins or galvanized iron receptacles.
7.	Trash, litter, rags, accumulations of barrels, boxes, crates, packing crates, mattresses, bedding, excelsior, packing hay, straw or other pacldng material, lumber and or fire wood not neatly piled, scrap iron, tin or other metal not neatly piled, old automobiles or parts thereof, or any other waste materials when any of said articles or materials create a condition in which flies or rats may breed or multiply, or which may be a fire danger or which are so unsightly as to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof.
8.	Any unsightly building, billboard, or other structure, or any old, abandoned or partially destroyed building or structure or any building or structure commenced and left unfinished, which said buildings, billboards or other structures are either a fire hazard, a menace to the public health or safety, or are so unsightly as to depreciate the value of property in the vicinity thereof.
9.	All places used or maintained as junk yards, or dumping grounds, or for the wrecking and
dissembling of automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinety of any kind, or for the storing or leaving of worn-out, unlicensed, inoperable, unregistered, wrecked or abandoned automobiles, trucks, tractors, or machinety of any ldnd, or of any of the parts thereof, or for the storing or leaving of any machinery or equipment used by contractors or builders or by other persons, which said places are kept or maintained so as to essentially interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by others, or which are so unsightly as to tend to depreciate property values in the vicinity thereof.
10.	Stagnant water petmitted or maintained on any lot or piece of ground.
11.	Stockyards, granaries, mills, pig pens, cattle pens, chicken pens or any other place, building or enclosure, in which animals or fowls of any kind are confined or on which are stored tankage or any other animal or vegetable matter, or on which any animal or vegetable matter including grain is being processed, when said places in which said animals are confined, or said premises on which vegetable or animal matter is located, are maintained and kept in such a manner that foul and noxious odors are permitted to emanate therefrom, to the annoyance of inhabitants of the Municipality, or are maintained and kept in such a manner as to be injurious to the public health.
12.	Rock, gravel, stone, pebbles or other loose rock like material that moves or travels from a private driveway and/or real estate and comes to rest or is deposited on any public street or public right of way within the City Limits.
13.	All other things specifically designated as nuisances elsewhere in this Code. (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-240, 18-1720) (Ord. No  1369, 2/24/76).
(Penalties refer to Sections 4-601 through 4-603 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee
 

Schedule) (Amended by Ordinance 2082 08/22/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2306 6/14/2016).

Sec. 4-502.01 NUISANCES; LITTER WITHIN STREAMS. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is in control of any property to place or cause to be placed on his or her property, or any other property, or allow to remain on his or her property any litter within any stream as said terms are defined hereinabove; provided, however, that such act will not be unlawful if a specific written permit for such activity is obtained under any other provisions of the Municipal Code of the City of Blair, Nebraska, or from the appropriate regulatory agency of the United States Government; provided, however, a written permit from the appropriate governmental agency of the United States Government is an affamative defense, and it shall be the burden of the person who owns, is in control of, places or causes to be placed or allowed to remain any litter within any stream to provide satisfactory evidence  of such written permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as relieving any person from state or federal permit requirements. (Penalties refer to Sections 4-601 through 4-603 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 4-503 NUISANCES; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE. It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee of real estate, or the officers thereof if such entity is a corporation, in the Municipality to keep such real estate free of public nuisances.
The City Administrator or the Chief of Police shall have the power to investigate all complaints or violations of this section an if they find that such property owner or lessee has allowed such nuisance, they  shall cause the property owner or lessee to be served with written notice directing them to abate the nuisance within five (5) days of the receipt of the notice.
It shall be unlawful to fail to abate such nuisance and any person failing to abate such
nuisance within five (5) days after receiving notice to do so shall be deemed guilty of a Class III misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the minimum fines as set forth by the Statutes of the State of Nebraska. The court, as part of the judgment shall order the owner to abate such nuisance. In addition, an authorized agent of the municipality may abate said nuisance at the expense of the owner or lessee from the land whereon such nuisance existed and the cost of same shall be levied, equalized, and assessed as are other special assessments. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230, 16-240, 18-1720)

Sec. 4-503.01 NUISANCES IN STREAMS; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.  Whenever the City
Administrator, or his authorized representative, determines that any litter deposited or existing within a stream causes imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare, particularly where such litter is determined to cause an obstruction to the channel, stream, watercourse, or flood way affected, then the City Administrator, or his designated agent, may remove such litter at the expense of the owner or person in control of the land on which such litter is found and the land immediately adjacent thereto, if such land was used as the source of such litter or as the place of access for the disposition of such litter.  In cases where the City Administrator, or his designated agent, determines that such danger is less remote than imminent, he/she may notify, in writing, such owner or person in control of such land to remove the litter within a reasonable time period, not less than ten (10) days from notification.  Ifthe owner or person in control of such land fails or refuses to so remove the litter, the City Administrator, or his designated agent, may remove it at the expense of the owner or person in
 

control of the land; provided, further, that the reasonable expense associated with the removal or abatement of such litter shall be levied, equalized and assessed as are other special assessments as provided by law. The remedy provided to the City for the removal or abatement of such litter and assessment of the cost thereof shall not be deemed the exclusive remedy to the City for such violations but all of said acts shall remain enforceable as other violations  of this Code and the penalties described or applicable thereto may be applied in lieu of or in addition to the remedies provided herein (Amended by Ordinance 2306 6/14/2016).

Sec. 4-504 NUISANCES; JURISDICTION. The City Administrator and the Chief of Police of the Municipality or their designated agents are directed to enforce this Municipal Code against all nuisances. The jurisdiction of the City Administrator, Chief of Police, and court shall extend to, and the territorial application of this Chapter shall include, all territory adjacent to the limits of the Municipality within the two (2) mile zoning jurisdiction thereof and all territory within the corporate limits. (Neb. Rev. Stat.  §18-1720) (Ord. No. 1181, 2/24/76) (Amended by Ordinance 2306 6/14/2016).

SECTION 4-505 Reserved for Future Use.


Sec. 4-506 NUISANCES, WEEDS, GRASSES, WORTHLESS VEGETATION AND LITTER.
In addition to the definitions as provided in Sections 4-501 to 4-504 inclusive, a nuisance is hereby declared to be and defined as permitting, allowing, or maintaining any growth of eight (8) inches or more in height of weeds, grasses, or worthless vegetation, or to litter or cause litter to be deposited or remain on any premises in the municipality except in proper receptacles.

1.	For the purposes of this section, litter shall include but not be limited to: (i) trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, paper, rags, and ashes; (ii) wood, plaster, cement, brick, or stone building rubble; (iii) grass, leaves, and worthless vegetation; (iv) offal and dead animals; and (v) any machine or machines, vehicle or vehicles that are unlicensed, inoperable, unregistered, wrecked or abandoned, or parts of a machine or vehicle, appliances, electronics and household goods and furnishings which have lost their identity, character, utility, or serviceability as such through deterioration, dismantling, or the ravages of time, are inoperative or unable to perform their intended functions, or are cast off, discarded, or thrown away or left as waste, wreckage, or junk.
2.	For the purposes of this section, weeds shall include but not be limited to: bindweed (convolvulus arvensis), puncture vine (tribulus terrestris), leafy spurge (euphorbia esula), Canada thistle (cirsium arvense), perennial peppergrass (lepidium draba), Russian knapweed (centaurea picris), Johnson grass (sorghum halepense), nodding or musk thistle, quack grass (agropyron   repens), perennial sow thistle  (sonchus  arvensis),  horse  nettle  (solanum carolinense), bull thistle (cirsium lanceolatum), buchthom (rahmnus sp.) (toum), hemp plant (cannabis sativa), and ragweed (ambrosiaceae).
3.	Any owner or occupant of a lot or piece of ground shall, upon conviction of violating such ordinance, be guilty of a Class V misdemeanor.
(Amended by Ordinance 2306 6/14/2016)
 

Sec. 4-507 NUISANCES; SWIMMING POOLS. In order to provide protection against potential drownings and near drownings by restricting access to swimming pools, it shall be unlawful for any person to have a swimming pool as defined in 4-507.01 on any property within the City of Blair without compliance with all requirements of this ordinance. Failure to comply with any requirement herein shall be declared a nuisance. (Penalties refer to Sections 4-601 through 4-603 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule)

1.	Each swimming pool must be completely surrounded by a barrier as defined in 4-507.01.
2.	The top of the barrier shall be at least 48 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches measured on the side of the barrier which faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, such as an above-ground pool, the barrier may be at ground level, such as the pool structure, or mounted on top of the pool structure. Where the baiTier is mounted on top of the pool structure, the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier shall be 4 inches.
3.	Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a 4-inch-diameter sphere.
4.	Solid barriers which do not have openings, such as a masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
5.	Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between
vertical members shall not exceed 1% inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1% inches in width.
6.	Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 4 inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1% inches in width.
7.	Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be a 2Y4-inch square unless the fence has slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce the openings to not more than 1% inches.
8.	Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the maximum opening formed by the diagonal members shall not be more than 1% inches.
9.	Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Section 4-507 (1) through (8) above and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall:
a.	Remain locked at all times when the pool is not directly supervised, or
b.	Open outward away from the pool and shall be self-closing and have a self­ latching device. Gates other than pedestrian access gates shall have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less
 

than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism and openings shall comply with the following:
1.	The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches below the top of the gate; and
n.   The gate and barrier shall have no opening larger than Yz inch within 18
inches of the release mechanism.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2245 4/14/2013)

Sec. 4-507.01 BARRIER, SWIMMING POOL; SPECIFICALLY DEFINED. For the purpose of
this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:


BARRIER: A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof which completely surrounds a swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.

SWIMMING POOL: Any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that is capable of containing water over 24 inches deep. This includes in-ground, above-ground and on-ground swimming pools, hot tubs and spas. Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover which complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the barrier provisions ofthis Article. (Amended by Ordinance No. 2245 4/14/2013)

SECTION 4-508 Reserved for Future Use.


Sec. 4-509 NOTICE TO ABATE AND REMOVE. Notice to abate and remove a nuisance shall be given to each owner or owner's duly authorized agent and to the occupant, if any, by conspicuously posting the notice on the lot or ground upon which the nuisance is to be abated and removed or by personal service or certified mail. Within five (5) days of such notice, the owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground may request a hearing with the city to appeal the decision to abate or remove a nuisance by filing a written appeal with the city clerk. A hearing on the appeal shall be held within fourteen (14) days and the hearing officer shall render a decision within five (5) business days following the conclusion of the hearing. Ifthe owner or occupant of the lot or piece of ground does not request a hearing with the city or fails to comply with the order to abate and remove the nuisance, the city may have such work done at the expense of the owner. If the expense from the work performed by the city pursuant to this section remains unpaid for a period of two (2) months after such work is completed, the city may either (a) levy and assess the costs, processing fees and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground so benefited in the same manner as other special taxes for improvements are levied and assessed or (b) recover in a civil action the costs and expenses of the work upon the lot or piece of ground. (Amended by Ordinance No. 2245 4/14/2013) (Amended by Ordinance 2306 06/14/2016).

(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 6.  Violations Bureau/Penal Provision


Sec. 4-601 VIOLATION; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State of Nebraska, Section 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly. (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec 4-602 VIOLATIONS BUREAU. A Violations Bureau for the City of Blair is hereby created pursuant to Section 18-1729 R.R.S. Neb. for the purpose of collecting penalties for nuisance violations.
Any person accused of a violation as established by Sections 4-302, 4-501, 4-501.01, 4-
501.2	, 4-502, 4-502.01, 4-506 and 4-507 inclusive may within ten (10) days after the date of issuance of the citation of the violation and before the appearance date thereon dispose of the citation by appearing at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair and remitting full payment of the penalty assessed for the specific violation.
Any person may plead not guilty to the citation and he or she may appear before the County
Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on the date and at the time specified on the citation.
At the time of the commission of the alleged violation, the accused shall be served with printed notice informing the accused of his or her options in disposing of the citation as noted hereinbefore.
Ifthe accused fails to appear at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair or before the
County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on or before the date specified on the citation, a warrant for his or her arrest shall be issued by the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska. (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2164 5/12/2009) (Amended by Ordinance 2245 5/14/2013)

Sec. 4-603 NUISANCES, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, use, place, deposit, leave, pennit, or create or in any other way allow a nuisance as defined in Sections 4 302, 4-501, 4-501.01, 4-501.02, 4-502, 4-502.01, 4-506 and 4-507 inclusive, and any person found in violation hereof shall be deemed guilty of a Class illmisdemeanor and shall be subject to for the first offense in any one calendar year the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), for the second offense in any one calendar year the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and for the third and subsequent offenses in any one calendar year the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Further, the penalty shall include the reasonable costs of any cleanup expended by the Municipality. Each day a nuisance is permitted to exist shall be deemed a separate violation hereunder. (Ord. No. 1574) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2164 5/12/2009) (Amended by Ordinance 2245 5/14/2013)









(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapters TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Article 1. Definitions

Sec. 5-101 DEFINITIONS. The words and phrases used in this Chapter, pertaining to motor vehicles and traffic regulations, shall be construed as defined in Chapter 60 of the Reissue Revised Statutes of Nebraska, 1943, as now existing or hereafter amended. Ifnot defined in the designated statute, the word or phrase shall have its common meaning.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-103 thru 60-136.01)













































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2.  Municipal Traffic Regulations

Sec. 5-201 AUTOMATIC SIGNAL SYSTEM. At each intersection where an automatic signal system is in operation, all vehicular and pedestrian traffic crossing such street intersection shall be governed by such automatic signal system. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any such signal. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6, 119 thru 60-6, 121, 60-6, 123)

1.	(a) Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed straightthrough or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn, but vehicular traffic,  including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited;
(b)	Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications shown at the same time, and such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and
(c)	Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as provided inSections
60-601 to 60-602, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk;
2.	(a) Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow signal is thereby warned thatthe related green movement is being terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the intersection, and upon display of a steady yellow signal vehicular traffic shall stop before entering the nearest  crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in safety a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection; and
(b) Pedestrians facing a steady yellow  signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in Sections 60-601 to 60-602, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before  a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway;
3.	(a)       Vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal alone shall stop at a clearly-marked stop line, but if there is no such line then before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, of ifthere is no crosswalk then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown except as provided in subdivisions 3 (b) and 3 (c) of this section;
(b)	Except where a traffic-control device is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal may cautiously enter the intersection to make a right turn after stopping as required by subdivision 3 (a) of this section.
Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
(c)	Except where a traffic-control device is in place prohibiting a turn, vehicular traffic facing a steady red signal at the intersection of two one-way streets may cautiously enter the intersection to make a left turn after stopping as required by subdivision 3 (a) of this section. Such vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and persons riding bicycles lawfully within an
 


(d)



4.
 
adjacent crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in Sections 60-601 to 60-602, pedestrians facing a steady red signal alone shall not enter the roadway; and
If a traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
 

Sec. 5-202  PEDESTRIANS, CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS; YIELD RIGHT OF WAY.

1.	Every pedestrian who crosses a roadway at any point other than within a marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
2.	Any pedestrian who crosses a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
3.	Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked crosswalk.
4.	No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless authorized by traffic-control devices and, when authorized to cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
5.	Local authorities and the Department of Roads, by erecting appropriate official traffic-control devices, may, within their respective jurisdictions, prohibit pedestrians from crossing any roadway in a business district or any designated highway except in a crosswalk. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,154)

Sec. 5-203 TRUCK ROUTES. The Governing Body may, by resolution, designate certain streets in the Municipality that trucks shall travel upon, and it shall be unlawful for persons operating such trucks to travel on other streets than those designated for trucks, unless to pick up or deliver goods, wares, or merchandise, and in that event, the operator of such truck shall return to such truck routes
as soon as possible in traveling through or about the Municipality.  The Governing Body shall cause notices to be posted or shall erect signs indicating the streets so designated as truck routes.
In addition to the restrictions provided for hereinabove, the Chief of Police or Director of Public Works shall have the authority to prohibit any truck from traveling upon any street other than those designated for trucks regardless of its pick up or delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, or other cargo to prevent injuries to the streets of the Municipality from vehicles which weight would be injurious to such streets. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-209)

(NOTE:  See Resolution No. 2011-8 for definition of"Commercial Truck" and additional guidelines for truck routes.)

Sec. 5-204 ONE-WAY TRAFFIC.  The Governing Body may, by resolution, provide for one-way
 
travel in any street, or alley located in the Municipality and shall provide for appropriate signs and markings when said streets have been so designated by resolution.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)

Sec. 5-205 TRAFFIC LANES; DESIGNATION. The Governing Body may, by resolution, mark lanes for traffic street pavements at such places as they may deem advisable.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680)

Sec. 5-206 TURNING; "U" TURNS PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful to turn any vehicle within the City so as to proceed in the opposite direction and make a "U" turn or one hundred eighty (180) degree turn along the route of any state or federal highway or any street within the limits of the City.

Sec. 5-207 TURNING; HAND SIGNALS. A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred ( 100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. The signals herein required shall be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by a signal device of a type approved by the Department of Roads. The hand and arm signals herein required shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner: STOP or decreased speed, hand and arm extended downward; LEFT TURN, hand and arm extended horizontally; RIGHT TURN, hand and arm extended upward.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6, 161 thru 60-6, 163)

Sec. 5-208 TURNING; GENERALLY. Vehicles turning to the right into an intersecting street shall approach such intersection in the lane of traffic nearest to the right hand side of the highway and must turn the corner as near the right hand curb as possible to keep between the curb to the right and the center of the intersection of the two (2) streets. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left shall approach such center line of the highway, and in turning shall pass as near as possible to the center ofthe intersection, passing as closely as practicable to the right thereof before turning such vehicle to the left. For the purposes of this Section, the center of the intersection shall mean the meeting point of the medial lines of the highways intersecting one another. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,159)

Sec. 5-209	RIGHT OF WAY.	When two (2) vehicles approach, or enter an intersection at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right when the paths of such vehicles intersect and there is danger of a collision, unless otherwise directed by a Law Enforcement Officer stationed at the intersection. The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection, or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard. The driver of a vehicle on any street shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing such street within any clearly marked crosswalk, or at any regular pedestrian crossing at the end of a block where the movement of is being regulated by law enforcement officers or traffic direction devices. The driver of a vehicle entering a Municipal street from a private road, or drive shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such streets. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,146 thru 60-6,154)

Sec.  5-210	RIGHT-OF-WAY;	OVERTAKING   AND  PASSING  RULES;  VEHICLES
PROCEEDING IN THE SAME DIRECTION. Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding inthe same direction:

1.	The driver of the vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall first give a visible signal of his intention and shall pass to the left of the other vehicle at a safe
 
distance and shall not again drive to the right of the roadway until safely clear of the vehicle being overtaken;
2.	The driver of a vehicle being overtaken shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle; and
3.	The driver of a vehicle overtaking bicycles, animals, animal-propelled-vehicles, or farm vehicles proceeding in the same direction may give an audible signal of his intention to pass from one hundred (100) feet to three hundred (300) feet from the vehicle or animal and then pass without giving another audible signal.

Sec. 5-211 RIGHT-OF-WAY; EMERGENCY VEHICLES. Upon the immediate approach of any authorized emergency vehicle which makes use of proper audible or visual signs:
1.	The driver of any other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to and as close as possible to the right hand edge or curb of the roadway, or to either edge or curb of a one-way roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such a position until such emergency vehicle passes, unless otherwise directed by any police or traffic officer; and
2.	Any pedestrian using such roadway shall yield the right-of-way until such emergency vehicle passes, unless otherwise directed by any police or traffic officer.

Sec. 5-212  POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; GENERALLY.  Upon all highways of
sufficient width, one-way streets excepted, the driver of a vehicle shall drive the same on the right half of the roadway. In passing or meeting other vehicles, drivers shall give each other at least one half ( 112)of the main traveled portion of the roadway.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6, 131)

Sec. 5-213  POSITION OF VEHICLE ON HIGHWAY; STREET CENTER LINE.  A vehicle
shall not be driven to the center line of the highway in overtaking, or passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and free from oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance to permit such overtaking and passing to be made in safety.

Sec. 5-214 BACKING. Before backing, unceasing vigilance must be exercised not to injure those behind.   The driver of a parked vehicle about to back shall give moving vehicles the right-of-way.

Sec. 5-215 DRIVING IN SIDEWALK SPACE. No vehicle shall be driven within any sidewalk space, except a permanent or temporary driveway.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6, 178)

Sec. 5-216 STOPS; MANDATORY. The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, private road, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately before driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across such alley, driveway, road, or building entrance, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching on any sidewalk extending across such alley, driveway, road, or building entrance. Before entering the highway, he or she shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such highway.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,149)

Sec. 5-217 SIGNS, SIGNALS. The Governing Body may, by resolution, provide for the placing of stop signs, or other signs, signals, standards, or mechanical devices in any street or alley under the Municipality's jurisdiction for the purpose of regulating, or prohibiting traffic thereon. Such resolution shall describe the portion of the street or alley wherein traffic is to be regulated or prohibited; the
 
regulation or prohibition; the location where such sign, signal, standard or mechanical device shall be placed; and the hours when such regulation or prohibition shall be effective in the event such regulation has specific hours. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with such regulation, or prohibition.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,119 thru 60-6,121, 60-680)

Sec. 5-218 STOP SIGNS. Every person operating any vehicle shall, upon approaching any stop sign erected in accordance with the ordinances prescribed heretofore, cause such vehicle to come to a complete stop. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,119 thru 60-6,121, 60-680)

Sec. 5-219 STOP; FOR SCHOOL BUS. The driver of any motor vehicle upon meeting or overtaking, from the front or rear, any school bus on which the stop warning signal lights are flashing shall reduce the speed of such vehicle to not more than twenty-five (25) miles per hour and shall bring such vehicle to a complete stop when the school bus stop signal arm is extended and shall remain stopped until the stop-arm is retracted and the school bus driver resumes motion or until signaled by the bus driver to proceed. This Section shall not apply to approaching traffic traveling in the opposite direction on dual highway divided by a median strip.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,175)

Sec. 5-220 DEFACING OR INTERFERING WITH SIGNS AND SIGNALS. It shall be unlawful
for any person to willfully deface, injure, or remove or obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal.

Sec. 5-221 SCHOOL CROSSING ZONES; ENTERING, OVERTAKING AND PASSING.
It shall be unlawful for:

(1)	A person operating a motor vehicle to enter or cross a school crossing zone designated by the City Council for the City of Blair, Nebraska, and at which appropriate regulatory signs have been erected, when a pedestrian or pedestrians are in the designated crosswalk, without first coming to a complete stop; and the operator of such motor vehicle shall not proceed across the designated crosswalk before the pedestrian or pedestrians have left the lane of traffic of such motor vehicle;
(2)	A person operating a motor vehicle to overtake and pass another vehicle in any school crossing zone designated by the City Council for the City of Blair, Nebraska at which appropriate signs have been erected, in which the street has only one lane of traffic in each direction. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6, 134.01)

Sec. 5-222 BACKING TO CURB. No vehicle shall remain backed up to the curb except when actually loading or unloading. A truck tractor attached to a trailer backed up to a curb shall be turned parallel to the curb. Such backed vehicle shall comply with all other parking and traffic laws except where written permission is granted by the Chief of Police for a limited and special purpose.

Sec. 5-223 FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow any emergency vehicle or an ambulance responding to a call.

Sec. 5-224 OBSTRUCTING FUNERAL PROCESSIONS. It shall be unlawful for any person to delay or in any way interfere with any funeral procession or drive any vehicle through such funeral procession.
 

Sec. 5-225   DRIVING ON HIGHWAY  SHOULDERS PROHIBITED;  EXCEPTIONS.   No
person shall drive on the shoulders ofhighways and streets of the City of Blair except that: ( 1) Vehicles may be driven on the shoulders of highways (a) by federal mail carriers while delivering United States mail or (b) to safely remove a vehicle from a roadway; (2) Implements of husbandry may be driven on shoulders of highways; and (3) bicycles may be operated on paved shoulders ofhighways included in the state highway system.

Sec. 5-226 ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED. The practice of engine braking, commonly known as "Jake Braking" is prohibited within the corporate limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class II Misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State of Nebraska, and upon conviction thereof,  shall be sentenced accordingly. (11197) (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701 through 5-705 or Addendum to  Code Violations  Bureau  Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-227 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY; OWNER; REQUIREMENTS; PROHIBITED ACTS; VIOLATION; PENALTY; DISMISSAL OF CITATION; WHEN.	(1)  It shall  be
unlawful for any owner of a motor vehicle which is being operated with In Transit decals pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-320, which is being operated pursuant to Neb. Rev. Stat.§ 60-320.01, or which is required to be registered in this city and which is operated on a public highway of this city to allow the operation of the motor vehicle on a public highway of this city without having a current and effective automobile liability policy, evidence of insurance, or proof of financial responsibility. The owner shall be presumed to know of the operation of his or her motor vehicle on a public highway of this city in violation of this section when the motor vehicle is being operated by a person other than the owner. An owner of a motor vehicle who operates the motor vehicle or allows the operation of the motor vehicle in violation of this section shall be guilty ofa Class II misdemeanor and shall be advised by the court that his or her motor vehicle operator's license, motor vehicle certificate ofregistration, and license plates will be suspended by the Department of Motor Vehicles until he or she complies with Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-505.02 and 60-528. Upon conviction the owner shall have his or her motor vehicle operator's license, motor vehicle certificate of registration, and license plates suspended by the department until he or she complies with Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-505.02 and 60-528. The owner shall also be required to comply with Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-528 for a continuous period of three years after the violation. This subsection shall not apply to motor vehicles registered in another state.
(2)	An owner who is unable to produce a current and effective automobile liability policy, evidence of insurance, or proof of financial responsibility upon the request of a law enforcement officer shall be allowed ten days after the date of the request to produce proof to the appropriate prosecutor or county attorney that a current and effective automobile liability policy or proof of financial responsibility was in existence for the motor vehicle at the time of such request. Upon presentation of such proof, the citation shall be dismissed by the prosecutor or county attorney without costtothe owner and no prosecution for the offense cited shall occur.
(3)	The department shall, for any person convicted for a violation of this section, reinstate such person's operator's license, motor vehicle certificate ofregistration, and license plates and rescind any order requiring such person to comply with Neb. Rev. Stat.§ 60-528 without cost to such person upon presentation to the director that, atthe time such person was cited for a violation of this section, a current and effective automobile liability policy or proof of financial responsibility was in existence for the motor vehicle at the time the citation was issued.
 

Sec. 5-228 SCHOOL CROSSING ZONES: DESIGNATION.

(1)  Section 60-682.01 RS Neb. provides fines for operating a motor vehicle in violation of authorized speed limits and states that the fines are doubled if the violation occurs within a school crossing zone.
(2)	Section 60-6,134.01 RS Neb. and Section 5-211 (2) of the Municipal Code makes it unlawful for a person operating a motor vehicle to overtake and pass another vehicle in a school crossing zone in which the street has only one lane of traffic in each direction and provides fines for violation of that prohibition.
(3)	The City Council for the City of Blair, Nebraska ("Governing Body") may, by resolution, designate to the public any area of a street, other than a freeway, as a school crossing zone through the use of a sign or traffic control device as specified by the Governing Body in conformity with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Any school crossing zone so designated starts at the location of the first sign or traffic control device identifying the school crossing zone and continues until a sign or traffic control device indicates that the school crossing zone has ended.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-658.01)










(END OF SECTION)
 

Article 3. Operator and Vehicle Qualifications

Sec. 5-301 REGISTRATION; OPERATOR AND VEIDCLE QUALIFICATIONS. No person
shall operate any motor vehicle upon any street, or public highway without having first registered the same and without first having obtained a motor vehicle operator's license as provided by the laws of the State of Nebraska, and such vehicle shall have the registration number plates and operator's license, furnished by the State or County, displayed upon said vehicle in the manner and place provided by the laws of the State ofNebraska.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle upon any street or alley during the period that his/her operator's license has been revoked, canceled, suspended, terminated, or in any manner whatsoever terminated so as to be considered as not granting the privilege to the holder thereof to operate a motor vehicle. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-363)

Sec. 5-302 REGISTRATION; TRAILER. When any trailer shall be attached to any motor vehicle in use upon the Municipal streets, such trailer shall carry a separate registration number and rear lights as required of any other motor vehicle.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-302)

Sec. 5-303 LICENSE PLATES AND CERTIFICATES. All letters, numbers, printing, writing, and other identification marks upon such plates and certificates shall be kept clear and distinct and free from grease, dust or other blurring matter so that they may be plainly visible at all times during the daylight and under artificial light in the night time.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-324)

Sec. 5-304 VEHICLES; EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE. Transferred to 5-621.01.

Sec. 5-305 VEHICLES; UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a highway which motor vehicle is so constructed or loaded to prevent the driver from obtaining a view of the highway to the rear by looking 1backward from the driver's position, unless such vehicle is equipped with a right and left side outside mirror so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the highway for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet to the rear of such vehicle. (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-6,254)


Sec. 5-305.01  VEHICLES; WINDSHIELDS AND WINDOWS; POSTERS PROHIBITED;
WINDSHIELD EQUIPMENT; REQUIREMENTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon a highway with any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon a front windshield, sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or other paper required to be so displayed by law. Every windshield on a motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device for cleaning rain, snow or other moisture from the windshield, which device shall be constructed as to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle.

Sec. 5-306 VEHICLES; CLEARANCE LIGHTS, REQUIREMENTS. Every vehicle, including road rollers, road machinery, combines, farm machinery, wagons, racks and farm tractors (1) having a width, including load, of eighty (80") inches or more, or (2) having any part thereof or having any load thereupon which shall extend forty (40") inches or more to the left of the center of the chassis, shall display, when driven, pulled, operated or propelled on any City street during the period from one-half hour after sunset until one half hour before sunrise and at all other times when there is not sufficient light to render such vehicle clearly discernible, two (2) clearance lights on the left side of
 
such vehicle, one (1) of which shall be located at the front and display a green or amber light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of three hundred (300) feet to the front of such vehicle, and the other shall be located at the rear and display a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of three hundred (300) feet to the rear of such vehicle. The light at the rear shall be located at a sufficient distance above the tail light of such vehicle so there will not be confusion with such tail light by those approaching from the rear and the same shall be located on a line with the extreme outer point of such vehicle or the load thereon; Provided, suitable reflectors oflike color, equal visibility and of a type approved by the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of Nebraska may be substituted for such clearance lights, and Provided further, the installation of all such lamps shall be made in such a manner that no hazard will be created by their use on the highway.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,235)

Sec. 5-307 VEHICLES; DIMMING OF LIGHTS. Whenever a person operating a motor vehicle on any street in this City shall meet another person operating a motor vehicle proceeding in the opposite direction and equipped with head lamps constructed and adjusted to protect glaring or dazzling light to persons in front of such head lamps, upon signal of either person aforesaid, the other shall forthwith dim the head lamps of his motor vehicle or tilt the beams of glaring or dazzling light projecting therefrom downward so as not to blind or confuse the vision of the operator in front of such head lamps; Provided however, that the foregoing provisions shall not apply to the operators of motor vehicles aforesaid if they shall have covered the upper one-third of the head lamps thereon with a coat of paint or some other permanent material which shall cover the glass enclosing the lenses of such head lamps as provided by the laws of Nebraska.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,224)

Sec. 5-308 VEHICLE; MUFFLER. No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any highway or street unless such motor vehicle is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise or annoying smoke. It shall be unlawful to use a "muffler-cut-out" on any motor vehicle upon any highway or street.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,286)

Sec. 5-309  LOADS; PROJECTING.  Whenever the load of any vehicle shall extend more than four (4') feet beyond the rear of the bed or the body thereof, there shall be displayed at the end of such load in such position as to be clearly visible at all times in the rear of such load, a red flag, not less than twelve (12") inches both in length and width, except that  between one half hour after sunset and one half hour before sumise, there shall be displayed at the end of such load, a red light plainly visible under normal atmospheric conditions at least two hundred (200') feet from the rear of such vehicle.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,243)

Sec. 5-310  LOADS; SPILLING.  No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,286)

Sec.  5-311  OPERATION  OF  EMERGENCY  AMBULANCE   SERVICE  UNLAWFUL;
PENAL TY. It shall be unlawful for any person who is not employed by or authorized by the City of Blair or an authorized member of the Blair Volunteer Fire Department/Rescue Squad to operate, drive, or cause to be operated or driven any ambulance on the streets of the city for the purpose of furnishing emergency ambulance service, or to furnish or attempt to furnish emergency ambulance



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 3, page 2
 
service within the City of Blair.  Any person convicted hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a maximum $500.00 fine for each such conviction. Each transport or incident in which emergency ambulance service is unlawfully provided or attempted to be provided shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. Transport of a patient from a healthcare or specialized treatment facility to another healthcare or specialized treatment facility by an emergency ambulance service otherwise unauthorized herein shall not be prosecuted under this section.    (Amended by ordinance No. 2256 10/22/2013)





(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4. Parking

Sec. 5-401 VEHICLES; UNATTENDED. No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand unattended without first effectively setting the brakes thereon and, when standing upon any grade, without turning the front wheels of such vehicle to the curb or side ofthe street.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,168)

Sec. 5-402 PARKING; GENERALLY. No person shall park any vehicle, or approach the curb with a vehicle, except when headed in the direction of the traffic. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-680) (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701through5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-403 ILLEGAL PARKING IN CITY PARKING LOTS/PARKING FACILITIES. Itshall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave stand any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any City of Blair parking lots/parking facilities unless the vehicle shall be parked in the designated parking areas in accordance with the marked parking zones in each city parking lot/ parking facility. Any vehicle that shall violate this section shall be subject to being towed away at the expense of the owner of said vehicle and the owner fined. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701through5-704 or Addendum to the Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2165 5/12/2009)

Sec. 5-404 STREET PARKING. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, on any street within the City where parking has been so restricted by resolution of the governing body, or on any lot or track of ground abutting upon any street or other thoroughfare in the City between the lot line and curb line of said street unless said vehicle is owned by or permitted to park thereon by the person responsible for the maintenance of such area pursuant to Section 8-107. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701 through 5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-404.01 STREET PARKING; FIRE HYDRANTS; PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS. It shall be
unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, on any street within the Municipality in front of a private driveway or within fifteen ( 15') feet in any direction from a fire hydrant or the entrance of any fire station nor within 37.5 feet from the intersection of property lines at street intersections. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701 through 5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-405 PARKING; ALLEYS. No vehicle shall be parked in any alley, except for the purpose of loading or unloading during the time necessary to load or unload, which shall not exceed the maximum limit of one half (112) hour. Every vehicle while loading or unloading in any alley shall be parked in such manner as will cause the least obstruction possible to traffic in such alley. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60- 680) (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701 through 5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-406 TRUCK PARKING. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2175 - September 8, 2009)

Sec. 5-406.01 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any recreational vehicle, including but not limited to travel trailers, folding trailers, motor homes, utility trailers, boats, or boat trailers on any street or any portion of the municipal right of way, for more
 
than forty-eight (48) hours in a seventy-two (72) hour period. Any person failing to comply with the parking prohibition as set forth herein shall be subject to the penalties of Section 5-414 of the Municipal Code. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701through5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2060 02/28/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-407 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS. The City Council of the Municipality may, by resolution, and after proper  posting, direct the flow of traffic on any street or alley within the Municipality as one-way only. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701through5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-408 PARKING TIME. The Governing Body may, by resolution and proper posting restrict parking times on designated streets or portions thereof within the Municipality. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701through5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-409 VEHICLES; IMPOUNDING. Whenever a vehicle is found to be parked or left standing in violation of the ordinances of the Municipality, any member of the City Police Department may remove the same or cause the same to be removed to commercial storage facilities or a suitable location designation by the Chief of Police and hold the same until the owner thereof, shall pay for all reasonable costs of removal and storage, and any fines or penalties imposed by City ordinance for violation of the same.

Sec. 5-410 PARKED VEHICLES; REMOVAL. Whenever the Director of Public Works or any member of the City Police Department shall deem it advisable in the performance of his official duties to move any unoccupied vehicle parked or left standing on any street, alley or other public place, he shall cause same to be moved to a suitable nearby location and shall place and secure upon the exterior of such vehicle, in a prominent place, a statement signed by him of the reason for such removal.

Sec. 5-410.01  ILLEGAL OR IMPROPER PARKING, OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY.  The
owner of any motor vehicle or truck illegally or improperly parked pursuant to Section 5-401 through 5-410, inclusive, shall be responsible and liable for any fine or penalty as a result of such improper or illegal parking notwithstanding that the owner may or may not have been the person in control or in charge of the vehicle at such time as it was placed in violation of this code. (Ord. No. 1359) (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701 through 5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-411 VEHICLES, ABANDONED AUTOMOBILES. It shall be unlawful to abandon any automobile or recreational vehicle as defined in Section 5-406.01 on the Municipal Streets, highways, alleys, parks, or other property. An automobile or recreational vehicle shall be deemed to be abandoned ifleft unattended:
(1)  with no current license plates affixed thereto for more than six (6) hours on any public
property;
(2)	for more than twenty-four (24) hours on any public property where parking is not legally permitted;
(3)	for more than forty-eight (48) hours in a seventy-two (72) hour period ifleft on a portion of public property on which parking is legally permitted; or
(4)	for more than twenty-four (24) hours on private property if left initially without the
 
permission of the owner, or after the permission of the owner shall have been terminated. (Above amended by Ordinance 2060 02/28/2006)

Sec. 5-412 ABANDONED VEHICLES; LOCAL AUTHORITY; POWERS & DUTIES.  Any
automobile or recreational vehicle shall immediately become the property of the Municipality if, in the estimation of the Chief of Police the said automobile or recreational vehicle is of a wholesale value of one hundred ($100.00) dollars or less. In the event the automobile or recreational vehicle is of an estimated value of over one hundred ($100.00) dollars, the Chief of Police shall make a reasonable effort to contact the owner of said automobile or recreational vehicle by sending a notice to the registered owner, if known;  by sending an inquiry to the county it is registered in, if the owner is unknown; or by contacting the Director of Motor Vehicles, ifthe automobile or recreational vehicle is without license plates and the owner is unknown. If it is known to the Chief of Police that a lien or mortgage exists on the vehicle, notice shall also be sent to the lienholder or mortgagee. Ifthe owner is known and does not claim the automobile or recreational vehicle within five (5) days after the date when notice was mailed, or upon receiving word from the Director of Motor Vehicles that the owner is unknown, title will immediately vest in the City and the automobile or recreational vehicle may be sold. Any proceeds from the sale of the automobile or recreational vehicle less any expenses incurred by the City in such sale shall be held without interest for the benefit of the owner of such vehicle for a period of two (2) years. If not claimed within such period of time, the proceeds shall then be placed into the General Fund. Any person who abandons an automobile or recreational vehicle as hereinbefore defmed shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-1901 et seq.) (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701through5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance  2140  06/10/2008)

SECTIONS 5-413 and 5-414 Reserved for Future Use. SECTIONS 5-415 through 5-425 Reserved for Future Use.
Sec. 5-426 RESTRICTED PARKING LOTS; UNAUTHORIZED PARKING PROHIBITED;
TOWING; VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. Any person parking a motor vehicle in a properly posted, restricted parking lot without the consent of the owner or tenant authorized to give permission shall be guilty of an infraction and the vehicle shall be subject to being towed away at the request of such lot owner or tenant. Any person found guilty under this Section shall be subjectto the penalties provided in Section 29-436 R.R.S. Nebraska  1943 for infractions.  Ifthe identity of the operator of a motor vehicle in violation of this Section cannot be determined, the owner or person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such infraction.  When any Police Officer observes or is advised that a motor vehicle may be in violation of this Section, he or she shall make a determination as to whether a violation has in fact occurred and if so shall personally serve or attach to such motor vehicle a citation pursuant to the provision  of Section 29-424 R.R.S. Nebraska 1943 directed to the owner or operator of such vehicle, which shall set forth the nature of the violation. Any person who refuses to sign the citation or otherwise comply with the command of the citation shall be punished as provided by Section 29-426 R.R.S. Nebraska 1943. (Amended by Ordinance 1319 1/12/82) (Neb. Rev.  Stat.  §60-2401)

Sec. 5-427   RESTRICTED  PARKING  LOT;  SIGNS DESIGNATING.    Signs designating a
restricted parking lot shall be readily visible, and shall state the purpose or purposes for parking on the restricted parking lot, state the hours for restricted parking, and state who to contact for information
 
regarding a towed vehicle.  (Ord. No. 19, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-2402)

Sec. 5-428	MOTOR  VEHICLE  TOWED  AWAY;  NOTIFICATION  TO  LOCAL  LAW
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; RE-NOTIFICATION. Any one towing a motor vehicle away pursuant to Sections 5-426 to 5-436 shall notify the local law enforcement agency within twenty-four
(24)	hours of the license number of the motor vehicle. Anyone towing a motor vehicle away pursuant to Sections 5-425 to 5-436 and holding the motor vehicle for more than twenty-nine (29) days shall on the thirtieth (30th) day, re-notify the local law enforcement agency of the motor vehicle's license number for the purpose of ascertaining whether the motor vehicle has been reported stolen or missing. Such re-notification shall be repeated each thirty (30) days while the motor vehicle is held by the tower or until such time as the tower has placed a lien on the motor vehicle as provided by Section 5-430. (Ord. No. 1319, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-2403)

Sec. 5-429  MOTOR VEHICLE TOWED AWAY; SUBJECT TO LIEN; WHEN.   A motor
vehicle towed away under Sections 5-426 to 5-436, which is not claimed by the owner within one hundred eighty (180) days after towing, is subject to liens by the person who towed the vehicle under Chapter 52, Article 6 R.R.S. Nebraska 1943. (Ord.No.1319,1112/82)  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-2404)

Sec. 5-430 MOTOR VEHICLE TOWED AWAY; PROPERLY PARKED; LIABILITY. Any
owner or tenant causing the towing away of a motor vehicle that is not improperly parked on a restricted lot shall cause the return of the motor vehicle to its owner or driver at no charge to such owner or driver. The person causing the motor vehicle to be towed shall be liable for any reasonably foreseeable damage incurred by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle due to loss of transportation. (Ord. No. 1319, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-2405)

Sec.  5-431	MOTOR  VEHICLE,  TOWED  AWAY;  LIABILITY  FOR  REASONABLY
FORESEEABLE DAMAGES. Anyone towing away a motor vehicle pursuant to Sections 5-426 to 5-436 shall be liable for any reasonably foreseeable damages to the motor vehicle that occur duringthe hookup, towing, or disengagement of the motor vehicle to or from the towing vehicle and anyone storing such a towed motor vehicle shall be liable for any reasonably foreseeable damages to the motor vehicle and the personal contents therein duringthe storage period. (Ord. No. 1319, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-2406)

Sec. 5-432   MOTOR VEHICLE;  FULL POSSESSION  OF TOWING VEHICLE; WHEN;
EFFECT. Anyone attempting to tow away a motor vehicle pursuant to Sections 5-426 to 5-436 shall not be in full possession of the motor vehicle to be towed until the motor vehicle has been fully and completely attached to his or her towing vehicle. The tower shall, upon request of the owner or driver of the motor  vehicle to be towed, disengage the towing apparatus  at any time prior to taking full possession, as defined in this Section, of the motor vehicle. (Ord. No. 1319, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-2407)

Sec.  5-433	OWNER  OR  DRIVER;  GIVEN  WRITTEN  STATEMENT  BY  TOWER;
CONTENTS. The owner or driver of any motor vehicle towed away pursuant to Sections 5-426 to 5-436 shall, upon regaining possession of the motor vehicle from the tower, be given a written statement by the tower fully detailing: (1) the name and address of the person or persons who caused the vehicle to be towed; (2) under what statutory authority the vehicle was towed; and (3) his or her rights under Sections 5-426 to 5-436.  (Ord. No. 1319, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-2408)
 

Sec. 5-434 PERSON TOWING MOTOR VEHICLE ASCERTAIN OWNER OR TENANT OF
LOT. Anyone towing a motor vehicle pursuant to Sections 5-426 to 5-436 shall take reasonable steps to ascertain that the person causing the motor vehicle to be towed is the owner or tenant of the lot from which the motor vehicle is to be towed.  (Ord. No. 1319, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-2409)

Sec.  5-435	OWNER  OF  TOWED  MOTOR  VEHICLE;  LIABLE  FOR  TOWING  AND
STORAGE FEES. The owner of any motor vehicle towed or stored pursuant to Sections 5-426 to 5-436 shall be liable for any towing and storage fees incurred but neither the motor vehicle nor the contents therein shall be subject to any storage, or towing lien except as provided in Section 5-430. (Ord. No. 1319, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-2410)

Sec. 5-436  OWNER OR TENANT OF LOTS; SOLICIT OR ACCEPT COMPENSATION
FROM TOWER; PROHIBITED. Any owner or tenant causing the towing away of a motor vehicle shall not solicit or accept therefor a commission, gift, gratuity, or any form of compensation or wealth from the person or business towing away the motor vehicle.  (Ord. No. 1319, 1112/82) (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§60-2411)





















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 5. Bicycles, Motorcycles, Snowmobiles and Mopeds

Sec. 5-501 BICYCLE; OPERATION. No person shall ride or propel a bicycle on a street or other public highway of this Municipality with another person on the handlebars or in any position in front of the operator.
No bicycle shall be ridden faster than is reasonable and proper and in no event in excess of motor vehicle speed limits and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of the operator and any other persons upon the streets and public highways. In no event shall a bicycle be operated on sidewalks at a speed in excess of five (5) miles per hour.
Persons riding bicycles shall observe all traffic signs and stop at all stop signs.
No bicycle shall be permitted on any street or other public highway from one half (1/2) hour after sunset and one half (1/2) hour before sumise without a headlight, visible under normal atmospheric conditions, from the front thereof for not less than five hundred (500) feet indicating the approach or presence of the bicycle, firmly attached to such bicycle, and properly lighted, or without a yellow, or red light reflector attached to, and visible five hundred (500) feet from the rear thereof. The said headlight shall give a clear, white light.
No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street or other public highway abreast of more than one other person riding or propelling a bicycle.
Every person riding or propelling a bicycle upon any street or other public highway shall observe all traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto, and shall turn only at intersections, signal for all turns, ride at the right-hand side of the street or highway, pass to the left when passing overtaken vehicles and individuals that are slower moving, and shall pass vehicles to the right when meeting.
Every operator of a bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian.
It shall be unlawful to operate a bicycle on the City streets, alleys or sidewalks unless the operator guides same with at least one (1) hand on the handle bars.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle in a manner such as to umeasonably obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel a bicycle on any ramp designed or used for handicap access on any sidewalks located on or adjacent to Washington Street between 14th Street
and 19th Street, on 16th Street between Lincoln Street and Front Street and on 1ih Street between
Lincoln Street and Front Street in the City of Blair. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701 through 5-705
or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec.  5-501.01      ROLLER  SKATES,  IN-LINE  SKATES,  ROLLER  BLADES,  SKATE­
BOARDS; OPERATION; UNLAWFUL USE. No person shall ride or propel any skates with wheels on any ramps designed for handicap access on any sidewalks located on or adjacent to Washington Street between 14th Street and 19th Street, on 16th Street between Lincoln Street and Front Street and on 17th Street between Lincoln Street and Front Street in the City of Blair. For purposes of this provision, skates with wheels include roller skates, skateboards, in-line skates and roller blades. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701 through 5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-502 MOTORCYCLE; LIGHTS. No person shall ride a motorcycle upon the streets, alleys, or highways from one half (1/2) hour after sunset to one half (1/2) hour before sumise, unless the same shall be equipped with at least one (1), and not more than two (2) headlights, plainly visible
 
from the front and with a light on the rear exhibiting a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of at least five hundred (500) feet to the rear thereof; Provided, said lamps shall comply with the requirements and limitations of the Statutes of the State of Nebraska. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,219)

Sec. 5-503   MOTORCYCLE;  OPERATION.   No person  operating a motorcycle  shall carry another person in front of the operator.

Sec. 5-504 SNOWMOBILES; EQUIPMENT. Every snowmobile operated within the Municipality shall be registered with the State of Nebraska, as required by law. No snowmobile shall be operated upon a public street or highway unless it is equipped with at least one head lamp, one tail lamp, reflector material of a minimum area of sixteen (16) square inches mounted on each side forward of the handle bars, and with brakes as prescribed by the Director of Motor Vehicles.
All laws applying to the operation of other motor vehicles shall apply to snowmobiles, except those relating to required equipment and those which, by their nature, have no application. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,321, 60-6,335) (Ord. No. 1132, 1/14/75)

Sec. 5-505  SNOWMOBILES; UNLAWFUL ACTS.
It shall be deemed a misdemeanor for any person to allow a snowmobile, either owned or operated by him or her, to be operated upon any public way, shoulder, or inside bank or slope of any street or highway or highway right-of-way except a snowmobile may make a direct crossing of a street or highway at any hour of the day if:
(a)	The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees to the direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick and safe crossing;
(b)	The snowmobile is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or main-traveled way of the highway;
(c)	The driver yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes an immediate hazard.
(d)	Ifthe crossing is made between the hours of one-half hour after sunset and
one-half hour before sunrise or in conditions of reduced visibility, both front and rear lights are on.
1. No snowmobile shall be operated upon a public street or highway unless equipped with at least one headlamp, one tail lamp, each of minimum candlepower as prescribed by regulations of the director, reflector material of a minimum area of sixteen square inches mounted on each side forward of the handle bars, and with brakes each of which shall conform to standards prescribed by rule of the director.
2.	A snowmobile may be operated upon a public street or highway other than as provided herein in an emergency during the period of time when and at locations where snow upon the roadway renders travel by automobile impractical.
3.	At a rate of speed greater than reasonable or proper under the surrounding circumstances.
4.	In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger person or property.
5.	Without a lighted headlight and tail light when such would be required by conditions.
6.	In any tree nursery or planting in a manner which damages or destroys growing stock.
7.	Upon any private lands without first having obtained permission of the owner, lessee or operator of such lands.
8.	With more than two (2) people on a snowmobile at one time.
City of Blair Municipal Code                                                               Chapter 5, Article 5, page 2
 
9.	Without having attached to said snowmobile a safety flag which meets the following minimum standards, to-wit: A triangular shaped ten (10") inch by twelve (12") inch Day-Glo Flag attached to a six (6) foot pole or staff. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,335, 60-6,337) (Ord. No. 1132, 1114/75)

Sec.  5-506     MOTORCYCLES   OR  MOTOR-DRIVEN   CYCLES;   OPERATOR   AND
VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS. It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity to operate or cause to be operated a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle upon any street within the corporate limits of the City of Blair except in compliance with the following:
The operator of such vehicle shall have upon his or her possession a valid driver's license issued by the State ofNebraska (or if such operator is a non-resident, such operator shall have upon his or her possession evidence of a non-resident's operating privilege) and which has not been suspended, limited, or canceled.
Such vehicle shall at such time of operation be capable of performing in accordance with the standards then fixed by the Motor Vehicle Laws of the State of Nebraska and by the Ordinances of the City of Blair.
The operator shall operate said vehicle in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Laws of the State of Nebraska and Ordinances of the City of Blair.
Such vehicle shall be equipped with an exhaust system, including muffler, in good working order and with at least one baffle in the muffler, sufficient to prevent excessive, offensive, annoying, or unusual noises.
Before operating a motorcycle or motor driven cycle upon a public street the operator thereof shall possess a valid operator's license to operate such motorcycle or motor driven cycle. (Ord. No. 1153, 9/9/75)

Sec. 5-507  MOTORCYCLES  OR MOTOR-DRIVEN  CYCLES; PROHIBITED USES.  No
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be operated in such a manner that it carries more than one (1) passenger in addition to the operator.
Not more than two (2) motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be operated side by side upon any street.
No motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be driven on any sidewalk in Blair, Nebraska. No motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be operated in any manner so as to cause a disturbance in any area of the City. Touring, stunting, or racing of motors are prohibited in any hospital or nursing home area, and in residential areas.
No operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall engage in maneuvers, stunting or other operation dangerous to himself or herself or his or her passenger or to the persons or property of others; and except, when done for the better control of a vehicle, in emergencies or to maneuver rough passages of a street, an operator must at all times keep body contact with the saddle or seat of such vehicle.
No person shall operate a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle having handle-grips more than eighteen (18") inches above the mounting point, but in no case to exceed shoulder height. (Ord. No. 1153 9/9/75)

Sec. 5-508 MOPEDS; DEFINED. For the purposes of this Article, moped shall mean a bicycle with fully operative pedals for propulsion by human power, an automatic transmission, and a motor with a cylinder capacity not exceeding fifty (5Occ) cubic centimeters, which produces no more than two (2) brake horsepower and is capable of propelling the bicycle at a maximum design speed of no
City of Blair Municipal Code                                                                Chapter 5, Article 5, page 3
 
more than thirty (30 m.p.h.) miles per hour on level ground. Mopeds, their owners, and their operators, shall be subject to Chapter 60, Article 4, R.R.S. of Nebraska, 1943, and amendments thereto, but shall be exempt from the requirements of Chapter 60, Articles 1, 3, 5, and 17, R.R.S. of Nebraska, 1943 and amendments thereto.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,309)

Sec. 5-509 MOPEDS; OPERATOR'S LICENSE REQUIRED. No person shall operate a moped upon the streets, alleys, or public highways of the Municipality unless such person has a valid motor vehicle operator's license or a valid school or learner's permit.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,310)

Sec. 5-510 MOPEDS; TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLICABLE. Any person who rides a moped upon a roadway shall have all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle under Chapter 5 of this Code and Sections 60-601 to 60-602 R.R.S. of Nebraska, and amendments thereto, except for those provisions of such sections which by their nature can have no application. Such regulations applicable to mopeds shall apply whenever a moped shall be operated upon any street, alley, or public highway within the Municipality or upon any path set aside by the Department of Roads or local authority for the use of mopeds. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,311)

Sec. 5-511 MOPEDS; OPERATION. Any person who operates a moped shall ride only upon a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and shall not carry any other person nor shall any other person ride on a moped unless such moped is designed by the manufacturer to carry more than one
(1)	person.
Any person shall ride a moped only while sitting astride the seat, facing forward. Further, no person shall operate a moped while carrying any package, bundle, or other article which prevents him or her from keeping both hands on the handlebars. No operator shall carry any person, nor shall any person ride, in a position that will interfere with the operation or control of the moped or the view of the operator. No person who rides upon a moped shall attach him or herself or the moped to any other vehicle on a roadway.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,312)

Sec. 5-512 MOPEDS, USE OF TRAFFIC LANES. A moped shall be entitled to full use of a traffic lane of any street or highway with an authorized speed limit of forty-five (45 m.p.h.) miles per hour or less and no vehicle shall be operated in such a manner as to deprive any moped of the full use of such lane. This Section shall not apply to mopeds or motorcycles operated two (2) abreast in a single lane. No person shall operate a moped between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. Mopeds shall not be operated more than two (2) abreast in a single lane. Any person who operates a moped on a roadway with an authorized speed limit of more than forty-five (45 mph) miles per hour shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable, and shall not ride more than single file.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,313)

Sec 5-513 DEFINITION:  UTILITY-TYPE  VEHICLE.
Utility-type vehicle means any motorized off-highway vehicle which:
1.	Is seventy-four (74) inches in width or less;
2.	Is not more than one hundred eighty (180) inches, including the bumper, in length;
3.	Has a dry weight of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less; and
4.	Travels on four (4) or more non-highway tires;
5.	Utility-type vehicle does not include all-terrain vehicles, golf car vehicles, or low-speed vehicles.
 
(Neb. Rev. Stat.§ 60-6,355) (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701through5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2279 5/12/2015).

Sec 5-514 UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE; LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or be in physical control of a utility-type vehicle upon any road, street, highway or alley within the City:
1.  Without having in full force and effect a Class 0 operator's license issued by the Nebraska
Department of Motor Vehicles, as provided by the laws of the State;
2.	Without carrying the operator's license; and
3.	Under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.

A utility-type vehicle shall not be considered a motor vehicle for purposes of requiring a State motor vehicle registration of the same, except any individual or entity who desires to operate a utility­ type vehicle shall make written request to the Blair Police Department for a permit allowing the use and shall display the identification tag issued by the Blair Police Department on the utility­ type vehicle.
(Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,356 through §60-6,361) (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701through5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2279 5/12/2015).

Sec 5-515 UTILITY-TYPE VEHICLE; OPERATION; RESTRICTIONS.

A utility-type vehicle shall not be operated on any highway with more than two marked traffic lanes.
The crossing of any highway with more than two marked traffic lanes must only be made at an intersection that is controlled by a traffic control signal.

The crossing of any highway that does not have more than two marked traffic lanes shall not be permitted unless the crossing is made only at an intersection of such highway with another road, street or highway.

The crossing of any road, street or highway within the City requires the following;
1.	The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees to the direction of the highway;
2.	The crossing is made only at an intersection of such road, street or highway with another
road, street or highway;
3.	The vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the shoulder or roadway of the highway;
4.  The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic that constitutes an immediate
potential hazard; and
5.   Both the headlight and taillight of the vehicle are on when the crossing is made.


Operation of a utility-type vehicle shall occur only between the hours of sunrise and sunset. No operation of a utility-type vehicle shall occur on any public land not directly on any road, street, highway or alley within the City including sidewalks, trails, parks and right of way.

Any person operating a utility-type vehicle as authorized herein shall have liability insurance coverage for the utility-type vehicle while operating the utility-type vehicle. The person operating the utility-type vehicle shall provide proof of such insurance coverage to any peace officer
 
requesting such proof within five (5) days of such a request.
Any person operating a utility-type vehicle as authorized herein shall not operate such vehicle at a speed in excess of thirty (30) miles per hour or the posted speed limit, whichever is lower.

When operating a utility-type vehicle the headlight and taillight of the vehicle shall be on and the vehicle shall be equipped with a bicycle safety flag which extends not less than five (5) feet above ground attached to the rear of such vehicle. The bicycle safety flag shall be triangular in shape with an area of not less than thirty (30) square inches and shall be day-glow in color.

No person shall:
1.	Equip the exhaust system of a utility-type vehicle with a cutout, bypass, or similar device;
2.	Operate a utility-type vehicle with an exhaust system so modified;
3.	Operate a utility-type vehicle with the spark arrester removed or modified except for use in closed-course competition events.

Every utility-type vehicle shall be equipped with:
1.	A brake system maintained in good operating condition;
2.	An adequate muffler system in good working condition;
3.	A United States Forest Service qualified spark arrestor; and
4.	A roll bar designed and manufactured to prevent injuries in the event of a roll over.


Every person in a utility-type vehicle during operation shall be in a permanent and regular seat which includes an occupant protection system which utilizes a lap belt, a shoulder belt or any combination of belts which restrains driver and passengers and which conforms to federal motor vehicle safety standards for passenger restraint systems applicable for the UTV's model and year and which shall be in use by all occupants at all times.

Except as otherwise specifically stated above, the operation of a utility-type vehicle shall be subject to all of the statutory requirements for the operation of any motor vehicle in the  State of Nebraska and shall require a valid Class 0 operator's license; specifically including those statutes dealing with the rules of the road, child restraint systems and the operation of a motor vehicle by any person impaired by alcohol or drugs. Any violations could result in revocation of the right to operate the UTV.

Statutory references: (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,356 through §60-6,361) (Penalties refer to Sections 5- 701 through 5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2279 5/12/2015; Amended by Ordinance 2290 9/22/2015)













(END OF SECTION)

City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 5, page 6
 

Article 6. Prohibition and Enforcement

Sec. 5-601 PASSING. No driver shall overtake and pass another vehicle or drive to the left of the center of the roadway whenever:

1.	He or she approaches the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction;
2.	He or she approaches within one hundred feet of or traverses any intersection or railroad grade crossing;
3.	The view is obstructed when he approaches within one hundred feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or,
4.	The section ofroadway is designated as a no-passing zone.
The limitations imposed by this section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway, nor when an obstruction exists which requires a driver to drive to the left of the center of the highway nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway unless otherwise prohibited by signs.

Sec. 5-602 OVERTAKING AND PASSING RULES; VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN SAME
DIRECTION. Except where overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding in the same direction: (Neb. Rev. Stat.§ 60-6,133 RS Neb.)
1.	The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall first give a visible signal of his or her intention and shall pass to the left of the other vehicle at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle;
2.	The driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle; and
3.	The driver of a vehicle overtaking bicycles, animals, animal-drawn vehicles, or farm vehicles proceeding in the same direction shall give an audible signal of his or her intention to pass from one hundred to three hundred feet from the vehicle or animal and then pass without giving another audible signal.

Sec. 5-603 DRIVING ABREAST. Two (2) or more vehicles shall not be driven abreast except when passing, or when traversing a multi-lane or one-way street; Provided, motorcycles may be driven no more than two (2) abreast in a single lane. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,139, 60-6,308) (Ord. No. 1182, 2/24/76)

Sec. 5-604 FOLLOWING; DISTANCE. The operator of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent having due regard for the speed of the vehicles, and the traffic and condition of the street.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,140)

Sec. 5-605 LITTERING. This section was deleted by Ordinance #2140 passed 6/11/08. Please refer to section 6-320.



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 6, page 1
 

Sec. 5-606 GLASS; POINTED OBJECTS. No person shall throw, cast, lay, or place upon any street any thorns, nails, tacks, glass, bottles, window glass, or other articles made of, or containing glass, and in case of an accident causing the breaking of any glass upon any street, the owner or person in charge of such glass, or the person responsible for such breakage, shall at once remove, or cause the same to be removed, from the street.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §39-311)

Sec. 5-607 SIGNS; DEFACING OR INTERFERING WITH. Itshall beunlawfulforanyperson to willfully deface, injure, remove, obstruct or interfere with any official traffic sign or signal, or any other highway or street signs or markers, or any other road markers and public notices lawfully placed. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any such sign or device which has been unlawfully removed in violation of this section.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,129, 60-6,130)

Sec. 5-608 SIGNS; UNAUTHORIZED DISPLAY. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or display upon, or in view of any street, any unofficial sign, signal, or device which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic sign or signal which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view, or interferes with the effectiveness of any official sign or signal. Every such prohibited sign, signal, or device is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and any police officer is hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed, without notice. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,127)

Sec. 5-609 CROWDING; FRONT SEAT. No person shall drive a motor vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there is in the front seat such a number of persons, exceeding three (3), as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle or to interfere with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of such vehicle.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,179)  (Ord. No. 1183, 2/24/76)

Sec. 5-610 RIDING; OUTSIDE VEHICLE. No person shall permit any other person to ride on the running board, hood, top, window frame, or fenders of any motor vehicle. Nor shall any person ride on the running board, hood, top, window frame, or fenders of any motor vehicle.

Sec. 5-611 SPEED; LIMITS. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be drawn, driven or propelled on any street, alley, or public place in the City at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper under the existing conditions, having due regard to the traffic and use of the highway or thoroughfare, or in any event, at a greater rate than twenty-five (25) miles per hour within the limits of the Municipality unless otherwise posted after resolution duly adopted by the Governing Body or as otherwise provided by law.

Sec. 5-611.01 MAXIMUM SPEED LIMIT ON U.S. HIGHWAY 30. The maximum speed limit on U.S. Highway 30 from Clark Street to Davis Street, in the City of Blair, Nebraska, is thirty-five
(35)	miles per hour.  (Ord. No. 1316, 12/8/81)


Sec. 5-612  SPEED; USE OF ELECTRONIC DEVICES; REQUIREMENTS; APPREHENSION OF DRIVER, WHEN.

1.	Determinations made regarding the speed of any motor vehicle based upon the visual observation of any law enforcement officer may be corroborated by the use of radio



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 6, page 2
 

microwaves or other electronic device. The results of such radio microwave or other electronic speed measurement may be accepted as competent evidence of the speed of such motor vehicle in any court or legal proceeding when the speed of the vehicle is at issue. Before the state may offer in evidence the results of  such radio microwave or other electronic speed measurement for the purpose of establishing the speed of any motor vehicle, the state shall prove the following: (a) The measuring device was in proper working order at the time of conducting the measurement; (b) The measuring device was being operated in such a manner and under such condi­ tions so as to allow a minimum possibility of distortion or outside interference; (c) The person operating such device and interpreting such measurement was qualified by training and experience to properly test and operate the device; and (d) The operator conducted external tests of accuracy upon the measuring device, within a reasonable time both prior to and subsequent to an arrest being made, and the measuring device was found to be in proper working order.

2.	The driver of any motor vehicle measured by use of radio microwaves or other electronic device to be driving in excess of the applicable speed limit may be apprehended: (a) Ifthe apprehending officer has observed the recording of the speed of the motor vehicle by the radio microwaves or other electronic device; (b) Ifsuch apprehending officer has received a radio message from an officer who observed the speed recorded and the radio message (i) has been dispatched immediately after the speed of the motor vehicle was recorded, and (ii) gives a description of the vehicle and its recorded speed; and (c) Ifthe apprehending officer is in uniform or displays his or her badge of authority. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,192)

Sec. 5-613 DRIVING UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR DRUG; PENALTIES; REVOCATION OF OPERATOR'S LICENSE; APPLICABLE TO VIOLA­ TION OF ORDINANCES; PROBATION; ALCOHOLISM TREATMENT PROGRAM.  It
shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle (1) while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or of any drug; (2) when such person has a concentration of ten-hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of his or her blood; (3) when such person has a concentration often-hundredths of one
gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred ten liters of his or her breath, or; (4) when such person has a concentration of ten-hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of his or her urine. Any person who shall operate or be in the actual physical control of any motor vehicle while in a condition described in subdivision (1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section shall be deemed guilty of a crime and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:

1.	Ifsuch person has not had a previous conviction under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute eight (8) years prior to the date of the current conviction such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor and the Court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle for any purpose for a period of six (6) months from the date of his or her conviction, and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period. Ifthe Court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any reason, the Court shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 6, page 3
 

suspension, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle for any purpose for a period of sixty (60) days from the date of the order;
2.	Ifsuch person (a) has had one (1) previous conviction under any City or Village Ordinance or
State Statute eight (8) years prior to the date of the current conviction such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor and the Court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle for any purpose for a period of one (1) year from the date of his or her conviction, and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period.
3.   If the court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any reason, the
court shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence suspension, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State ofNebraska for any purpose for a period of six (6) months from the date of the order and such order of probation shall include as one of its conditions confinement in the City or County jail for forty-eight (48) hours.
4 . If such person (a) has had two or more convictions under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute eight (8) years prior to the date of the current conviction such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor and the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State ofNebraska for any purpose for a period of fifteen (15) years from the date of his or her conviction, and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period.
Ifthe court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any reason, the court
shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence suspension, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State of Nebraska for any purpose for a period of one year, and such order of probation shall include as one of its conditions confinement in the City or Countyjail for seven (7) days.
For each conviction under this Section, the court shall as part of the judgment of conviction make a finding on the record as to the number of the defendant's prior convictions under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute eight (8) years prior to the date of the current conviction. The defendant shall be given the opportunity to review the record of his or her prior convictions, bring mitigating facts to the attention of the Court prior to sentencing, and make objections on the record regarding the validity of such prior convictions.
For the purposes of this section, the eight (8) year period shall be computed from the date of the prior offense to the date of the offense which resulted in the current conviction. The term conviction under this section and prior conviction shall include any conviction under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute as it existed at the time of such conviction regardless of any subsequent amendments to any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute.
Upon conviction of any person of a violation of such a city or village ordinance, the provisions of this section with respect to the license of such person to operate a motor vehicle shall be applicable the same as though it were a violation of this section.
Any person who has been convicted driving while intoxicated for the first time or any person convicted of driving while intoxicated who has never been assessed for alcohol abuse shall, during a pre-sentence evaluation, submit to and participate in an alcohol assessment. The alcohol assessment shall be paid for by the person convicted of driving while intoxicated. At the time of sentencing, the Judge, having reviewed the assessment results, may then order the convicted person to follow through on the alcohol assessment results at the convicted person's expense in lieu of or in addition to any to any penalties deemed necessary.
 

Sec. 5-614 DRUNKEN DRIVING; IMPLIED CONSENT OF OPERATOR OF MOTOR VEHICLE TO SUBMIT TO CHEMICAL TEST; WHEN TEST ADMINISTERED; REFUSAL; PENALTY.

1.	Any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a motor vehicle upon a public highway in the City of Blair shall be deemed to have given his or her consent to submit to a chemical test of his or her blood, urine, or breath, for the purpose of determining the amount of alcoholic content in such blood, breath, or urine.
2.	Any  law  enforcement  officer  who  has  been  duly  authorized  to  make  arrests  for violations of traffic laws of this state or of ordinances of any city or village may require any person arrested for any offense arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person was driving or was in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor to submit to a chemical test of his or her blood, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content of such blood, breath, or urine, when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving or was in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle upon a public highway in this state while under the influence of alcoholic liquor.
3		Any law enforcement officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for violation of traffic laws of this State or ordinances of any city or village may require any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a motor vehicle upon a public highway in this state to submit to a preliminary test of his or her breath for alcohol content if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person has alcohol in his or her body, or has committed a moving traffic violation, or has been involved in a traffic accident. Any person who refuses to submit to such preliminary breath test or whose preliminary breath test results indicate an alcohol content of ten-hundredths of one percent or more shall be placed under arrest. Any person who refuses to submit to such preliminary breath test shall be guilty of a Class V misdemeanor                   .
4.	Any person arrested as provided in this section may, upon the direction of a law enforcement officer, be required to submit to a chemical test of his or her blood, breath or urine for a determination of the alcohol content. Any person who refuses to submit to a chemical blood, breath, or urine test required pursuant to this section shall be subject to the administrative revocation procedures of the Director of Motor Vehicles provided in sections 60-6, 196 to 60-6, 199 and 60-6204 to 60-6,208 and shall be guilty of a crime and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows:

(a)	Ifsuch person (i) has not had a previous conviction under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute eight (8) years prior to the date of the current conviction such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor, and the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State ofNebraska for any purpose for a period of six (6) months from the date of his or her conviction, and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period.
Ifthe court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any reason, the court shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence suspension, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State of
 

Nebraska for any purpose for a period of sixty (60) days.
(b)	If such person (i) has had one previous conviction under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute eight (8) years prior to the date of the current conviction such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor and the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State of Nebraska for any purpose for a period of one (1) year from the date of his or her conviction, and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period.
Ifthe court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any
reason, the court shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence suspension, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State of Nebraska for any purpose for a period of six (6) months from the date of the order and such order of probation shall include as one of its conditions confinement in the city or county jail for forty-eight (48) hours.
(c)	If such person (i) has had two (2) or more convictions under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute eight (8) years prior to the date of the current conviction such person shall be guilty of a Class W misdemeanor and the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State of Nebraska for any purpose for a period of fifteen years from the date of his or her conviction and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period. Such revocation shall be administered upon sentencing, upon final judgment of any appeal or review, or upon the date that any probation is revoked. Such revocation shall not run concurrently with any jail term imposed.
Ifthe court places such person on probation or suspends the sentence for any
reason, the court shall, as one of the conditions of probation or sentence suspension, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle in the State of Nebraska for any purpose for a period of one (1) year, unless otherwise authorized by an order issued pursuant to Section 60-6,211.05 R.R.S. Neb., and such and such order of probation shall include as one of its conditions confinement in the City or County jail for seven (7) days.
5.	For each conviction under this Section, the court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, make a finding on the record as to the number of the defendant's prior convictions under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute eight (8) years prior to the date of the current conviction. The Defendant shall be given the opportunity to review the record of his or her prior convictions, bring mitigating facts to the attention of the court prior to sentencing, and make objections on the record regarding the validity of such prior convictions.
6.	For the purposes of this section, the eight (8) year period shall be computed from the
date of the prior offense to the date of the offense which resulted in the current conviction. The term conviction under this section and prior conviction shall include any conviction under any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute as it existed at the time of such conviction regardless of any subsequent amendments to any City or Village Ordinance or State Statute.
7.	Any person involved in a motor vehicle accident in the City of Blair may be required to



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 6, page 6
 

submit to a chemical test of his or her blood, breath, or urine by any law enforcement officer if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the person was driving or was in actual physical control of a motor vehicle on a public highway or street in the City while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or drugs at the time of the accident.	A person involved in a motor vehicle accident, subject to the implied consent law of the State of Nebraska and the City of Blair, shall not be deemed to have withdrawn consent to submit to a chemical test of her or his blood, breath, or urine by reason ofleaving the State ofNebraska or the City of Blair.  Ifthe person refuses a test under this section and leaves the State of Nebraska and the City of Blair for any reason following an accident, he or she shall remain subject to subsection 4 of this section and Section 60-498.02
R.R.S.  Neb. upon return.
8 Any person who is required to submit to a chemical, blood, breath, or urine test or tests pursuant to this section shall be advised that refusal to submit to such test or tests is a separate crime for which the person may be charged.
9. Refusal to submit to a chemical, breath, or urine test or tests pursuant to this section shall be admissible evidence in any action for the violation of Section 60-6, 196 or a City or Village ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 60-6,197 R.R.S. Neb

Sec. 5-614.01 DRUNKEN DRIVING; CHEMICAL TEST; VIOLATION OF STATUTE OR ORDINANCE; RESULTS; COMPETENT EVIDENCE; PERMIT FEE. Any test made under
the provisions of section 60-6,197, if made in conformity with the requirements of this section, shall be competent evidence in any prosecution under a state statute or city or village ordinance involving operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, or involving driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while an amount of alcohol in the blood in violation of a statute or a city or village ordinance.  Tests to be considered valid shall have been performed according to methods approved by the Department of Health and by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by such department for such purpose. The department is authorized to approve satisfactory techniques or methods and to ascertain the qualifications and competence of individuals to perform such tests and to issue permits which shall be subject to termination or revocation at the discretion of the department. A permit fee may be established by regulation by the department which shall not exceed the actual cost or processing the initial permit. Such fee shall be charged annually to each permitholder.
The fees shall be used to defray the cost of processing and issuing the permits and other expenses incurred by the department in carrying out this section.  The fee shall be deposited in the state treasury and credited to the Department of Health Cash as a laboratory service fee.

Sec. 5-614.02   PERSON UNDER TWENTY-ONE  (21) YEARS OF AGE; PROHIBITED ACTS; ENFORCEMENT.

(1) It shall be unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to operate or be in actual physical control of any motor vehicle: (a) when such person has a concentration of two hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per one hundred milliliters of his or her blood but less than the concentration prescribed under subdivision (1)(b) of Sec. 60-6,196 R.R.S. Neb. or (b) when such person has a concentration of two hundredths of one gram or more by weight of alcohol per two hundred liters of his or



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 6, page 7
 

her breath but less than the concentration prescribed under subdivision (1)(c) of Sec. 60-6,196 R.R.S. Neb.

(2) Enforcement of this section by state or local law enforcement agencies shall be accomplished only as a secondary action when the driver of a motor vehicle has been cited for a violation of some other offense. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,211.01)

Sec. 5-614.03 IMPLIED CONSENT TO SUBMIT TO CHEMICAL TEST; WHEN TEST ADMINISTERED; REFUSAL; PENALTY.

(1)	Any person who operates or has in his or her actual physical control a motor vehicle within the municipal limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall be deemed to have given his or her consent to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood or breath for the purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol in such blood or breath.
(2)	Any officer who has been duly authorized to make arrests for violations of traffic laws of ordinances of the City of Blair, Nebraska, may require any person under twenty-one
(21) years of age who has been cited for some offense to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood or breath for the purpose of determining the concentration of alcohol in such blood or breath when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that such person was driving or was in the actual physical control of a motor vehicle in this city in violation of Section 5-412.02. Such officer may require such person to submit to a preliminary breath test. Any person who refuses to submit to such preliminary breath test or whose preliminary breath test results indicate an alcohol concentration in violation of Section 5-412.02 shall be placed under arrest.
(3)	Any person arrested as provided in this section may, upon the direction of a peace officer, be required to submit to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood or breath for a determination of the concentration of alcohol. If the chemical test discloses the presence of a concentration of alcohol in violation of Section 5-412.02, the person shall be found guilty of a traffic infraction as defined in Section 60-672 R.R.S. Neb. and upon conviction shall have his or her operator's license impounded by the court for thirty (30) days for each violation of Section 5-412.02. Any person who refuses to submit to such test or tests required pursuant to this section shall not have the tests taken but shall be found guilty of a traffic infraction as defined in Section 60-672 R.R.S. Neb. and upon conviction shall have his or her operator's license impounded by the court for ninety (90) days for refusal to submit to such tests required pursuant to this section. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,211.02)

Sec. 5-615 NEGLIGENT DRIVING. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, use, operate, park, cause to park or stop any motor vehicle in a negligent manner so as to endanger person or property within the City of Blair, Nebraska. Negligent, as it is used in this section, shall mean a failure to exercise due care and/or caution of which a person of common prudence would use under like circumstances. (Penalties refer to Sections 5-701 through 5-705 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Ordinance 2263 08/26/2014)





City of Blair Municipal Code                                                              Chapter 5, Article 6, page 8
 

Sec. 5-616  CARELESS DRIVING.  Any person who drives any motor vehicle in this Municipality carelessly or without due caution so as to endanger a person or property shall be guilty of careless driving.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,212)

Sec. 5-617 RECKLESS DRIVING. Any person who drives a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate an indifferent or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property shall be deemed to be guilty of reckless driving. Any person so convicted shall be punished by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not less than five (5) days nor more than thirty (30) days, or by a fine of not less than twenty-five ($25.00) dollars nor more than one hundred ($100.00) dollars or by both such fine and imprisonment.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,213, 60-6,215)

Sec. 5-618 WILLFUL RECKLESS DRIVING.  Any person who drives a motor vehicle in such a manner as to indicate a willful disregard for the safety of persons, or property shall be deemed to be guilty of willful reckless driving, and shall be punished upon first (1st) conviction by imprisonment of a period of not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days, or by a fine of not less than fifty ($50.00)  dollars nor  more than one hundred  ($100.00)  dollars, or by both the fine and imprisonment, and the court shall, as part of the judgment conviction, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle for any purpose for a period of not less than thirty (30) days nor more than one (1) year from the date of his or her final discharge from the County jail, or the date of payment or satisfaction of such fine, whichever is the later, and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period.  Upon the second (2nd) conviction of any person for either reckless driving or willful reckless driving, he or she shall be punished by imprisonment for a period of not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, by a fine of not less than one hundred ($100.00)  dollars  nor  more  than  five  hundred  ($500.00)  dollars,  or  by  both  such fine  and imprisonment, and the judge  shall order the person so convicted, as part of the judgment  of the conviction, not to drive any motor vehicle of any description for any purpose from that date for a period of not less than sixty (60) days nor more than two (2) years from the date of his or her final discharge from the County jail, or the date of payment or satisfaction of such fine, whichever is the later, and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period, and that the motor vehicle that the person was operating in such reckless or willful reckless manner, if registered in the name of such person, shall be impounded by a reputable garage by the court for a period of not less than two (2) months nor greater than one (1) year at the expense and risk of the owner thereof; Provided, any motor vehicle so impounded shall be released to the holder of a bona fide lien thereon executed prior to such impounding when possession of such motor vehicle is requested in writing by such lienholder for the purpose of foreclosing or satisfying his or her lien thereon.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,216)


Sec. 5-619 ACCIDENTS; DRIVER'S DUTY. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident upon a public highway, private road, or private drive, resulting in injury or death to any person shall:

1.		Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident and ascertain the identity of all persons involved. Give his or her name, address, and the license number of his or her vehicle, and exhibit his or her operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or occupants of any vehicle collided with. Render to any person injured in such accident reasonable assistance, including the carrying of such person to a



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 6, page 9
 
physician or surgeon for medical or surgical treatment if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary, or is required by the injured person. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in Section 5-620. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-697) (Amended by Ordinance 2121 08/08/2007)

Sec.5-619.01 ACCIDENT; DUTY TO STOP; INFORMATION TO REPORT;
VIOLATION.  The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident, whether upon the public highway, private road or private drive, resulting in damage to property shall:

1.	Immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident.
2.	Give his or her name, address, and the registration number of his or her vehicle, and exhibit his or her operator's or chauffeur's license to the owner of the property struck, or the driver, or occupants of any other vehicle involved in the collision. Any person violating this section shall, if he or she shall report such accident, by telephone or otherwise, to the appropriate peace officer within twelve hours, be guilty of a Class misdemeanor or, ifhe or she does not report such accident within twelve hours, be guilty of a Class IV misdemeanor.(Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-696)

Sec. 5-620 ACCIDENT; PENALTY. Every person convicted of violating section 39-6,104.01 relative to the duty to stop in the event of certain accidents, shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. The court shall, as part of the judgment of conviction, order such person not to drive any motor vehicle for any purpose for a period of not more than one year from the date of his or her final discharge from the county or municipal jail or the date of payment or satisfaction of such fine, whichever is the later, and shall order that the operator's license of such person be revoked for a like period.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-698)

Sec. 5-621 ACCIDENT REPORTS. The operator of any motor vehicle or bicycle involved in an accident within the corporate limits of the Municipality resulting in injuries or death to any person or in damage to the property of any one (1) person, including such operator, to an apparent extent of more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars shall within ten (10) days forward a report to the City Police Department of such accidents. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-699)

Sec. 5-621.01 VEHICLES; EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE. Every motor vehicle, while in use on the streets, alleys, or public highways of the municipality shall be equipped and maintained according to the laws of the State of Nebraska.

Sec. 5-622 POLICE; ENFORCEMENT. The Municipal Police are hereby authorized, empowered, and ordered to exercise all powers, and duties, with relation to the management of street traffic and to direct, control, stop, restrict, regulate, and, when necessary, temporarily divert, or exclude, in the interest of public safety, health, and convenience the movement of pedestrian, animal, and vehicular traffic of every kind in streets, parks, and on bridges. The driver of any vehicle shall stop upon the signal of any police officer.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-683)







City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 6, page 10
 
Sec. 5-623 POLICE; REFUSAL TO OBEY. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse, or fail to comply with, any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer.

Sec. 5-624 POLICE; TRAFFIC OFFICERS. The Governing Body or the Municipal Police may at any time detail officers, to be known as "traffic officers," at street intersections. All traffic officers shall be vested with the authority to regulate and control traffic at the intersections to which they are assigned. It shall be their duty to direct the movement of traffic and prevent congestion and accidents. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any order or signal of any such traffic officer notwithstanding the directive of a stop sign or signal device which may have been placed at any such intersection.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-683, 81-2008)

Sec. 5-625 SAFETY PATROL; SIGNALS, SIGNS. It shall be unlawful to disobey or disregard a direction, sign, or signal given or displayed by any member of a safety patrol designated by the Superintendent of the City Public School while such member is actually engaged in performing his safety patrol duties.

Sec. 5-626 TRAFFIC CITATION; ILLEGAL CANCELLATION. Any person, who cancels or solicits the cancellation of any traffic citation in any manner other than as provided herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

Sec. 5-627 DESTRUCTION OF TRAFFIC TICKETS OR MARKS. It shall be unlawful for any person to tear up or destroy any parking or traffic violation ticket placed on a vehicle or handed to the violator by any Police Officer or Traffic Officer of this City prior to disposition of the alleged offense or to disregard the summons contained thereon or to fail to appear as directed thereby or to erase or tamper with any tire or other mark placed on a vehicle while in a parking stall by any such Officer.

Sec. 5-628  CITATION; FAILURE TO APPEAR; CONVICTION; PENALTY.  Any person
failing to appear or otherwise comply with the command of a citation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more then five hundred ($500.00) dollars, or by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than three (3) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §29-426)





















City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 5, Article 6, page 11
 
(END OF SECTION)

































































 

City of Blair Municipal Code
 
Chapter 5, Article 6, page 12
 
Article 7.  Violations Bureau/Penal Provision

Sec. 5-701 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State ofNebraska, Section 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly. (Added by Ordinance 2150 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-702 FAILURE TO APPEAR; PENALTY. Whoever is charged with a violation of the Municipal Ordinance, conviction of which would carry ajail sentence of more than ninety (90) days, who is released from custody under bail or recognizance or conditional release and who willfully fails to appear before the court granting such release when legally required to render himself or herself other than three (3) days thereafter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon completion thereof, be punished by a fine or not more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars, or by imprisonment in the County jail for not more than six (6) months, by both such fine and imprisonment, in addition to any other penalties or forfeitures provided by law. (Added by Ordinance 2150 06/10/2008)

Sec. 5-703 VIOLATIONS BUREAU; CITATION. A Violation Bureau for the City of Blair is hereby created pursuant to Section 18-1729 Neb. RRS. 1943, for the purpose of collecting penalties for city code violations.
Any person accused of a violation as established by Section 5-226, 5-402 through 5-405, 5- 406.01, 5-407, 5-408, 5-410.01, 5-411, 5-501, 5-501.01, 5-513 through 5-515, and 5-615, may within
ten (10) days after the date of issuance of the citation of the violation and before the appearance date thereon, dispose of the citation by appearing at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair and remitting full payment of the penalty assessed for the specific violation.
Any person may plead not guilty to the citation, he or she may appear before the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on the date and at the time specified on the citation.
At the time of the commission of the alleged violation, the accused shall be served with printed notice informing the accused of his or her options in disposing of the citation as noted hereinbefore.
Ifthe accused fails to appear at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair or before the
County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on or before the date specified on the citation, a warrant for his or her arrest shall be issued by the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska. (Added by Ordinance 2150 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2165 5/12/2009; (Amended by Ordinance 2279 5/12/2015)

Sec. 5-704 PENALTIES. Any person, firm, association, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article, Sections 5-226, 5-402 through 5-405, 5-406.01, 5-407, 5-408, 5-410.01, 5- 411, 5-501, 5-501.01, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined the sum of twenty five ($25.00) dollars. (Added by Ordinance 2150 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2165 5/12/2009)

Sec. 5-705 PENAL TIES. Any person, firm, association, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article, Sections 5-513 through 5-515, and 5-615 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Added by Ordinance 2150 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2279 5/12/2015)
City of Blair Municipal Code                                                               Chapter 5, Article 7, page 1
 






























































(END OF SECTION)



 
City of Blair Municipal Code
 
Chapter 5, Article 7, page 2
 
Chapter 6 POLICE REGULATIONS
Article 1.  Dogs and Cats I Dangerous Dogs
(Updated Ordinance 2229, September 25, 2012, October 11, 2016)


Sec. 6-101 OWNER DEFINED.  Any person, firm, corporation, organization, political subdivision or department possessing, harboring, keeping or having control or custody of a dog or cat to be present in or about his or her house, store, or enclosure or to remain to be fed shall be deemed the owner and possessor of such dog or cat and shall be deemed to be liable for all such penalties herein prescribed. "Owner" shall not apply to dogs or cats owned by other persons which are temporarily maintained on the premises of a veterinarian or kennel operator for a period of not more than 30 days. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526, 54-606, 71-4401)

Sec. 6-102 MAXIMUM NUMBER ALLOWED. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor at any time more than 3 adult dogs or 3 adult cats per residential or dwelling unit in the City. The total number of adult dogs or adult cats per residential or dwelling unit in the City shall not exceed 4 adult animals. For the purpose of this section, an adult dog or cat is a dog or cat that is more than 4 months old. Provisions of this section shall not apply to catteries, kennels and pet stores, which have been licensed by the City. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec. 6-103  LICENSES.
(1) Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat over the age of 6 months within the City shall, within 10 days after acquisition of said dog or cat, acquire a license for each such dog or cat annually by or before Januaiy 1 of each year. The license fee shall be delinquent from and after March 15; provided, the possessor of any dog or cat brought into or harbored within the corporate limits subsequent to January 1 of any year shall be liable for the payment of the license fee levied herein and such fee shall be delinquent if not paid within 10 days thereafter. Licenses shall be issued by the City. Said license shall not be transferable and no refund will be allowed in case of death, sale, or other disposition of the licensed dog or cat.
 
(2)







(3)
 
The owner shall state at the time the application is made and upon printed forms provided for such purpose his or her name and address and the name, breed, color, and sex of each dog or cat owned and kept by him or her. A certificate that the dog or cat has had a rabies vaccination, effective for the ensuing year of the license, shall be presented when the license is applied for, and no license or tag shall be issued until the certificate is shown.
License fees for dogs and cats shall be set by ordinance of the City Council and shall be on file in the City office, where they shall be available for inspection by the public during office hours.
 
(Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations  Bureau Fee Schedule).
 

Sec. 6-104 LICENSE TAGS. Upon payment of the required license fee, the City shall issue a numbered receipt and license tag as necessary to the owner for the dog or cat licensed. Tags shall be issued annually, or at another interval determined by the City. It shall be the duty of every owner or owners of any dog or cat to securely place upon the neck of such dog or cat a good and sufficient collar with (i) a metallic plate plainly inscribed with the name of such owner, and (ii) the physical tag issued by the City. It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners of any dog or cat to go in or upon the private premises of others or upon the public grounds, streets or highways of the City with the dog or cat, without an owner name tag and a cull'ent license tag. The City shall recognize a microchip identification number as a substitute for the physical tag. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526, 54-603, 54-605) (Penalties refer to Sections 4-402 through 4-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule) (Amended by Ordinance 2320 10/11/2016)

Sec. 6-105 DOG GUIDES, HEARING AID DOGS AND SERVICE DOGS; EXEMPT FROM
LICENSE TAX. Every dog guide for a blind or visually impaired person, hearing aid dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person, and service dog for a physically limited person shall be licensed as required, but no license fee shall be charged upon a showing by the owner that the dog is a graduate of a recognized training school for dog guides, hearing aid dogs, or service dogs. Upon the retirement or discontinuance of the dog as a dog guide, hearing aid dog, or service dog, the owner of the dog shall be liable for the payment of the required license fee. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §54-603)

Sec. 6-106 WRONGFUL LICENSING. It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any dog or cat to permit or allow such dog or cat to wear any license or other city identification other than that issued by the City for such dog or cat. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401through6-403  or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec. 6-107 REMOVAL OF TAGS. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed the collar, hamess, or metallic tag from any licensed dog or cat without the consent of the owner, keeper, or possessor thereof. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec. 6-108 DOGS AND CATS; RUNNING AT LARGE. All dogs and cats found to be at large and to go in or upon the private premises of others or upon the public grounds, streets or highways of the City are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to have any dog or cat which is owned, kept, harbored, or allowed to be habitually in or upon the premises occupied by him/her or under his, her or their control, to be at large and to go in or upon the private premises of others or upon the public grounds, streets or highways of the City; and it shall be unlawful for such person or persons to own, keep, or harbor, or to have in or upon the premises occupied by him/her or under his, her or their control, any dog or cat, unless said dog or cat is securely fastened by a chain or otherwise confined in or upon said premises in some enclosure. However, when a dog or cat is away from the occupied premises there is no violation of this section if the dog or cat is on a secure leash and under control of the owner or other person. (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§17-526) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).
 
Sec. 6-109  VIOLENCE ON OR INTERFERENCE WITH A SERVICE DOG.
 
(1)






(2)







(3)







(4)
 
A person commits the offense of violence on a service dog when he or she intentionally injures, harasses, or threatens to injure or harass or attempts intentionally to injure, harass, or threaten a dog that he or she knows or has reason to believe is a dog guide for a blind or visually impaired person, a hearing aid dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person, or a service dog for a physically limited person.
A person commits the offense of interference with a service dog when he or she intentionally impedes, interferes, or threatens to impede or interfere or attempts intentionally to impede, interfere, or threaten to impede or interfere with a dog that he or she knows or has reason to believe is a dog guide for a blind or visually impaired person, a hearing aid dog for a deaf or hearing-impaired person, or a service dog for a physically limited person.
Evidence that the defendant initiated or continued conduct toward a dog as described in subsection (1) or (2) of this section after being requested to avoid or discontinue such conduct by the blind, visually impaired, deaf, hearing-impaired, or physically limited person being served or assisted by the dog shall create a rebuttable presumption that the conduct of the defendant was  initiated or continued intentionally.
For purposes of this section:
"Blind person" shall mean a person with totally impaired vision or with vision, with or without con-ection, which is so severely impaired that the primary means of receiving information is through other sensory input, including but not limited to Braille, mechanical reproduction, synthesized speech, or readers;
"Deaf person" shall mean a person with totally impaired hearing or with hearing, with or without amplification, which is so severely impaired that the primary means of receiving spoken language is through other sensory input, including but not limited to lip reading, sign language, finger spelling, or reading;
"Hearing impaired person" shall mean a person who is unable to hear air conduction thresholds at an average of 40 decibels or greater in the person's better ear; "Physically  impaired  person"  shall  mean  a  person  having  limited  ambulatory abilities, including but not limited to having a permanent impairment or condition that requires the person to use a wheelchair or to walk with difficulty or insecurity to the extent that the person is insecure or exposed to danger; and
"Visually impaired person" shall mean a person having a visual acuity of20/200 or less in the person's better eye with correction or having a limitation to the person's field of vision so that the widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angular distance not greater than 20°. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1009.01)
 

Sec. 6-110 KILLING AND POISONING. It shall be unlawful to kill or to administer, or cause to be administered, poison of any s01i to a dog or cat, or in any manner to injure, maim, or destroy, or in any manner attempt to injure, maim, or destroy, or in any manner attempt to injure, maim, or destroy any dog or cat that is the prope1iy of another person, or to place any poison, or poisoned food where the same is accessible to a dog or cat; provided, that this section shall not apply to the City and/or its agents acting within the its power and duty.
 
Sec. 6-111 BARKING AND OFFENSIVE DOGS. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any dog which by loud, continued, or frequent barking, howling, or yelping shall annoy or disturb any neighborhood, or person, or which habitually barks at or chases pedestrians, drivers, or owners of vehicles while they are on any public sidewalks, streets, or alleys in the City. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec. 6-112 OFFENSIVE CATS. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor any cat which shall annoy or disturb any neighborhood or person. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526) (Penalties refer
.t	Sections 6-401through6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).


Sec.  6-113     DOGS;   CONFINEMENT   OF  FEMALE  DOGS  DURING  PERIOD   OF
FERTILITY. Any person who owns, harbors, or in any way sustains a female dog shall confine the same in an enclosed area during the female dog's entire period of fertility, commonly refened to as the period during which the dog is in season. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec. 6-114 FIGHTING. It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or otherwise, to set dogs or cats to fighting, or by any gesture or word to encourage the same to fight. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17- 526)

Sec. 6-115  LIABILITY OF OWNER; DAMAGE TO PROPERTY OF OTHERS.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to allow a dog or cat owned, kept, or harbored by him/her or under his/her charge or control to injure or destroy any real or personal property of any description belonging to another person. The owner or possessor of any such dog or cat, in addition to the usual judgment upon conviction, may be made to be liable to the persons so injured in an amount equal to the value of the damage so sustained. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526, 54-601, 54-602)

Sec. 6-116 RABIES CONTROL; DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
"Cat" shall mean any feline animal, male or female, sexed or neutered. "Dog" shall mean any canine animal, male or female, sexed or neutered.
"Rabies control authority" shall mean any City law enforcement officer, animal control officer or other officer designated by the mayor.
"Vaccination against rabies" shall mean the inoculation of a dog and cat with a rabies vaccine licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture on the effective date of this code. Such vaccination must be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state.

Sec. 6-117 RABIES CONTROL; VACCINATION REQUIRED. Every dog and cat four months of age and older shall be vaccinated against rabies by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State ofNebraska. Young dogs or cats shall be vaccinated within 10 days after they have reached four months of age. Unvaccinated dogs and cats acquired or moved into the City must be vaccinated within 10 days after purchase or anival, unless under four months of age, as specified above. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).
 

Sec. 6-118 RABIES CONTROL; REVACCINATION. Every dog or cat shall be revaccinated against rabies according to product label directions following a period of not more than 36 months since its last vaccination. Such revaccination shall be performed by a veterinarian duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State ofNebraska. The intervals of any other anti-rabies vaccine shall be set by the state veterinarian, and he/she shall follow the latest recommendations of the U. S. Public Health Service. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec. 6-119  RABIES CONTROL; PERSON BITTEN BY DOGS OR CATS;PROCEDURE.
(1)	Any dog or cat suspected of being afflicted with rabies or any dog or cat not vaccinated in accordance with the regulations herein which has bitten any person and caused an abrasion of the skin of such person, shall be seized by the City and impounded under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian or a public health authority for a period of not less than 10 days. Ifupon examination by a veterinarian, the dog or cat has no clinical signs of rabies at the end of such impoundment, it may be released to the owner or, in the case of a stray, it shall be disposed of in accordance with applicable law.
(2)	Any dog or cat vaccinated in accordance with the provisions herein which has bitten any person(s) shall be confined by the owner or other responsible person as required by the rabies control authority for a period of at least ten days, at which time the dog or cat shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian. Ifno signs of rabies are observed by the veterinarian, the dog or cat may be released from confinement.
(3)	All costs of impoundment and examination fees shall be the responsibility of the owner.

Sec. 6-120 RABIES CONTROL; PROCLAMATION. It shall be the duty of the City Council, whenever in its opinion the danger to the public safety from rabid dogs or cats is great or imminent, to issue a proclamation ordering all persons owning, keeping, or harboring any dog or cat to muzzle the same or to confine it for a period of not less than 30 days or more than 90 days from the date of such proclamation or until such danger is passed. The dogs or cats may be harbored by any good and sufficient means in a house, garage, or yard on the premises wherein the said owner may reside. Upon issuance of the proclamation, it shall be the duty of all persons owning, keeping, or harboring any dog or cat to confine the same as herein provided. (Neb. Rev. Stat. § 17-526)

Sec.	6-121	INTERFERENCE    WITH    CITY   LAW   ENFORCEMENT    OFFICER
PERFORMING ANIMAL CONTROL DUTIES. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay, or interfere with any City law enforcement officer or animal control officer who is performing any animal control duty enjoined upon him/her by the provisions of this article, or to break open, or in any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the breaking open of the animal shelter, any ambulance wagon, or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of dogs to the animal shelter. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-906)

Sec. 6-122  IMPOUNDING.
(1)	It shall be the duty of any City law enforcement officer or animal control officer to
 
capture, secure, and remove in a humane manner to the animal shelter any dog or cat violating any of the provisions of this chapter. The dogs or cats so impounded shall be treated in a humane manner and shall be provided with a sufficient supply of food and fresh water each day. Each impounded licensed dog or cat shall be kept and maintained at the animal shelter for a period of not less than five days after public notice has been given unless reclaimed earlier by the owner. However, any impounded unlicensed animal that is sick or injured and the treatment for such animal exceeds the costs of $50.00 and the City is not aware of the identity of the owner of such animal, then such animal may be destroyed in a humane manner at the discretion of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. Notice of impoundment of all animal(s), including any significant marks or identifications, shall be posted at the office of the animal shelter within two working days after impoundment as public notification of such impoundment.
(2)	Any dog or cat eligible to be reclaimed may be reclaimed by its owner during the
period of impoundment by payment of the required fees as set by the City. The owner shall then be required to comply with the licensing and rabies vaccination requirements within 72 hours after release. Ifthe dog or cat is not claimed at the end of required waiting period after public notice has been given, the City may dispose of the dog or cat in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations pe1iaining to the same, provided that if, in the judgment of the City, a suitable home can be found for any such dog or cat, the said dog or cat shall be turned over to that person and the new owner shall then be required to pay all fees and meet all licensing and vaccinating requirements provided in this article.
(3)	The City shall acquire legal title to any unlicensed dog or cat impounded in the animal shelter for a period longer than the required waiting period after giving notice. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526, 17-548)

Sec. 6-123 ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY. The animal control facility shall be safe, suitable, and conveniently located for the impounding, keeping, and destruction of dogs and cats. The animal control facility shall be sanitaiy, ventilated, and lighted as required by the Nebraska Depaiiment of Agriculture, Bureau of Animal Industly. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-548)

Sec. 6-123.01 STERILATION OF ADOPTED ANIMALS. All animals under the age of six (6) months of age adopted from an animal control facility or shelter shall be spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian when such animal reaches six (6) months of age. Documentation of such sterilization shall be provided to the City of Blair within ten (10) days of the required procedure. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-402 through 6-403 or Addendum to the Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec. 6-124 CAPTURE IMPOSSIBLE. Any City law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall have the authority to kill any dog or cat showing vicious tendencies or characteristics of rabies which make capture impossible because of the danger and risk involved. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §17-526)

Sec. 6-125  DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; DEFINITIONS.
(1)	No person shall own, keep, harbor or allow to be in or upon any premises occupied
 
by him or under his charge or control any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog without said dog being confined so as to protect the public from injury. Any City law enforcement officer, animal control officer or other authority designated by the Mayor and City Council is authorized to kill such dog if found running at large. The prudent use of firearms by any such officer for this purposes or for any purpose required by this section shall not be considered a violation of this code or other ordinances of the City.
(2)	"Dangerous dog" shall be defined as one who meets one or more of the following
conditions:
(a)	Has killed a human being;
(b)	Has inflicted injury on a human being that requires medical treatment;
(c)	Has killed a domestic animal without provocation; or
(d)	Has been previously determined to be a potentially dangerous dog by an animal control authority, the owner has received notice from an animal control authority or an animal control officer of such determination, and the dog inflicts an injury on a human being that does not require medical treatment, injures a domestic animal, or threatens the safety of humans or domestic animals.
(3)	"Potentially dangerous dog" shall be defined as one who meets one or more of the following conditions:
(a)	Any dog that, when unprovoked:
(1)	Inflicts an injury on a human that does not require medical treatment, or injures a domestic animal(s) either on public or private property, or
(2)	Chases or approaches a person upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
(b)	Any specific dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack when unprovoked, to cause injury, or to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animal(s).
(4)	No dog may be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous if it inflicts injury or damage  on a person  committing  a willful  trespass  or other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or lessee of the dog or committing or attempting to commit a crime. No dog may be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous for taking action to defend or protect a human being within the immediate vicinity of the dog from an unjustified attack or assault.No dog used in lawful activities of any law enforcement officer shall be declared a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog.
(5)	Definitions for the purpose of this section:
"Law enforcement officer" or "animal control officer" shall mean a person authorized to enforce the animal control laws of the City including any active police officer or animal control officer and the duties of said law enforcement officer shall include the control of animal(s), or seizure and impoundment of animal(s) and shall include any state or local law enforcement or other employee whose duties in whole or in part include assignments that involve the seizure and impoundment of any animal(s). "Domestic animal" shall mean a cat, a dog, or livestock.
"Medical treatment" shall mean treatment administered by a physician or other licensed health care professional that results in sutures or surgery or treatment for
 
one or  more broken bones.


Sec. 6-126	JUDICIALLY  OR ADMINISTRATIVELY  EXCLUDED  DOGS.	It shall  be
unlawful for any person to bring any dog into the City which has, in another jurisdiction, been judicially or administratively declared to be dangerous, potentially dangerous, vicious, a nuisance, or a threat to the health or safety of human beings. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401through6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec. 6-127  IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS DURING ENFORCEMENT PROCEEDINGS.
 
(1)





















(2)











(3)
 
Ifthere is reasonable cause shown thatthe offending dog under Section 6-125 and/or 6-126 may constitute a hazard to the safety of the public at large during the pendency of any action commenced thereunder, the court may order such dog impounded pending the outcome of such proceedings. Any person who owns, keeps, harbors, maintains, or controls any dog involved in such impoundment shall pay all expenses to the City, including shelter, food, veterinary expenses, boarding, or other expenses necessitated by the impoundment of the dog forthe protection of the public and other expenses as may be required. The City may require such person, prior to expiration of 10 days after the  date of impoundment,  to pay an amount sufficient to pay  all reasonable expenses incurred in caring and providing for the dog, including estimated medical care, for 30 days, inclusive of the date on which the dog was impounded. If such payment is not made prior to expiration of such 10-day period, the dog shall become the property of the City to be disposed of as the City deems appropriate. Such payment  shall be required  for each succeeding 30-day period. If any such payment is not made prior to the end of each succeeding 30-day period, the dog shall become the property of the City to be disposed of as the City deems appropriate. The amount of the payment shall be determined by the City based on the current rate for board at the animal shelter and the condition of the dog after its examination by a veterinarian acting for the City. Any such payment received by the City in excess of the amount determined by the City to be due for the board and care of the dog shall be   refunded   by   the   City  upon   expiration   of  the   order   of   impoundment. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the owner or custodian is found not guilty in any legal proceeding brought under this Section, the owner or custodian shall only be required to pay the veterinary  expenses and one-half of the board and care fees determined by the City to be due, unless waived.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if it is dete1mined by a veterinarian acting for the City that such dog is diseased or disabled beyond any useful purpose, the dog shall immediately become the property of the City to be humanely disposed of as the City deems appropriate.
 

Sec. 6-128  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG; DECLARATION.
(1)	The City shall initiate administrative proceedings to declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it meets the definition of "potentially dangerous dog" under Section 6-
125. The City shall provide written notice of such declaration to the dog's owner either by regular mail to the owner's last known address or to the owner personally. The notice shall contain:
 
(a)	The name and address of the owner whose dog is subject to such declaration;
(b)	The name, description and license number of the dog that is subject to such declaration;
(c)	A description of the facts which form the basis of such declaration;
(d)	A copy of Sections 6-101 through 6-139 and state that noncompliance will result in an owner being declared a reckless owner by the City;
(e)	Effective date of the declaration, which shall be not less than ten days after
the date of mailing or personal service of the notice; and
(f)	Notification that an appeal may be filed within ten days of the date of mailing or personal service of the notice, if the owner objects to such declaration,
(2)	An owner whose dog is declared to be a potentially dangerous dog shall be required to comply with Section 6-131 immediately; Sections 6-129 and 6-132 within 30 days of the date of declaration; and Section 6-130 within 90 days of the effective date of the declaration, unless a written appeal is filed with the City; provided, noncompliance with any of the sections set forth above in this paragraph shall result in the owner being declared a reckless owner by the City under Section 6-138.
(3)	An appeal of such a declaration shall be heard at a hearing by the City Council Police Committee within 10 days of the date of the filing of a written appeal and shall provide an opportunity for the owner to appear and offer evidence to dispute the declaration. The filing fee for each appeal shall be $200.00 paid to the City at the time of filing the appeal. A decision to affirm or reverse such decision shall be entered within 10 days of the date of the hearing.
(4)	An owner may request te1mination of the declaration if there  are no additional incidents of the type specified in Section 6-125(3) for at least 48 months following the date of the declaration. Such request for termination shall be made in writing and shall be heard by the City Council Police Committee within 30 days of the date of the filing of the written request for termination. Said hearing shall provide an opportunity for the owner to appear and offer evidence to support te1mination of the declaration. The owner must provide written documented evidence that the dog's behavior has changed due to environment, health, age, training, neutering or other relevant factors. The filing fee for each request for te1mination shall be $200.00 and shall be paid to the City at the time of the filing of the written request for termination. A decision to continue or terminate such declaration shall be entered within 10 days of the date of the hearing.
(5)	An owner whose dog has been declared potentially dangerous can elect to euthanize the dog or permanently remove the dog from the city's jurisdiction as opposed to complying with Sections 6-129 through 6-132. Ifthe owner elects to remove the dog from the city's jurisdiction, the owner will be required to sign a separate written agreement prepared by the city confirming the dog will never be brought back inside the city's jurisdiction. Should the owner fail to comply with said agreement any time in the future, the city would enforce Section 6-137.

Sec.  6-129   DANGEROUS  AND  POTENTIALLY  DANGEROUS  DOGS;  SPAYING  OR NEUTERING;  MICROCHIP  IDENTIFICATION  AND LICENSE REQUIRED.   Any  dog
declared dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be spayed or neutered, implanted with microchip
 
identification by a licensed veterinarian at the owner's expense and written proof of spaying or neutering and the microchip identification number being provided to the City within 30 days after such declaration is entered.

Sec.   6-130      DANGEROUS   AND   POTENTIALLY   DANGEROUS   DOGS;   CLASSES
REQUIRED. The owner of any dog declared dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be required to attend, at the owner's expense, a responsible pet ownership class approved by the City within 90 days after such declaration is entered.

Sec. 6-131 DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; RESTRAINED. It
shall be unlawful for any person owning, harboring, or having the care of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog to permit such dog to go beyond the property of such person unless the dog is under the control of a person 19 years of age or older, restrained securely by a harness and leash no longer than 6 feet, and properly muzzled to prevent the dog from biting. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).

Sec.  6-132    DANGEROUS   AND  POTENTIALLY  DANGEROUS   DOGS;  PROOF  OF
INSURANCE. The owner of any dog declared dangerous or potentially dangerous shall be required to present written proof of public liability insurance of not less than $100,000.00 to the City within 30 days after such declaration. Such insurance shall be required to remain in effect as long as such dog is declared dangerous or potentially dangerous and shall be verified annually at the time of licensing.

Sec. 6-133  DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS; IMPOUNDMENT.
Any dog declared dangerous or potentially dangerous that bites a human being without provocation shall be immediately impounded by any City law enforcement officer or animal control officer. The owner shall be responsible for the reasonable costs incurred for the care of such impounded dangerous dog and the dog may be destroyed upon determination by the court.

Sec.  6-134     DANGEROUS  AND  POTENTIALLY   DANGEROUS   DOGS  AT  LARGE;
DESTRUCTION. Any dog declared dangerous dog or potentially dangerous as defined in Section 6-125 and/or 6-126 and is found at large and unattended upon public property, park property, or a public right-of-way, or upon the property of someone other than its owner, thereby creating a hazard to person or property, may, in the discretion of the chief of police or his authorized designee, or any City law enforcement officer or animal control officer, be destroyed if it cannot be confined or captured. The City shall be under no duty to confine or capture a dangerous dog found at large nor shall it have a duty to notify the owner of such dog prior to its destruction.

Sec. 6-135  DANGEROUS DOG; DETERMINATION.
(1)	The City shall initiate administrative proceedings to declare a dog to be dangerous if it meets the definition of "dangerous dog" under Section 6-125. The  City shall provide written notice of such declaration to the dog's owner either by regular mail to the owner's last known address or to the owner personally. The notice shall contain:
(a)	The name and address of the owner whose dog is subject to such declaration;
(b)	The name, description and license number of the dog that is subject to such
 
declaration;
(c)	A description of the facts which form the basis of such declaration;
(d)	A copy of Sections 6-101 through 6-139 and state that noncompliance will result in an owner being declared a reckless owner by the City;
(e)	Effective date of the declaration, which shall be not less than 10 days after the date of mailing or personal service of the notice; and
(f)	Notification that an appeal may be filed within 10 days of the date of mailing
or personal service of the notice, ifthe owner objects to such declaration.
(2)	An owner whose dog is declared to be a dangerous dog shall be required to comply with Sections 6-131 and 6-136 immediately; Sections 6-129 and 6-132 within 30 days of the date of declaration and Section 6-130 within 90 days of the effective date of the declaration, unless a written appeal is filed with the City; provided, noncompliance with any of the sections set forth above in this paragraph shall result in the owner being declared a reckless owner by the City under Section 6-138.
(3)	An appeal of such a declaration shall be heard at a hearing by the City Council Police
Committee within 10 days of the date of the filing of a written appeal and shall provide an opportunity for the owner to appear and offer evidence to dispute the declaration. The filing fee for each appeal shall be $200.00 paid to the City at the time of filing the appeal. A decision to affirm or reverse such decision shall be entered within 10 days of the date of the hearing.
(4)	An owner whose dog has been declared dangerous can elect to euthanize the dog or permanently remove the dog from the city's jurisdiction as opposed to complying with Sections 6-129 through 6-132 and 6-136. Ifthe owner elects to remove the dog from the city's jurisdiction, the owner will be required to sign a separate written agreement prepared by the city confirming the dog will never be brought back inside the city's jurisdiction. Should the owner fail to comply with said agreement any time in the future, the city would enforce Section 6-137. Ifthe owner transports such dog or permits such dog to be transported to another county, city, or village in this state for the purpose of permanent relocation of the owner, the owner shall obtain written permission prior to such relocation from the animal control authority of the county, city, or village in which the owner will reside. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §54-618) (Amended by Ordinance 2320 10/11/2016)

Sec. 6-136 DANGEROUS DOGS; CONFINED. No person owning, harboring, or having the care of a dangerous dog shall permit such dog to go unconfined while unattended on the premises of such person. A dangerous dog shall be securely confined, in a humane manner, indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or structure suitably designed to prevent the entry of young children and to prevent the dog from escaping. The pen or structure, if allowed by zoning regulations, shall have secure sides and a secure top. If the pen or structure has no bottom secured to the sides, the sides shall be embedded into the ground no less than one foot or have a concrete pad with sides secured to the concrete pad. The pen or structure shall also protect the dog from the elements. The owner of a dangerous dog shall post a City approved warning sign on the property where the dog is kept so that the sign is clearly visible at all times and inform the public that a dangerous dog is on the property.

Sec.  6-137    DANGEROUS  AND  POTENTIALLY  DANGEROUS  DOGS;  FAILURE  TO
 
COMPLY. Any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog may be immediately confiscated by any City law enforcement officer or animal control officer if the owner is inviolation of this Section. The owner shall be responsible for the reasonable costs incurred by the City for the care of such confiscated dangerous dog or potentially dangerous, or for the destruction of any dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. In addition to any other penalty, a court may order the City to dispose of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog in an expeditious and humane manner.

Sec. 6-138  RECKLESS OWNER.
(1)	The City shall initiate administrative proceedings to declare an owner a reckless owner, and to revoke all pet license(s) issued to such person, if such owner has been convicted of one (1) or more violations of this chapter on two (2) separate occasions in a 24-month period or whose dog(s) has been determined to be dangerous or potentially dangerous and who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter pertaining to dangerous or potentially dangerous dog(s), the city shall provide written notice of such declaration to the owner either by regular mail to the owner's last known address or to the owner personally. The notice shall contain:
(a)	The name and address of the owner who is subject to such declaration and revocation;
 
(b)

(c)


(d)


(e)
 
The name(s), description(s) and license number(s) of any animal(s) associated with such violations licensed to the owner;
A description of the violations or requirements which form the basis of such declaration and revocation, including the case numbers, if any;
A summary of the effects of such declaration, including the revocation of said pet license(s) and surrender of said animal(s);
Effective date of the declaration and revocation which shall be not less than
ten days after the date of mailing or personal service of the notice; and
 
(f)       Notification that an appeal may be filed within 10 days of the date of mailing or personal service of the notice, ifthe owner objects to such declaration and revocation.
(2)	Upon effect of such declaration and revocation, unless an appeal of such is filed with
the City in accordance with this section, such reckless owner shall be required to surrender said animal(s) to any City law enforcement officer or animal control officer within 24 hours. Failure to surrender such animal(s) shall result in immediate impoundment by the City. Such surrendered or impounded animal(s) shall immediately become the property of the City and may be disposed of by the City as they deem appropriate.
(3)	An owner who is declared a reckless owner shall be prohibited from licensing, residing with, or owning any additional animal(s) in the City for a period of 48 months from the effective date of the declaration and revocation.
(4)	An appeal of such declaration and revocation shall be heard by the City Council Police Committee which shall provide an opportunity for the owner to appear and offer evidence to dispute the declaration and revocation. The filing fee for each appeal shall be $200.00 payable to the City at the time of the filing of said appeal. A determination to affom or reverse such declaration and revocation shall be entered within 10 days of the date of the hearing by the City Council Police Committee.
 

Sec. 6-139   PIT BULLS; LEASH AND MUZZLE REQUIRED.   It shall be unlawful for any persons owning, harboring or having the care of a pit bull to permit such dog to be outdoors unless confined in a securely fenced yard or unless the dog is under the control of a person 19 years of age or older, restrained securely by a harness and leash no longer than six feet and properly muzzled to prevent the dog from biting.  For purposes of this section, pit bull shall be defined as any dog that is an American Pit Bull Terrier, American  Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, Dago Argentina, Presa Canario, Cane Corso, American Bulldog, or any dog displaying the majority of such physical traits of any one or more of the above breeds (more so than any other breed), or any dog exhibiting  those  distinguishing  characteristics  which  substantially  conform  to  the  standards established by the American Kennel Club or United Kennel Club for any of the above breeds. The
A.K.C and U.K.C standards for the above breeds are on file at the City office.











































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2.  Animals and Fowls


Sec. 6-201 ANIMALS; RUNNING AT LARGE. It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper, or harborer of any animal, or any person having the charge, custody, or control thereof, to permit a horse, mule, cow, sheep, goat, swine, or other animal to be driven or run at large on any of the public ways and property, or upon the property of another. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-235) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401through6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-202  LIVESTOCK; BANNED FROM MUNICIPALITY.  It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, firm, or other entity, in the capacity of owner occupant, lessee, mortgagee,  or agent thereof, to keep or maintain within the corporate limits of Blair, Nebraska, any horse, mule, sheep, cow, goat, swine, or other livestock except such livestock as are within the said corporate limits temporarily for exhibition purposes and are kept in sanitary and enclosed areas at least one hundred fifty (150') feet from any habitable structure owned by any person or business. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2260 05/20/2014)

6-202.1 FOWL, CONTROLLED WITHIN MUNICIPALITY;  PERMIT PROCESS.

A  Except as permitted by subsection E of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation, firm, or other entity, in the capacity of owner occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent thereof, to keep or maintain, within the corporate limits of Blair, Nebraska, any chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, pheasants, quail, ostrich, or other fowl except such fowl  as are within the said corporate limits temporarily for exhibition purposes and are kept in sanitary and enclosed areas at least one hundred fifty (150') feet from any habitable structure owned by any person or business.

B.	The keeping or maintain of such fowl as described in subsection A above shall be considered to be a specific nuisance and may be abated in accordance with the provisions of the Blair Municipal Code.

C.	In addition to abatement as identified in subsection B above, the Mayor and City Council shall be authorized to maintain an action for abatement of such activity in Court in Washington County, Nebraska, against the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent thereof, who is deemed to be in violation of subsection A of this section.

D.	Furthermore, any owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, or agent thereof, who shall violate or refuse to comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section, or the enforcement thereof, shall be fined as per the City's Violations Bureau for every offense.  A new violation shall be deemed to have been committed every twenty-four (24) hours of such failure to comply.
 
E.	Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, the raising of hen chickens within the municipality may be permitted, subject to compliance with the following conditions:

1.	Any person desiring to keep hen chickens in the corporate limits of the City of Blair shall obtain a permit from the City of Blair prior to acquiring the hen chickens.  Application shall be made at City Hall and the fee for the permit shall be as determined by the City Council in APPENDIX-PERMIT,  LICENSE AND APPLICATION FEES.  The application shall be in writing on a form to be furnished by the City of Blair for that purpose.

2.	The minimum property requirements to qualify for a permit shall include:
a.	The applicant must be owner occupant, lessee or mortgagee of the property where the hen chickens will be kept;
b.	The use of the property where the hen chickens will be kept must be a single-family dwelling. No permit will be issued for duplexes, condominiums, or multi-family dwellings;
c.	Hen chickens shall not be kept on a vacant or uninhabited property.


3.	The application for such permit shall be made pursuant to the procedures and requirements that are applicable at the time the person applies for a new permit, which shall include:
a.	Name and mailing address of the applicant;
b.	Mailing address where hen chickens are to be kept;
c.	Signature of the property owner (if not the applicant) agreeing to the application;
d.	Statement of the method and frequency in which offal, manure and waste material accumulating from such hen chickens will be sanitarily disposed of;
e.	An attached plot plan of the property upon which the hen chickens will be kept, as well as all adjacent properties, showing dimensions of the property upon which the hen chickens will be kept, the location and dimensions of the covered enclosure and fenced pen area, the distance of any part of the covered enclosure and fenced pen area from residence buildings on all properties, and the distance of any part of the covered enclosure and
fenced pen area from the property lot lines upon which the hen chickens will be kept.

4.	Any applicant for such permit, shall, prior to the issuance or renewal of a permit by the City of Blair, give notice of the pendency of said application to all owners of property adjacent to the property upon which the hen chickens will be kept, as well as to other owners ofresidences within one hundred feet (I 00') of any part of the covered enclosure and fenced pen area.  The applicant shall furnish proof of said notice to the City Clerk.  The notice required by this section shall be in writing and in a form as provided by the City of Blair, and may be served personally with proof by signature or by certified return receipt mail. If any owner of property adjacent
to the property upon which the hen chickens will be kept or any owner of a
 
residence within one hundred feet (100') of any part of the covered enclosure and fenced pen area objects within ten (10) days of the date of notification to the issuance of a permit for the keeping of hen chickens, such permit will not be issued.

5.	Prior to the issuance or renewal of any permit for the keeping of hen chickens, the City of Blair shall have a proper investigation completed by City personnel of the facts set forth in the application for the permit and determine whether said application conforms to the requirements of this section and whether the property conforms to the requirements of this section and other ordinances of the City with respect to zoning and building regulations, sanitation, and location of the covered enclosure and fenced pen area.  No permit shall be issued by the City of Blair until all requirements of this section have been satisfied.

6.	Permits expire and become invalid one (1) year after date of issuance.  A person who wishes to continue keeping hen chickens shall have satisfied the requirements of subsection 3-5 and obtained a new permit on or before the expiration date of the previous permit.  No permit shall be assignable or transferable.

7.	A person who keeps or houses hen chickens shall comply with all of the following requirements:
a.	No more than six (6) hen chickens may be kept on any one (1) property or  lots joined by a contiguous parcel agreement;
b.	No person shall keep any rooster;
c.	No person shall slaughter any hen chickens within view of the general public;
d.	The hen chickens shall be provided with a covered enclosure and fenced pen area which meets all of the requirements of subsection 7. The hen chickens shall be kept in the covered enclosure or the fenced pen area at all times.  Hen chickens shall be secured within the covered enclosure during non-daylight hours;
e.	A person shall not keep hen chickens in any location on the property other than in the rear yard.  For purposes of this section, "rear yard" means that portion of a lot enclosed by the property's rear lot line and the side lot lines to the points where the side lot lines converge with an imaginary line established by the rear of the dwelling and extending to the side lot lines;
f.	No part of the covered enclosure or fenced pen area shall be located closer than ten feet (10') to any property line of an adjacent property;
g.	No part of the covered enclosure or fenced pen area shall be located closer than forty feet (40') to any residential structure on an adjacent property;
h.	All covered enclosures for the keeping of hen chickens shall meet the following requirements:
1.	Contain at least four (4) square feet of floor area per hen chicken.
No covered enclosure shall exceed one hundred-twenty (120) square feet in size or exceed twelve feet (12') in height. Covered enclosures
 
shall be constructed and repaired so as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being harbored underneath, within, or within the walls of the enclosure.
11.		Enclosed on all sides and shall have a roof and doors.  Access doors must be able to be shut and locked during non-daylight hours. Openings for windows and vents must be covered with predator and bird proof wire ofless than one (1") inch openings.
111.		The building materials used shall be uniform for each element of the structure, such that the walls are made of the same material, the roof has the same shingles or other covering, and any windows or openings are constructed using the same materials.  The use of scrap wood, waste board, sheet metal, or similar materials is prohibited.
All elements shall be well maintained and are subject to the Property Maintenance Code adopted by the City of Blair;
1.	All fenced pen areas shall provide at least ten (10) square feet of open floor or ground area per hen chicken and shall consist of sturdy wire fencing.
The top of the fenced pen area must be covered with wire, aviary netting, or solid roofing so as to not allow hen chickens to escape or predators to enter;
J.		All storage containers for feed and other items associated with the keeping of hen chickens that are likely to attract or to become infested with or infected by rats, mice, or other rodents shall be protected so as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from gaining access to or coming into contact with them;
k.	Odors from hen chickens, hen chicken manure or other hen chicken related substances shall not be perceptible beyond the boundaries of the permitted tract of land;
1.	Noise from hen chickens shall not be loud enough beyond the boundaries
of the permitted tract of land at the property boundaries to disturb persons of reasonable sensitivity;
m.  Hen chickens shall not roam outside of the covered enclosure and fenced pen area.

F.	The City may revoke any permit granted under this section due to any violation(s) of this section. Fees associated with permits which are revoked are not refundable.

G.	A person who has been issued a permit shall allow the inspection of the property, covered enclosure and fenced pen area, during reasonable hours, upon written or verbal request by any Police Officer or Code Enforcement Officer of the City. (Penalties refer to Sections 6- 401through6-403  or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule.)



Sec. 6-203  ANIMALS; WILD.  No wild animals may be kept within the corporate limits except such animals kept for exhibition purposes by circuses and educational institutions.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-235) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau
 
Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)


Sec. 6-204  ANIMALS; CRUELTY.
(1)	A person commits cruelty to animals including a domesticated living creature and a wild living creature previously captured if, except as otherwise authorized by law, he or she intentionally or recklessly:
(a)	Subjects any animal to cruel mistreatment meaning every act or omission which causes, or unreasonably permits the continuation of, unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering;
(b)	Subjects any animal in his or custody to cruel neglect meaning failure to provide food, water, protection from the elements, opportunity to exercise, or other care normal, usual, and proper for an animal's health and well-being; and
(c)	Abandons any animal meaning the leaving of an animal by its owner or other person responsible for its care or custody without making effective provisions for its proper care.
(d)	Kill or injures any animal belonging to another.
(2)	Cruelty to animals is a Class II misdemeanor.
(3)	Nothing in this section shall be construed to amend  or in any manner  change the authority of the Municipal Policemen acting within their power and duty. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1012)

Sec. 6-205 OTHER ANIMALS; RABIES SUSPECTED. Any animal (other than a dog or cat which is covered in §6-117 et. seq.), suspected of being affiicted with rabies or any which has bitten any person and caused an abrasion of the skin, shall be seized and impounded under the supervision of the Board ofHealth for a period of not less than ten (10) days. Ifupon examination by a veterinarian, suspected animal has no clinical signs of rabies at the end of such impoundment, it may be released to the owner, or it shall be disposed ofin accordance with the provisions herein. Ifthe owner of the said animal has proof of vaccination, it shall be confined by the owner or some other responsible person for a period of at least ten (10) days, at which time said animal shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian. Ifno signs of rabies are observed, said animal may be released from confinement, only after payment of all impoundment fees during the period of confinement. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §71-4406) (Amended Ordinance 2209 10/25/2011)

Sec. 6-206 ANIMALS; ENCLOSURES. All pens, cages, sheds, yards, or any other area or enclosure for the confinement of animals and fowls not specifically barred within the corporate limits shall be kept in a clean and orderly manner so as not to become a menace or nuisance to the neighborhood in which the said enclosure is located.

Sec. 6-207 FOWLS; COCK FIGHTING. It shall be unlawful for any person, by agreement or otherwise, to set game cocks, game roosters, or game fowls of any kind to fighting, or by any gesture or word to  encourage  the same to  do so. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-208 BABY POULTRY. No person shall display, give away, distribute or sell natural colored or artificially colored baby poultry as pets or novelties. This Section shall not be construed to prohibit
 
the display or sale of baby poultry when such poultry is provided with proper brooder facilities by hatcheries or businesses engaged in the business of selling the same commercially.

Sec. 6-209 ANIMALS; IMPOUNDING. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Police or its authorized agent to capture, secure, and remove in a humane manner to the Municipal Animal Shelter or to a designated animal shelter located within or out of the City limits any dog or other animal violating any of the provisions of this Article. The dog or other animal or animals so impounded shall be treated in a humane manner and shall be provided with a sufficient supply of food and fresh water each day. Each impounded dog or other animal shall be kept and maintained at the pound for not less than forty-eight (48) hours unless reclaimed earlier by the owner. A list ofimpounded dogs or other animals, including any significant marks or identifications, shall be maintained at the Police Station. Any dog or other animal may be reclaimed by its owner during the period of impoundment by payment to ten ($10.00) dollars for a general impoundment fee. If the dog or other animal is not claimed at the end of forty-eight (48) hours, the Municipal Police or its authorized agent may dispose of the dog or other animal or destroy the dog or other animal in any humane manner within the discretion of the Municipal Police or its authorized agent; Provided, that if, in the judgment of the Municipal Police or its authorized agent, a suitable place can be found for any such animal, the said animal shall be turned over to that person and the new owner shall then be required to pay all fees and meet all licensing and vaccinating requirements, if any, provided in this Article. The Municipality, or its authorized agent, shall acquire legal title to any dog or other animal impounded in the Animal Shelter after forty-eight (48) hours. All dogs or other animals destroyed shall be disposed of in a summary and humane manner. (Ord. No. 1163, 1/13/76)



(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3.  Miscellaneous Misdemeanors


Sec. 6-301 MISDEMEANORS; ASSAULT IN THE THIRD DEGREE. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly cause bodily injury to another person; or threaten another in a menacing manner. Assault in the third degree shall be a Class I misdemeanor unless committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent  in which case it shall be a Class II misdemeanor.    (Neb. Rev.  Stat.  §28-310)

Sec. 6-302 MISDEMEANORS; THEFT.  The terms and definitions applied in this Section shall be in conformance with Section 28-509 RS Neb.   It shall be unlawful  for any person to:

A.	Take or exercise control over movable property of another with the intent to deprive him or her thereof; or
B.	Transfer  immovable property  of another or any interest therein with the intent to benefit himself or another not entitled thereto; or
C.	Fail to return leased or rented movable property to the lessor after the expiration of a written lease or written rental agreement, if done with intent to deprive, and if such lessee has been mailed notice by certified mail that such lease or rental agreement has expired and he or she has failed within ten (10) days after such notice to return such property; or
D.	Obtain the property of another by deception, as defined by Section 28-512 RS Neb; or
E.	Obtain the property of another by threatening to:
1.	Inflict bodily injury on anyone or commit any other criminal offense; or
2.  Accuse anyone of a criminal offense; or
3.   Expose any secret tending to subject any person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to impair his or her credit or business repute; or
4. Take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official to take or withhold action; or
5.  Bring about or continue a strike, boycott, or other collective unofficial   action, if the property is not demanded or received for the benefit of the group in whose interest the actor purports to act; or
6. Testify or provide information or withhold testimony or information with respect to another's claim or defense. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution based on subdivision 2, 3, or 4 of the above subsection, that the property obtained by threat of accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other invocation of official action was honestly claimed as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the circumstances to which such accusation, exposure, lawsuit or other official action relates, or as compensation for property  or lawful services; or
F.	Come into control of property of another that he knows to have been lost, mislaid, or delivered under a mistake as to the nature or amount of the property or the identity of the  recipient if, with  intent to  deprive the  owner thereof,  he  or  she fails to take reasonable   measures   to  restore  the  property  to  a  person   entitled  to  have   it; or
G.	Obtain services which he or she knows are available only for compensation, by deception
 
or threat, or by false token or other means to avoid payment for the service; or
H.	Have control over the disposition of services of others, to which he or she is not entitled, and diverts such services to his or her own benefit or to the benefit of another not entitled thereto; or
I.	Make, possess, sell, give, transfer, offer for sale or advertise any device, instrument, apparatus or equipment designed or which can be used to obtain telecommunications service fraudulently or to conceal from any supplier or telecommunications service or from any lawful authority the existence or place of origin or of destination of any telecommunication; or
J.	Receive, retain or dispose of movable property to another knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has been stolen, unless the property is received, retained or disposed with intention to restore it to the owner.
Provided that the value of the thing involved is under three hundred ($300.00) dollars. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-509 thru 28-515, 28-517) (Class I or II misdemeanor)

Sec. 6-303 MISDEMEANORS; CRIMINAL MISCHIEF. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage property of another intentionally or recklessly; or intentionally or recklessly tamper with property of another so as to endanger person or property; or intentionally or maliciously cause another to suffer pecuniary loss by deception or threat; Provided, that the value of the property involved is under three hundred ($300.00) dollars. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-519) (Class II or III misdemeanor)

Sec. 6-304 MISDEMEANORS; CRIMINAL TRESPASS. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that he or she is not licensed or privileged to do so, to:
A.	Enter or secretly remain in any building or occupied structure, or any separately
secured or occupied portion thereof; or
B.	Enter or remain in any place as to which notice against trespass is given by:
1.	Actual communication to the actor; or
2.	Posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably likely to come to the attention of intruders; or
3.	Fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to exclude intruders.
A person found guilty under subsection A hereof shall be guilty of a Class I misdemeanor. A person found guilty under subsection B hereof shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor except he or she shall be guilty of a Class II misdemeanor if the offender defied an order to leave personally communicated to him or her by the owner of the premises or other authorized person. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-520, 28-521) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2148 10/14/2008)

Sec. 6-305 MISDEMEANORS; IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.  Itshall be unlawful
for any person to falsely pretend to be a peace officer and perform any act in that pretended capacity. Impersonating an officer is a Class I misdemeanor.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-610)

Sec. 6-306 MISDEMEANORS; PUBLIC INDECENCY. It shall be unlawful for any person, eighteen (18) years of age or over, to perform or procure or assist any other person to perform in a
 
public place and where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public:
A. An act of sexual penetration as defined by Subdivision (5) of Section 28-318 RS Neb.;
or
B.	An exposure of the genitals of the body done with intent to affront or alarm any person; or
C.	A lewd fondling or caressing of the body of another person of the same or opposite sex.  Public indecency is a Class II misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-806)

Sec.  6-307    MISDEMEANORS;   RESISTING  ARREST,  WITHOUT  THE  USE  OF  A
DEADLY OR DANGEROUS WEAPON. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally prevent or attempt to prevent a peace officer, acting under color of his or her official authority, from effecting an arrest on said person or on another, by:
A.  Using or threatening to use physical force or violence against the peace of another; or
B.	Using any other means which creates a substantial risk of causing physical injury to the peace officer or another; or
C.	Employing means which require substantial force to overcome resistance to effecting the arrest;
Provided, that this Section shall apply only to those actions taken to resist arrest without the use of a deadly or dangerous weapon.
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Section if the peace officer involved was out of uniform and did not identify himself or herself as a peace officer by showing his or her credentials to the person whose arrest is attempted.  Class I misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-904)

Sec. 6-308 MISDEMEANORS; OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER. It shall be unlawful for any person, to use or threaten to use violence, force, physical interference, or hinder the enforcement of the penal law or the preservation of the peace by a peace officer or judge acting under color of his or her official authority. Class I misdemeanor.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-906)

Sec. 6-309 MISDEMEANORS;  DISTURBING THE PEACE.  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally disturb the peace and quiet of any person, family or neighborhood. Class III misdemeanor.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1322)

Sec. 6-310 MISDEMEANORS; APPLIANCES IN YARD. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit a refrigerator, icebox, freezer, or any other dangerous appliance to be in the open and accessible to children whether on private or public property unless he or she shall first remove all doors and make the same reasonably safe. Each day a refrigerator, ice box, freezer, or any other dangerous appliance is open, accessible to children, and unsafe shall be deemed a separate violation hereunder. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-311  MISDEMEANORS; WEED REMOVAL.  Repealed by Ord. No. 1574, 09/10/91,
provisions transferred to Section 4-506.
 
Sec. 6-312 MISDEMEANORS; TREES DEAD, DISEASED OR DAMAGED DYING TREES.
All trees and shrubs within the City of Blair shall be pruned or removed when such trees or shrubs constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or diseases or are damaged to the extent they constitute a threat to other trees or shrubs, persons or property within the City. For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Section, the City of Blair Police or Administrative Staff along with staff from the State Forestry Office or a licensed arborist shall have the authority to enter on private property to inspect the tree(s) or shrub(s) thereon. In the event the tree(s) or shrub(s) are dead, diseased or damaged beyond recovery notice shall be given to the owner of the property by mail or personal service and such notice shall allow the said owner sixty (60) days to remove said tree(s) or shrub(s). In the event the owner is a non-resident, notice shall be made by publication in a newspaper of general circulation, or by mail if the name and address is known. Inthe event of failure of owners to comply with said notice, the City of Blair shall have the authority to hire a registered contractor to prune or remove said tree(s) or shrub(s) and the City of Blair assess the cost of said pruning to the property owner. Ifthe owner fails to reimburse the City of Blair after being properly billed, the cost with interest may be assessed against the real estate and the City Clerk shall have the assessment filed as a lien against the real estate and certified to the City of Blair to be collected in the manner prescribed by law. Inthe event the property owner is a non-resident of Washington County the City of Blair shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published. Failure to remove any said tree shall be deemed to be a Class III misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230, 18-1720, 28-1321) (Amended by Ordinance 2167 7/14/2009)

Sec. 6-313 MISDEMEANORS; RADIO INTERFERENCE.  Any person operating, or causing to be operated, any motor, sign, or other electrical apparatus that is connected with the light and power system shall equip the apparatus with proper filtering attachments to eliminate interference; Provided, that the provisions herein shall not apply to the use of necessary medical equipment or apparatus where  electrical  interference  cannot be reasonably  and safely eliminated.	Any person  who  so operates, or causes to be operated, any such electrical apparatus that interferes habitually with radio and television reception shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor. Class III misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1720, 28-1321)

Sec. 6-314 MISDEMEANORS; DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS. It shall be unlawful for any person, except an officer of the law in the discharge of his or her official duty, to fire or discharge any gun, pistol, or other firearm specifically including but not limited to air guns, air rifles, pellet guns, and "B-B" guns, or any other device which by the triggering of an explosion discharges a projectile from the device excepting  any generally recognized tool or legal fireworks within the Municipality; provided, nothing herein shall be construed to apply to officially sanctioned public celebrations if the persons so discharging firearms have written permission from the Governing Body. Class V. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-227) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to  Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-315 MISDEMEANORS; FIREARMS, POSSESSION,  TRANSPORTATION, WHEN
ALLOWED.  It is hereby unlawful for any person, except an authorized law enforcement officer, or
 
a private security guard who is registered with the Chief of Police, purposely or knowingly, to openly carry or openly transport in any conveyance or in any other manner whatsoever, or to possess any rifle, shot gun, air gun, air rifle, pellet gun, or "B-B" gun at any building owned by the City of Blair, land owned by the City of Blair, or in any City Park, including the municipal pool and Youth Sports Complex. This section is not violated if, prior to exiting the vehicle, the firearm is locked inside a trunk, a locked compartment of vehicle, or a storage box which is locked and attached to a vehicle. This exception does not apply to any parking area used by such location in which the carrying of a firearm is prohibited by federal law. Furthermore, this section is not violated if the person meets the exceptions contained in Section 6-317 of the Blair City Code. This section shall not apply to a permitholder authorized to carry a concealed weapon, so long as Nebraska statutes allows for the carrying of a concealed weapon at the location as defined by Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-2441 and that the permitholder complies with the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-2441. It shall be an affirmative defense to this section that at the time he or she was carrying the firearm, there existed circumstances at that time in which such person was placed at the time were such as to justify a prudent person in carrying the firearm for the defense of his or her person, property, or family. (Amended by Ordinance 2100  01/23/2007;  Ordinance  2377  03/12/2019)

Sec. 6-316 MISDEMEANORS; HAND GUNS, POSSESSION, TRANSPORTATION, WHEN
ALLOWED.  It is hereby unlawful for any person, except an authorized law enforcement officer, or a private security guard who is registered with the Chief of Police, purposely or knowingly, to openly carry or openly transport in any conveyance or in any other manner whatsoever, or to possess any handgun at any building owned by the City of Blair, on any land owned by the City of Blair, or in any City Park, including the municipal pool and Youth Sports Complex. This section is not violated if, prior to exiting the vehicle, the handgun is locked inside a glove box, locked inside the trunk, a locked compartment of vehicle, a storage box which is locked and attached to a vehicle, or if the vehicle is a motorcycle, other than an autocycle, the handgun is locked inside of the hardened compartment securely attached to the motorcycle. This exception does not apply to any parking area used by such location in which the carrying of a handgun is prohibited by federal law. Furthermore, this section is not violated if the person meets the exceptions contained in Section 6-317 of the Blair City Code. This section shall not apply to a permitholder authorized to carry a concealed weapon, so long as Nebraska statutes allows for the carrying of a concealed weapon at the location as defined by Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-2441 and that the permitholder complies with the provisions of Neb. Rev. Stat. §69- 2441. It shall be an affirmative defense to this section that at the time he or she was carrying the handgun, there existed circumstances at that time in which such person was placed at the time were such as to justify a prudent person in carrying the handgun for the defense of his or her person, property, or family.  (Amended by Ordinance 2100 01/23/2007; Ordinance 2377 03/12/2019)

Sec.  6-316.01    MISDEMEANORS;  FIREARMS,  POSSESSION  BY  PERSONS  UNDER
TWENTY-ONE (21) PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person who has not reached the age of twenty-one (21) to possess a concealable firearm, hand gun, pistol, or revolver. The provi­ sions of this section shall not apply to members of the Armed Forces of the United States, active or reserve, National Guard of the state or Reserve Officer Training Corp when on duty or training or to the temporary loan of pistols, revolvers, or any other form of concealable firearms for instruction under the immediate supervision of a parent or guardian or adult instructor.  Any person found guilty under this section shall be deemed to be guilty of Class IV misdemeanor.
 

Sec. 6-317  MISDEMEANORS; FIREARMS, POSSESSION, EXCEPTIONS.  The provisions
of Section 6-315 and Section 6-316 shall not be construed to prevent carrying unloaded rifles in parades or using rifles in ceremonials, or to prevent possession of rifles or shotguns at shows or exhibits, or for other lawful use, purpose or activity, including but not limited to skeet and trap shooting, target shooting at rifle range, hunter safety instruction conducted by qualified instructors, when such do not endanger public safety or are detrimental to public welfare, provided the prior approval of the Chief of Police of the City of Blair shall have been obtained for such use, purpose or activity.  (Ord. No. 1107, 1/22/74)

Sec. 6-318 MISDEMEANORS; SLINGSHOTS. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a slingshot or the like loaded with rock or to shoot or discharge a bow and arrow, compound bow, cross bow or the like or other dangerous missiles at any time or under any circumstances within the Municipality. Class V. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-227) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-319  MISDEMEANORS; DEFINITION OF TERMS AS APPLIED TO PROVISIONS
CONCERNING TREES. For the purposes of Sections 6-319.01through6-319.09 inclusive the following definitions apply:
1.		Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on Municipal right-of-ways, on all streets, avenues, boulevards, alleys, or other transportation ways within the Municipality.
2.	Park trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public parks and all other public lands owned by the Municipality.
3.	Small trees  are defined as Crab Apple (small or no fruit only), Golden Rain Tree, Hawthorne (by special permission only), Hop Hombean, Japanese Tree Lilac, Maple as follows: Amur Maple, Compectre or Hedge Maple, Tartarian Maple, Callery Pear in variety, and Redbud.
4.	Medium trees are defined as Amur Cork Tree, Birch as follows: Monarch Birch, Canoe birch, River Birch; Buckeye as follows: Ohio or Yellow; Ginkgo, Linden as follows: Littleleaf and Edmond; Oak as follows: Bur, English, Sawtooth, Shingle, Swamp White, Pagoda Tree, Yellow Wood.
5.	Large trees are defined as Hackberry, Honeylocust (thomless and padles only), Horse Chestnut, Kentucky CoffeeTree, Maple as follows: Black and Sugar; Oak as follows: Black, Red, Scarlet, White. (Amended by Ordinance 1338 12/14/82) (Amended by Ordinance 2139 04/08/2008)

Sec. 6-319.01 MISDEMEANOR; PLANTING OF TREES. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, City Department, or other entity to plant any species of street trees in violation of Section 8-
108.1.	(Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 1338 12/14/1982) (Amended by Ordinance 2139 04/08/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-319.02 MISDEMEANORS; SPACING OF STREET TREES. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, City Department, or any other entity to plant street trees with a minimum
 
distance between small trees less than thirty (30 ') feet, a minimum distance between medium trees less than forty (40') feet, and a minimum distance between large trees of fifty (50') feet unless otherwise approved prior to the planting by written permission of the City Forester. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum  to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 1338 12/14/82) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-319.03 MISDEMEANORS; PLANTING DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK
OF PARK AND STREET TREES. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, City Department, or any other entity to plant street trees or park trees less in violation of Section 8-108.1 (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 1338 12/14/82) (Amended by Ordinance 2139 04/08/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-319.04   MISDEMEANORS;  PLANTING  DISTANCE  FROM  STREET CORNERS
AND FIRE PLUGS OF STREET AND PARK TREES. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, City Department, or other entity to plant any street or park tree less than thirty-five (35') feet from any street comer, measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. It shall further be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, City Department, or other entity to plant any street or park tree less than fifteen (15') feet from any fire hydrant. (Penalties refer to Sections 6- 401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Ord. No. 1338, 12/14/82) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-319.05 MISDEMEANORS; TREE TOPPING. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, City Department, or other entity to top any street tree, park tree, or any other tree on public property. Topping is hereby defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3") inches in diameter within the tree's crown. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this Section at the determination of the City Forester subject to the rules and regulations of the Department of Utilities governing the pruning and trimming of trees interfering with utility lines (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule) (Ord. No. 1338, 12/14/82) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-319.06  MISDEMEANORS; PRUNING AND CORNER CLEARANCE OF TREES. It
shall be the obligation and responsibility, and every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the City shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight (8') feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owner shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light from a street light along the street or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign.  (Ord. No. 1338, 12/14/82)

Sec. 6-319.07 MISDEMEANORS; REMOVAL OF STUMPS. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity removing any street or park trees shall remove the stumps from said trees below the
 
surface of the ground so that the top of said stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. (Ord. No.  1338, 12/14/82)

Sec. 6-319.08   MISDEMEANORS;  INTERFERENCE  WITH PARK AND RECREATION
ADVISORY  BOARD  OF  CITY  FORESTER.	It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, or other entity to prevent, delay or interfere with the City Forester, Park Advisory Board, and Recreation Advisory Board, or any of their agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removal of any street trees, park trees, or trees on private grounds as authorized by the Municipal Code.  (Ord. No. 1338, 12/14/82)

Sec. 6-319.09 MISDEMEANORS; INJURY TO TREES. It shall be unlawful for any person to purposely or carelessly, and without lawful authority, cut down, carry away, injure, break down, or destroy any fruit, ornamental, shade or other tree or trees standing or growing on any land belonging to another person or persons or on any public land in the corporate limits. Any public service company desiring to trim or cut down any tree, except on property owned and controlled by them, shall make an application to the City Forester to do so, and the written permit of the City Forester in accordance with their decision to allow such an action shall constitute the only lawful authority on the part of the company to do so. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Ord. No. 1338, 12/14/82) (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

SECTION 6-319.10 Reserved for Future Use


Sec. 6-320 MISDEMEANORS; LITTERING. Any person who deposits, throws, discards, or otherwise disposes of any litter on any public or private property, or in any waters, commits the offense of littering unless:
A.	Such property is an area designated by law for the disposal of such material and such
person is authorized by the proper public  authority to so use such property; or
B.  The litter is placed in a receptacle or container installed on such property for such purpose.
The term litter as used in this Section means all rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, trash,
debris or other foreign substances, solid or liquid, of every form, size, kind and description, but does not include the waste or primary process of farming or manufacturing.
Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle or water craft in violation of this Section, the operator of such motor vehicle or water craft commits the offense of littering. Littering is a Class V misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230, 28-523) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401through6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec.    6-320.01    MISDEMEANORS:    LITTERING;    SOLICITATION    ON    PRIVATE
PREMISES. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to throw, deposit, or distribute any commercial solicitation in or upon private premises, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill or solicitation material directly to the owner or other person present upon such premises or with the request of the owner or occupant of the premises. (Penalties refer to Sections  6-402  through  6-403  or  Addendum  to  the  Code  Violations  Bureau  Fee  Schedule).
 
(Amended Ordinance 2209 10/25/2011)


Sec. 6-321 MISDEMEANORS; POSTING. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use the streets, sidewalks or public grounds of the Municipality for signs, signposts, the posting of handbills or advertisements, without written permission of the Governing Body. Class V misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-210) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-322  MISDEMEANORS; NOTICES OFFICIAL, UNLAWFUL ACTS.  It shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any office notice or proclamation of the City or any of its officers during the time such notice or proclamation is in effect upon direction of the Mayor or the officer giving such notice or proclamation. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401through6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-323 MISDEMEANORS; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or behavior which disturb the peace and good order of the Municipality by clamor or noise, intoxication, drunkenness, fighting, using of obscene or profane language in the streets or other public places, or is otherwise indecent or disorderly conduct or lewd or lascivious behavior.  Class III misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-227, 16-228)

Sec.  6-324    MISDEMEANORS;  UNLAWFUL  ASSEMBLY,  DEFINED;  VIOLATIONS;
PENALTY. A person is guilty of unlawful assembly if he or she assembles with two (2) or more persons for the purpose of engaging in conduct constituting the crime of riot or if, being present at an assembly that either has or develops such a purpose, he or she remains there with an intent to advance that purpose. Any person convicted of unlawful assembly shall be punished as provided in Article 4 of this Chapter.

Sec. 6-325 MISDEMEANORS; WINDOW PEEPING. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon the private premise of another to look or peep into any window, door, or other opening in a building occupied by any other person. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-326 MISDEMEANORS; OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or suffer to remain on any street or public sidewalk a stand, wagon, display or other obstruction inconvenient to, or inconsistent with, the public use of the same. Class V misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-207, 16-227, 39-301, 39-303) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec 6-326.01 SNOW EMERGENCY DESIGNATION. When predictions or occurrences indicate the need, the Mayor or his/her designated representative may determine that it is necessary for the City to cause snow and/or ice to be cleared from the public streets, avenues, alleys, or other public places due to the accumulation thereon causing hindrance to traffic and constituting an emergency requiring the same to be cleared, the Mayor or his\her designated representative may, in the interest of
 
public safety, declare a snow emergency and the enforcement of emergency snow parking regulations, set forth in Sec. 6-326.01 through 326.03. When the Mayor or his/her designated representative issues a snow emergency appropriate public media shall be notified. In addition, such declaration shall be posted on the City website and cable T.V. channel as soon as practical. (Amended by Ordinance 2009 09/28/2004; Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Ordinance 2181 03/09/2010)

Sec. 6-326.02 PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCY. No person shall park, abandon or leave unattended any vehicle on any public street, alley, or City owned street or street parking area during any snow emergency proclaimed in Sec. 6-326.01 unless the snow has been cleared from said street, alley or parking area and the snow has ceased to fall for a minimum period of eight (8) hours. A snow emergency parking ban shall continue from its declaration throughout the duration of the snow or ice storm and the forty-eight (48) hour period after cessation of such storm except as provided above for streets which have been fully cleared. Any vehicle left parked in violation of this section may be removed by the Chief of Police or his designee and towed to the City impound lot. If such unlawfully parked vehicle is not removed and by reason of its presence any part of the streets of the city are unable to be cleared, the owner of the vehicle will be in violation of this section and subject to a fine and may be liable to the City for any added clearing expenses necessarily incurred as a result of such unlawful parking. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule.)

Sec. 6-326.03  SNOW EMERGENCY PARKING (WHERE APPLICABLE).  All City streets,
avenues, thoroughfares (State and Federal Highways), alleys or other public places shall be covered by a snow emergency issued pursuant to Sections 6-326.01 and 6-326.02 except the following area and conditions set forth as follows: That between October 15 and March 31 of each year there shall be no parking from the hours of2:00 o'clock A.M. to 5:00 o'clock A.M. on both sides of the streets as follows: Washington Street from its intersection with Thirteenth (13th) Street to its intersection with Nineteenth (19th) Street; Lincoln Street from its intersection with Fifteenth (15th) Street to its intersection with Seventeenth (17th) Street; Front Street from its intersection with Fifteenth (15th) to its intersection with Eighteenth (18th) Street; Fifteenth (15th) Street from its intersection with Lincoln Street to its intersection with the alley between Washington Street and Front Street; Sixteenth (16th) Street from its intersection with Grant Street to intersection with the Union Pacific Railroad (Formerly known as the Chicago and North Western Railroad) right of way; Seventeenth (17th) Street from its intersection with Lincoln Street to its intersection with Front Street; and Eighteenth (18th) Street from its intersection with Lincoln Street to its intersection with Front Street.

(NOTE: See Resolution  1992-7 adopted January 28, 1992 for additional reference)


Sec. 6-326.04 SNOW REMOVAL FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY. It shall be unlawful for any person or business within the limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska to remove or cause to be removed snow from any business lot, parking lot, or other private premises, including but not limited to sidewalks and driveways, which is pushed or otherwise deposited onto the streets, street parking areas, or alleys of said City, except for the sidewalks abutting Washington Street from Nineteenth (19th) Street to Fifteenth (15th) Street; Sixteenth (16th) Street from Lincoln Street to the Union Pacific Railroad right of way; and Seventeenth (17th) Street from Lincoln Street to Front Street. (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401through6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule.)
 

Sec. 6-326.05 CLEANING OF SIDEWALKS. It shall be unlawful for the adult occupant or occupants of any improved lot or tract of ground or the owner or owners of any unimproved tract of ground in the City to permit snow, sleet, mud or ice to accumulate and remain on the sidewalk along and adjacent to such lot or tract of ground for a period of more than five (5) hours after cessation of the storm causing the same, except in the case of cessation after the hour of nine (9:00) o'clock P.M. in which case such person shall be permitted until ten (10:00) o'clock A.M., of the following day in which to remove such substances. In case snow, sleet, mud or ice is not removed within twelve (12) hours following the deposit of same on the sidewalk along and adjacent to any lot or tract of ground within the City, the City Administrator may cause same to be removed and the cost of removal of same shall immediately become due and payable, jointly and severally, from the owners and adult occupants of such tract of ground. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-663) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2307 05/24/2016)

Sec. 6-327 MISDEMEANORS; CURFEW. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) years to be or remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys or other places in the City at night after the hour of twelve (12:00) o'clock A.M., unless accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of such minor person, or is going to or from some meeting or assemblage of lawful character, or is in the performance of an errand or duty directed by a parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of such minor person, or whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys, or public places during the night-time after such specified hours. It shall be unlawful for the parents, guardians or other adult persons having the care and custody of a minor child under the age of sixteen (16) years to allow or permit said minor to be or remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places in the City at night after the hour of twelve (12:00) o'clock A.M. unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of such minor person or is going to or from some meeting or assemblage of lawful character or is in the performance of an errand or duty directed by a parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of such minor person or whose employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys or public places during the night time after such specified hours. A conviction for violation of this section shall result in a fine for the first offense in any one calendar year of the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), for the second offense in any one calendar year the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), and for the third and subsequent offenses in any one calendar year the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. No.  1113, 4/23/75)

Sec. 6-328 MISDEMEANORS; LOITERING AND VAGRANTS. It shall be unlawful  for any person to loiter on the streets, in the park, on the sidewalk, or on any other public ways and property at unreasonable hours, and those persons who are unable to give a good and satisfactory reason why they should be there, including all vagrants and persons found without means of support or some legitimate business, shall be deemed to be guilty of loitering. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-229) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-329 MISDEMEANORS; MISREPRESENTATION BY MINOR. It shall be unlawful for any minor, as defined by Section 53-103 RS Neb., to obtain or attempt to obtain, alcoholic liquor by
 
misrepresentation of age, or by any other method, in any tavern or other place where alcoholic liquor is sold.  Class III misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-168.06, 53-180.01, 53-180.05)

Sec.   6-330      MISDEMEANORS;   MINOR;   ALCOHOLIC   LIQUOR;   SELLING   OR
DISPENSING; POSSESSION; UNLAWFUL; VIOLATION. No minor as defined by Section 53-103 R.S. Neb. may sell or dispense or have in his or her possession or physical control any alcoholic liquor in any tavern or in any other place including public streets, alleys, roads, highways, upon property owned by the State of Nebraska or any owned by the Municipality thereof, or inside any vehicle or while in any other place including, but not limited to, the public streets, alleys, roads, highways, or upon any property owned by the Municipality, except that a minor may possess or have physical control of any alcoholic liquor as allowed by Section 53-168.06 R.S. Neb. in his or her permanent place of residence. Class III misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-168.06, 53-103, 53-180.02, 53-180.05) (Amended by Ord. No.  1318, 1/12/82)

Sec. 6-331 MISDEMEANORS; DRINKING IN PUBLIC. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages in the public streets, alleys, roads, highways, or upon any property owned by the Municipality or other governmental subdivision thereof, or inside vehicles while upon the public streets, alleys, roads, or highways, in theatres, dance halls, or any other place open to the public; Provided, the provisions of this Section shall not apply to liquor establishments licensed by the State of Nebraska.
Notwithstanding any other provisions hereof the governing body of the Municipality may allow by resolution the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on (check ordinance) only in such cases as the sale of such alcoholic beverages is by the Blair Volunteer Fire Department. Such authorization shall be limited to no more than six (6) one day events in any one calendar year. Class II or IV misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-186, 53-1,100)

Sec. 6-332 MISDEMEANORS; AERIAL TRAFFIC. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any airplane, balloon or other aircraft used for air travel in a dangerous manner to persons or property within the Municipality or to operate any airplane at an altitude of less than five hundred (500') feet, exclusive of takeoff or landing, or to drop handbills or other objects therefrom, or to operate the same while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, while flying over any part of the Municipality.

Sec. 6-333 MISDEMEANORS; JUNK VEHICLES.  It shall be unlawful for any property owner or lessee to allow an accumulation of         dismantled, abandoned, inoperable, wrecked, unlicensed or unregistered motor vehicles or recreational equipment of any kind including, but not limited to, motorcycles, all-terrain vehicles, automobiles, trucks, boats and trailers which are in violation of Chapter 60, Article 3 R.R.S. Nebraska (as amended from time to time).
The City Administrator, the Chief of Police, or their designated agent, shall have the power to investigate all complaints of violations of this Section and if they find that such property owner or lessee has allowed such accumulation, they shall cause the property owner or lessee to be served with written notice directing them to remove the accumulation within five (5) days of the receipt of said notice.
Any person failing to remove said accumulation within five (5) days after receiving notice to do so, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and a conviction for violation of this section shall
 
result in a fine as indicated in Sections 6-401through6-404, and the Court, as part of the judgment, shall order the owner to remove the accumulation. Each day an accumulation is permitted to exist shall be deemed a separate violation hereunder. In addition, an authorized agent of the Municipality may cause said accumulation to be removed at the expense of the owner or lessee, from the land whereon said accumulation exist and the cost of such removal shall be levied, equalized, and assessed as are other special assessments. (Ord. No. 1280, 5/14/80) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2307 05/24/2016)

Sec. 6-334 MISDEMEANORS; METER TAMPERING. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, alter, destroy or modify or to do any other act or cause any other act to be done which alters or prohibits the accurate metering and registering of water as supplied by the City of Blair to its customers. Said tampering shall also specifically include but not be limited to breaking of any seals on the metering device and adjusting or removing cams. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6-401, any person guilty of any unlawful acts as provided for by this Section shall be punished by a fine as indicated in Sections 6-401 through 6-404, and the court as part of the judgment may order said person to make reasonable restitution to the City of Blair for any water used but not registered by said metering device as a result of the unlawful acts of said person. (Ord. No. 1287, 8/26/80) (Penalties refer to Sections 6-401 through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-335 MISDEMEANORS; CABLE TELEVISION, THEFT OF SERVICE. It shall be
unlawful for any person to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise, with any part of a franchise Cable Television system within this City for the purpose of enabling said person or others to receive any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of said system.
It shall be unlawful for any person, without consent of the owner, to willfully temper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound.  Class II misdemeanor.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-515)

Sec.   6-336   MISDEMEANORS;   BINGO   GAMES,   LOTTERIES,   OPERATION   AND
PARTICIPATION. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, entity, corporation, partnership, or any other entity to play, conduct, sponsor, promote, create, establish, or in any other way participate in any Bingo games or lotteries by the sale of pickle cards which are not specifically allowed by the Nebraska Bingo Pickle Card Regulatory Act, Section 9-124 et. seq. R.R.S. Neb. or any otherlotteries including but not limited to ticket lotteries or video lotteries.
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, entity, corporation, partnership or any other entity to possess, transport, use, lease, or in any other way access any paraphernalia, equipment, machinery, device, game, or any other apparatus specifically including but not limited to video lottery machines, which either its intended function or a potential function is the operation or the conduct of a lottery as prohibited herein.
Notwithstanding any other provisions hereof any nonprofit organization which holds a certificate of exemption under the Internal Revenue Code, Sec. 501, or whose major activities, exclusive of conducting lotteries, raffles, or gift enterprises, are conducted for charitable and community betterment purposes, may conduct lotteries, raffles, and gift enterprises, subject to Section
 
9-510 R.R.S. Neb. (1983 Supp.) except that no such lotteries, raffles or gift enterprises, shall be conducted by any machine, device, or paraphernalia, known as a video lottery and such lotteries, raffles, or gift enterprises, shall be conducted solely and strictly by the use of tickets and which are not issued, supplied, or provided by and or through a video lottery machine.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as to prohibit bingo games or lotteries by the sale of pickle tickets as specifically defined in and as regulated and governed by the Nebraska Bingo and Pickle Card Regulatory Act as set forth in Section 9-202 at Sec. RRS Neb.
Any person, persons, corporation, partnership or other entity conducting bingo or a lottery by the sale of pickle cards within the municipality shall prior to the establishment of such bingo or lottery within the municipal limits file with and present evidence to the City Clerk of their licensing with the Nebraska Bingo and Pickle Card Regulatory Commission and its compliance with the Nebraska Bingo and Pickle Card Regulatory Act.

Sec. 6-337 DRUGS, CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES, PARAPHERNALIA. It shall be unlawful
for any person to be under the influence of any controlled substance for a purpose other than the treatment of a sickness or injury as prescribed or administered by a person duly authorized by law to treat sick and injured human beings. It shall not be necessary to prove that the accused was under the influence of any specific controlled substance, but it shall be sufficient for conviction under this section to prove that the accused was under the influence of some controlled substance by proving that the accused did manifest physiological symptoms or reactions caused by the use of any controlled substance.  Violation of this section shall be a Class II misdemeanor.
It shall be unlawful for any person to breathe, inhale, or drink, or to induce or entice any other person to breathe, inhale, or drink any compound, liquid, or chemical containing acetate, acetane, benzene, butyl alcohol, cyclohexanone, ethyl acetate, ethyl alcohol, ethylene dichloride, ethylene trichloride, hexane, isopropanol, isopropyl alcohol, methyl alcohol, methyl cellosolve acetate, methyl ethyl ketone, methyl  isobutyl ketone, pentachloropehnol, petroleum ether, toluene, toluol, trichlorathane, trichloroethene, or any other substance for the purpose of inducing a condition of intoxication, stupification, depression,  giddiness, paralysis, inebriation, excitement, or irrational behavior or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the auditory, visual, mental, or nervous process.  Violation of this section shall be a Class III misdemeanor.
It shall be unlawful for any person to give, sell, or dispense to any other person any item to which has been added any deleterious substance which, if ingested, would cause injury, physical distress, or mental aberration.  Upon conviction a person shall be guilty of a Class II misdemeanor.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally manufacture, distribute, deliver, or possess with the intent to distribute or deliver an imitation controlled substance. In determining whether a substance is an imitation controlled substance, the Court or other authority concerned shall consider all relevant factors including but not limited to the following:
(a)	whether the substance is represented as having an affect similar to or the same as an illicit controlled substance,
(b)	whether the substance is represented by way of terminology which is deceptively similar to or the same as that describing a particular controlled substance,
(c)	whether the dosage unit price substantially exceeds the reasonable price of a
similar dosage unit of a like chemical composition sold over the counter with packaging and labeling provided by the Federal Food and Drug Administration,
(d)	whether the substance is packaged in a manner and quantity similar to or the same as that
 
commonly used for illicit controlled substances,
(e)	whether the dosage unit appearance of the substance is deceptively similar to that of a particular controlled substance, and
(f)	whether the substance is distributed to persons who represent it as a controlled substance under circumstances which indicate the distributors knows, intends, or should know that his or her distributee is making or will make such representations.
Upon a first conviction a person shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor. Upon a second conviction and all subsequent convictions a person shall be guilty of a Class II misdemeanor.
 
1.



2.











(A)
 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally possess marijuana weighing more than one ounce but not more than one pound. Upon conviction a person shall be guilty of a Class III (a) misdemeanor.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess marijuana weighing one ounce or less. Upon the first conviction a person shall be guilty of an infraction, receive a citation, be fined $100.00, and may be assigned to attend a course relating to the affects of the misuse of drugs. Upon a second conviction under this section, the person shall be guilty of a Class IV misdemeanor, receive a citation, be fined
$200.00, and may be imprisoned not to exceed five (5) days. Upon the third conviction under this section and for all subsequent convictions, a person shall be guilty of a Class III(a) misdemeanor, receive a citation, be fined $300.00, and be imprisoned not to exceed seven (7) days.
As used in this ordinance, drug paraphernalia shall mean all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any city ordinance or state or federal law. It shall include but not be limited to the following:
(1)	diluants and adulterants such as quinine hydrochloride, manitol, manite, dextrose, and lactose used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;
 
(2)


(3)



(4)
 
separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana, hypodermic syringes, needles, or other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in permentarily injecting controlled substances into the human body; and
objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body which shall include but not be limited to the following:
(a)	metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes, with
or without  screens, permanent  screens, hashish heads,  or punctured metal bowls,
 
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
 
water pipes,
carburation tubes and devices, smoking and carburation mats,
roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material such as
a marijuana cigarette which has become too small or too short to be
 
held in a hand,
(f)	miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials,
(g)	chamber pipes,
(h)	carburetor pipes,
(i)	electric pipes,
G)	air driven pipes,
(k)	chillums,
(l)	bongs, and
(m)	ice pipes or chillers.
(B)	In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia a Court or other authority shall consider, in addition to all other logical relevant factors the following:
(1)	Statements by an owner or anyone in control of the object concerning its use,
(2)	prior convictions, if any, of an owner or anyone in control of the object under any city ordinance or state or federal law relating to a controlled substance,
(3)	the proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of a city ordinance or state or federal law,
(4)	the proximity of the object to any controlled substance,
(5)	the existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the object,
(6)	direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to any person to whom he or she knows
or should reasonably know intends to use the object to facilitate a violation of a city, state, or federal law,
(7)	instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use,
(8)	descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use,
(9)	national and local advertising concerning its use,
(10)	the manner in which the object was displayed for sale,
(11)       whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products,
(12)	direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise,
(13)	the existence and scope of any legitimate use of the object in the community, and
(14)	expert testimony concerning its use.
(C)	It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with the intent to use, drug paraphernalia to manufacture, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of an infraction.

Sec. 6-338 NOISE, MOTOR VEHICLE LIMITS, SOUND REPRODUCTION DEVICES.
(A)	It is found and declared that the making, creation or maintenance of such loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use, effect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and the peace and quiet of the City.
(B)	It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by
 
loud noise, music, or language, by fighting or threatening to fight, or by any other offensive action. It shall be unlawful for any person in legal possession or charge of a residence or other private property to permit, or by inaction allow other persons on the premises to disturb the peace jointly or severally by loud noise, music or language.
(C)	The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this provision, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
(1)	Homs; Signaling Devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car or other vehicle on any street or public place of the City, except as a danger warning, the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh tone and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity, the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up;
(2)	Radios; stereos; phonographs, etc.  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, stereophonic sound system or  similar  device which  reproduces  or amplifies  radio broadcasts  or musical recordings  or other machines  or devices for the producing  or reproducing of sound in any such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons whom are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device  is  operated  and  who  are  voluntarily  listeners  thereto.	The operation of any such machine or device in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this code;
(3)	Loud-Speaker;  Amplifiers  for  Advertising.	The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure;
(4)	Yelling; Shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity;
(5)	Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or a other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
Provided, however, persons operating such machines or devices while participating in
 
licensed or permitted activities such as parades or carnivals shall not be deemed to be in violation of this Section.
(D)	Violation of this code section shall be deemed to be a Class V misdemeanor. Each day any such violation or failure to perform such act shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.	(Penalties refer to Sections 6-401  through 6-403 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 6-339 TOBACCO; USE BY MINORS; PENALTY. Any person under the age of 18 years who shall smoke cigarettes or cigars, or use tobacco in any form whatsoever, in the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall be guilty ofa Class V Misdemeanor. Any minor so charged with the violation of this Section may be  free from prosecution when such minor shall have furnished  evidence for the conviction of the person or persons selling or giving such minor the cigarettes, cigars or tobacco. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1418)

Sec. 6-340 MINOR MISREPRESENTING AGE TO OBTAIN TOBACCO; PENALTY.  Any
person under the age of 18 years who shall obtain cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, or tobacco material from any person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation licensed by the State of Nebraska as provided in Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1421and28-1422, by representing that he/she is of the age of 18 years or older, shall be guilty of a Class V Misdemeanor. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-1427)

Sec. 6-341 MINOR; UNLAWFUL POSSESSION  OF TOBACCO; PENALTY.   Any person
under the age of 18 years who shall have in his or her possession or physical control any cigarettes, cigars, tobacco material in any form whatsoever in the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall be guilty of a Class V Misdemeanor. Any person so charged with the violation of this Section may be free from prosecution when such minor shall have furnished evidence for the conviction of the person or persons selling or giving such minor the cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, or tobacco material.



Sec. 6-342 PUBLIC URINATION: PENALTY.	A person nineteen (19) years of age or over shall not urinate in a public place, including but not limited to a street, alley, or sidewalk, and where the conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public. Violation of this Section shall be a Class V Misdemeanor.
 





(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4.  Violations Bureau I Penal Provision


Sec. 6-401 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, unless specifically provided otherwise, be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor as defined by the Statutes of the State of Nebraska, Section 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined and/or jailed accordingly as well as any other penalty as provided for in the applicable ordinance. (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Ordinance 2247 6/25/2013)

Sec. 6-402 VIOLATIONS BUREAU. A Violations Bureau for the City of Blair is hereby created pursuant to Section 18-1729 R.R.S. Neb. for the purpose of collecting penalties for city code violation.
Any person accused of a violation as established by Sections 6-102, 6-103, 6-104, 6-106, 6-
108, 6-111, 6-112, 6-113, 6-118, 6-119, Sections 6-201through6-203, inclusive, Sections 6-207, 6-
304, 6-310, 6-314, 6-318 and Sections 6-319.01through6-319.09, inclusive, Sections 6-320, 6-
320.01, 6-321, 6-322, 6-325, 6-326, 6-326.02, 6-326.04, 6-326.05, 6-328, 6-333, 6-334 and 6-338
may, within ten (10) days after the issuance of a citation of the violation and before the appearance date thereon, dispose of the citation by appearing at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair and remitting full payment of the penalty assessed for the specific violation.
Any person may plead not guilty to the citation and he or she may appear before the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on the date and at the time specified on the citation.
At the time of the commission of the alleged violation, the accused shall be served with printed notice infmming the accused of his or her options in disposing of the citation as noted hereinabove.
Ifthe accused fails to appear at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair or before the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on or before the date specified on the citation, a wan-ant for his or her an-est shall be issued by the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska. (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Ordinance 2209 10/25/2011; Ordinance 2229, 09/25/2012; Ordinance 2247 6/25/2013; Ordinance 2260 5/20/2014; Ordinance 2320 10/11/2016)

Sec. 6-403 PENAL TIES. A conviction for violation of Sections 6-102, 6-103, 6-104, 6-106, 6-108,
6-111, 6-112, 6-113, 6-118, 6-119, 6-132, Sections 6-201through6-203, inclusive, Sections 6-207,
6-304, 6-314, 6-318, Sections 6-319.01through6-319.09, inclusive, Sections 6-320, 6-320.01, 6-
321, 6-322, 6-325, 6-326, 6-326.02, 6-326.04, 6-326.05, 6-328, 6-334, 6-338 shallresultinafinefor
the first offense in any one calendar year of the sum of Fifty dollars ($50.00), for the second offense in any one calendar year the sum of One Hundred dollars ($100.00), andforthe third or subsequent offenses in any one calendar year the sum of One Hundred Fifty dollars ($150.00). A conviction for violation of Section 6-310 and 6-333 shall result in a fine for the first offense in any one calendar year of the sum of One Hundred dollars ($100.00), for the second offense in any one calendar year the sum of One Hundred Fifty dollars ($150.00), and forthe third offense and subsequent offenses in any one calendar year the sum of Two Hundred dollars ($200.00). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Ordinance220910/25/2011; Ordinance2229, 09/25/2012; Ordinance2247 6/25/2013; Ordinance 2260 5/20/2014; Ordinance 2320 10/11/2016)

(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 5 - RESERVED FOR FUTURE USE



























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 6.  Arrest and Enforcement Jurisdiction

Sec. 6-601 POLICE DEPARTMENT; ARREST AND ENFORCEMENT JURISDICTION.
(1)	Every Municipal law enforcement officer shall have the power and authority to enforce the laws of this state and the Municipality or otherwise perform the functions of that office anywhere within his or her primary jurisdiction. Primary jurisdiction shall mean the geographic area with territorial limits of the Municipality.
(2)	Any Municipal law enforcement officer who is within this state, but beyond the territorial limits of his or her primary jurisdiction, shall have the power and authority to enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinance of any city or incorporated village or otherwise perform the functions ofhis or her office, including the authority to arrest and detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing the functions within the territorial limits of his or her primary jurisdiction in the following cases:
(a)	Any Municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to apprehend a person suspected of committing a felony, may follow such person into any other jurisdiction inthis state and there arrest and detain such person and return such person to the officer's primary jurisdiction;
(b)	Any Municipal law enforcement officer, if in a fresh attempt to apprehend a person suspected of committing a misdemeanor or a traffic infraction, may follow such person anywhere in an area within twenty-five (25) miles of the boundaries of the officer's primary jurisdiction and there arrest and detain such person and return such person to the officer's primary jurisdiction;
(c)	Any Municipal law enforcement officer shall have such enforcement and arrest and detention authority when responding to a call in which a local, state, or federal law enforcement officer is in need of assistance. A law enforcement officer in need of assistance shall mean (i) a law enforcement officer whose life is in danger or (ii) a law enforcement officer who needs assistance in making an arrest and the suspect (A) will not be apprehended unless immediately arrested, (B) may cause injury to himself or herself or others or damage to property unless immediately arrested, or (C) may destroy or conceal evidence of the commission of a crime; and
(d)	Ifthe Municipality, under the provisions of the Interlocal Cooperation Act, enters into a
contract with any other municipality or county for law enforcement services or joint law enforcement services, law enforcement personnel may have such enforcement authority within the jurisdiction of each of the participating political subdivisions if provided for in the agreement. Unless otherwise provided in the agreement, the Municipality shall provide liability insurance coverage for its own law enforcement personnel as provided in Section 13-1802 RS Neb.

(3)	IfMunicipal law enforcement personnel are rendering aid in their law enforcement capacity outside the limits of the Municipality in the event of disaster, emergency, or civil defense emergency or in connection with any program of practice or training for such disaster, emergency, or civil defense emergency when such program is conducted or participated in by the Nebraska Emergency Management Agency or with any other related training program, the law enforcement personnel shall have the power and authority to enforce the laws of this state or any legal ordinances or resolutions of the local government where they are rendering aid or otherwise perform the functions of their office, includingthe authority to arrest an detain suspects, as if enforcing the laws or performing the functions within the territorial limits of their primary jurisdiction.	The Municipality shall self-insure or contract for insurance against any liability for personal injuries or property damage that may be incurred by it or by
 
its personnel as the result of any movement of its personnel outside the limits of the Municipality pursuant to this subsection. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §29-215, 81-829.65)




















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter?

FIRE REGULATIONS

Article 1.  Fires

Sec. 7-101 FIRES; PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY. The Fire Chief, or any officer in charge of the Fire Department, shall have the authority and power to cause the removal of property whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of more valuable property, the protection ofhuman life, or to prevent the spreading of fire to adjoining property. The Fire Chief may direct the Municipal Firefighters to remove any building, structure or fence for the purpose of checking the progress of any fire. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to blow up, or cause to be blown up with explosives, any building or structure during the progress of a fire for the purpose of checking the progress of the same.

Sec. 7-102 INTERFERENCE. It shall be unlawful at any time and place where any fireman is discharging or attempting to discharge any official duties, to willfully:
a.	Resist or interfere with the lawful efforts of any fireman in the discharge or attempt to discharge an official duty; or
b.	Disobey the lawful order given by any fireman while performing his or her duties; or
c.	Engage in any disorderly conduct which delays or prevents a fire from being extinguished within a reasonable time; or
d.	Forbid or prevent others from assisting or extinguishing a fire or exhort another person, as to whom he or she has no legal right or obligation to protect or control, not to assist in extinguishing a fire.
Interfering with a fireman on official duty shall be a Class I misdemeanor.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§28-908)

Sec. 7-103 FIRES; EQUIPMENT. It shall be unlawful for any person except the Fire Chief and the members of the Municipal Fire Department to molest, destroy, handle or in any other way to interfere with the use and storage of any of the fire trucks and other apparatus belonging to the Municipality.

Sec. 7-104 FIRES; OBSTRUCTION. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstructthe use of a fire hydrant, or have or place any material within fifteen (15) feet of the said hydrant. Any vehicle or material found as an obstruction may be immediately removed by the Fire Chief or any member of the Fire Department, at the risk, cost and expense of the owner or claimant. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6,166)

Sec. 7-105 FIRES; DRIVING OVER HOSE. It shall be unlawful for any person, without the consent of the Fire Chief or Assistant Fire Chief, to drive any vehicle over unprotected hose of the Fire Department.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §60-6, 184)

Sec. 7-106 FIRES; FALSE ALARM. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without good and reasonable cause to furnish any information or cause such information to be furnished or conveyed by electric, electronic, telephonic, or mechanical means, knowing the same to be false concerning the need for assistance of a fire department or any personnel or equipment of such department. False reporting shall be a Class I misdemeanor.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-907)

Sec. 7-107 FIRES; PEDESTRIANS. It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to enter or remain in any
 
street after a fire alarm shall have sounded until the fire trucks shall have completely passed.




















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2.  Fire Prevention

Sec. 7-201 FIRE PREVENTION; LIFE SAFETY CODE. Incorporated by reference into this Code are the standards reconnnended by the National Fire Protection Association, known as the Life Safety Code, Current Edition, and all subsequent amendments. This Code shall have the same force and effect as if set out verbatim herein. Three (3) copies of the Life Safety Code are on file with the Municipal Clerk and shall be available for public inspection at any reasonable time. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-132, 19-902, 19-922, 81-502)

Sec. 7-202 FIRE PREVENTION; LAWFUL ENTRY. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or structure to allow the Fire Chief to inspect, or cause to be inspected, as often as necessary the said structure for the purpose of ascertaining and enumerating all conditions therein that are likely to cause fire, or any other violations of the provisions of the Municipal ordinances affecting the hazard of fire.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-512)

Sec. 7-203 FIRE PREVENTIONS; VIOLATION NOTICE. It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of any building or structure that was lawfully inspected as hereinbefore prescribed, and who receives written or verbal notice of a violation of any of the provisions of the Municipal ordinances to correct the condition that violates the said ordinance or ordinances within five (5) days from the date of receipt of such notice.

Sec. 7-204 FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE LIMITS DEFINED. The following described territory in the Municipality shall be and constitute the fire limits: All property zoned business, connnercial, or industrial and so zoned on the Official Zoning Map on file at the City Clerk's office. (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§16-222)

Sec. 7-205  FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE LIMITS BUILDING PERMIT.  Prior to the moving or
construction of any building in the fire limits, application must be made to the Governing Body. Construction shall include the enlarging or alteration of any building in the fire limits. Such application shall be furnished by the Municipal Clerk and shall require such information as the Governing Body deems necessary to determine whether or not to grant a building permit.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-222)

Sec. 7-206 FIRE PREVENTION; FIRE LIMITS MATERIALS. Within the aforesaid fire limits, no structure shall be built, altered, moved, or enlarged unless such structure will be enclosed with such incombustible materials as will satisfy the Fire Chief that the said structure will be reasonably fireproof (Neb. Rev.  Stat. §16-222)

Sec. 7-207  FIRE PREVENTION;  MOVING COMBUSTIBLE BUILDING WITHIN FIRE
LIMITS PROHIBITED. It shall be unlawful for any person to move any wooden or combustible building into the fire limits of the City or from one lot to another within the said fire limits.

Sec. 7-208 FIRE PREVENTION; PERMITTED REPAIRS. It shall be unlawful for any person to repair, alter, or add to any building in the fire limits where the repair is less than fifty (50%) percent of the building unless the said person shall first submit an application to make such repairs, alterations, or to add to any building and shall state on the application that the material used will be non-combustible and approved by the Fire Chief Repairs in the form of patching and other minor repairs shall not require a permit.  In the event that the repairs, alteration, or addition is to involve more than fifty (50%)
 
percent of the building, the owner shall be required to apply for a new building permit which shall state that the building, when completed, shall be fireproof and made of non-combustible materials. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-222)

Sec. 7-209 FIRE PREVENTION; REMOVAL REQUIRED. In the event that any wooden or combustible building or structure, or any non-combustible building which stands within the fire limits is damaged to the extent of fifty (50%) per cent or more ofits value, exclusive of the foundation, it shall not be repaired or rebuilt, but shall be taken down and removed within sixty (60) days from the date of such fire or other casualty.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-222)

Sec. 7-210  FIRE PREVENTION; REMOVAL OR REPAIR REQUIRED.  In the event that a
building within the fire limits becomes damaged to the extent ofless than fifty (50%) per cent of its value, exclusive of the foundation, it shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant to remove or repair the said building in accordance with the provisions of this Article. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow a building to stand in such damaged or decayed condition. Any such building shall be removed or repaired within thirty (30) days after receiving notice to do so by the Governing Body. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-222)

Sec. 7-211 FIRE PREVENTION; OPEN BURNING BAN, WAIVER
REPEALED BY ORDINANCE NO. 2138 -See Section 4-302. (March 25, 20os).





























(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3.  Explosive Materials

Sec. 7-301 EXPLOSIVES; STORAGE. It shall be unlawful for any person to store dynamite and other explosives other than in a proper receptacle which shall be closed at all times, except when actually in use. Such cement, metal or stone receptacle shall not be located in any room where there is a flame or flammable materials.

Sec. 7-302 EXPLOSIVES; BULLETS. It shall be unlawful for any person to store cartridges, shells, and percussion caps other than in their original containers away from flame, flammable materials, and high explosives.

Sec. 7-303 EXPLOSIVES; BLASTING PERMITS. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge high explosives within the Municipality without first securing a permit from the Police Chief and shall discharge such explosives in conformance with his or her direction and under his or her supervision.

Sec. 7-304 EXPLOSIVES, PETROLEUM FUELS, TRANSFER. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer to or fill a cargo vehicle with a container capacity of 1,500 gallons of water or more from another cargo vehicle. Cargo vehicles with a capacity of 1,500 gallons of water or more shall be filled only from a permanently installed bulk plant. For the purpose of this section a cargo vehicle shall be defined as a container used to transport liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) as liquid cargo, gasoline, diesel fuel, or other petroleum based fuel either mounted on a conventional truck chassis or an integral part of a transporting vehicle in which the container constitutes in whole, or in part, the stress member used as a frame.



























(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4.  Fireworks

Sec. 7-401 TERMS DEFINED. "Fireworks" shall mean any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation, and as may be otherwise defined in Titles 49 or 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations. "License" shall mean a permit issued by the City authorizing the licensee to engage in the business of retail sales of fireworks within its corporate limits, but not within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, all as permitted or limited by Nebraska state statutes.
"Outlet" shall mean a location or place of business within this city at which the licensee is
authorized to engage in the retail sale of fireworks.
"Permissible Fireworks" shall mean only sparklers, Vesuvius fountains, spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star and comet type color aerial shells without explosive charge for the purpose of making a noise, lady fingers not to exceed 50 milligrams in weight, color wheels, and any other fireworks approved by the state fire marshal by virtue ofNeb. Rev. Stat. §28-1252. It shall also include poppers, caps, and fireworks of any description which are authorized for possession and use at (a) exhibitions or displays approved by the state fire marshal and (b) public exhibitions and displays held under the auspices of any governmental subdivision of this state and which otherwise conform to all laws, rules and regulations.
"Sale" shall mean barter, exchange or gift or offer thereof and each such transaction made by person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. (Amended by Ordinance 1997 03/23/2004)

Sec. 7-402 DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE, DISCHARGE, AND POSSESSION.  It shall  be
unlawful for any person within the City of Blair to offer for sale, discharge, ignite, use, explode or set off any permitted fireworks as set forth in Sec. 7-401 at any time except between the hours of 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 10:30 o'clock p.m. between June 24th and July 2 and between the hours of 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 11:30 p.m. between July 3 and July 5, inclusive, of each year, except any public display that maybe approved by the City from time to time. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to have in his/her possession any fireworks which are prohibited from being sold, used, or discharged by the provisions of this Section or the previous Section. Ifany person shall have in his possession any fireworks which are prohibited from being sold, a warrant may be issued for the seizure of the fireworks, the same shall be safely kept by the Chief of Police to be used as evidence. Upon conviction of the offender, the fireworks shall be destroyed, but if the offender shall be discharged, the fireworks shall be returned to the person in whose possession they were found. (Penalties refer to Sections 7-501 through 7-503 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2038 06/14/2005) (Amended by Ordinance 1998 03/23/2004; Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Amended by Ordinance 2249 07/09/2013)

Sec. 7-403 FIREWORKS; THROWING FIRECRACKERS. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, or any object which explodes upon contact with another object; from or into a motor vehicle; onto any street, highway, or sidewalk; at or near any person; into any building; or into or at any group of persons. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-227, 28-1242) (Penalties refer to Sections 7- 501 through 7-503 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)
 
Sec. 7-404 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Prior to the granting of any license to sell fireworks within the city, each applicant must present to the city clerk a certificate of insurance or an actual policy, underwritten by a company authorized to do business within this state, demonstrating that the applicant has and carries liability insurance, currently effective for the year of the license applied for, and in the following minimum amounts $250,000 for bodily injury to each person, $500,000 for bodily injury to all persons injured in one occurrence and $100,000 for property damage coverage for any liability incurred through the operation of said fireworks sales; said policy providing additional coverage for the city and its duly elected and appointed officers, and further providing that the City shall be entitled to receive written notice of policy cancellation reasonably in advance of such action. (Amended by Ordinance 1999 03/23/2004)

Sec. 7-405 LICENSE REQUIRED.  In addition to any license to sell fireworks which may be required to be issued by the state fire marshal pursuant to the Revised Statutes of Nebraska, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or engage in the sale of fireworks within the city limits of Blair, Nebraska without first having obtained a license issued by the City Clerk and payment of an annual license fee in the amount of $5,000.00 for each retail outlet. The applicant/license holder must be a non-profit entity that is located within the City of Blair, Nebraska. Each application must be received between February 1 and March 1 of that calendar year at the City of Blair Offices. Each license issued shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued and shall be displayed at all times within the outlet of the license holder to which it applies. An individual non-profit entity shall be allowed to submit up to three (3) applications for a license. A Vendor (Fireworks Wholesaler) may be listed on any number of applications with any number of non-profit entities. All applications must be accompanied by a bank draft or certified cashier's check in the amount of the annual license fee. If an application is not accompanied by an appropriate bank draft of certified cashier's check, the application is incomplete and will not be accepted.
Ifthere are more applications than licenses available, each eligible application will have its
application submitted to a lottery wherein the license holders for that year shall be drawn by the City Clerk. No non-profit  entity shall be awarded a second license until all other eligible non-profit entities have been selected.  Ifrequired, the lottery will be on or before March 15 of each year. (Amended by Ordinance 2000 03/23/2004; Amended 01/24/2012)

Sec. 7-406  SALES AND STORAGE; LOCATION PERMITTED, SAFETY.   No fireworks
shall be stored within or without, nor displayed at or sold from, any building structure, stand or otherwise, whether or not the same is licensed outlet, within 100 feet from any service station or other establishment selling or storing gasoline, kerosene or other flammable or explosive liquids, gases or other combustible materials, nor within or without, displayed at or sold from, any structure or building of a permanent nature; and may be sold only from a temporary structure or stand erected and used solely for such purposes only at the Veterans Memorial Field parking area located at 13th & Butler Streets in the City of Blair. Said location will safely hold a maximum of three (3) fireworks outlets.
Except as otherwise exempted or permitted by this Ordinance, the location, placement and use of all licensed outlets shall be governed by applicable zoning, building and subdivision codes which have been, or may in the future be, adopted by the City of Blair. Reasonable discretion is hereby vested in and delegated to the City Clerk with reference to the granting or disapproval of all applications for fireworks licenses, and the physical placement of temporary structures or stands



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 7, Article 4, page 2
 
upon all premises intended to be licensed and used for the sale of fireworks. All licensed sales and storage outlets shall be subject to inspection at all times by the Fire Chief, Building Inspector and State Fire Marshal. (Amended by Ordinance 2001 03/23/2004)

Sec. 7-407 FLYING LANTERN-TYPE DEVICES PROHIBITED Flying lantern-type devices are prohibited from sales, possession and use in the City. For purposes of this section, flying lantern­ type devices means devices that require a flame which produces heated air trapped in a balloon-type covering allowing the device to float in the air. Flying lantern-type devices shall not include hot-air balloons used for transporting persons.  (Amended by Ordinance No. 2299 11/24/2015)
















































(END OF SECTION)




City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 7, Article 4, page 3
 
Article 4.  Fireworks

Sec. 7-401 TERMS DEFINED. "Fireworks" shall mean any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration or detonation, and as may be otherwise defined in Titles 49 or 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations. "License" shall mean a permit issued by the City authorizing the licensee to engage in the business of retail sales of fireworks within its corporate limits, but not within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, all as permitted or limited by Nebraska state statutes.
"Outlet" shall mean a location or place of business within this city at which the licensee is
authorized to engage in the retail sale of fireworks.
"Permissible Fireworks" shall mean only sparklers, Vesuvius fountains, spray fountains, torches, color fire cones, star and comet type color aerial shells without explosive charge for the purpose of making a noise, lady fingers not to exceed 50 milligrams in weight, color wheels, and any other fireworks approved by the state fire marshal by virtue ofNeb. Rev. Stat. §28-1252. It shall also include poppers, caps, and fireworks of any description which are authorized for possession and use at (a) exhibitions or displays approved by the state fire marshal and (b) public exhibitions and displays held under the auspices of any governmental subdivision of this state and which otherwise conform to all laws, rules and regulations.
"Sale" shall mean barter, exchange or gift or offer thereof and each such transaction made by person, whether as principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee. (Amended by Ordinance 1997 03/23/2004)

Sec. 7-402 DAYS AND HOURS OF SALE, DISCHARGE, AND POSSESSION.  It shall  be
unlawful for any person within the City of Blair to offer for sale, discharge, ignite, use, explode or set off any permitted fireworks as set forth in Sec. 7-401 at any time except between the hours of 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 10:30 o'clock p.m. between June 24th and July 2 and between the hours of 8:00 o'clock a.m. and 11:30 p.m. between July 3 and July 5, inclusive, of each year, except any public display that maybe approved by the City from time to time. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City to have in his/her possession any fireworks which are prohibited from being sold, used, or discharged by the provisions of this Section or the previous Section. Ifany person shall have in his possession any fireworks which are prohibited from being sold, a warrant may be issued for the seizure of the fireworks, the same shall be safely kept by the Chief of Police to be used as evidence. Upon conviction of the offender, the fireworks shall be destroyed, but if the offender shall be discharged, the fireworks shall be returned to the person in whose possession they were found. (Penalties refer to Sections 7-501 through 7-503 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2038 06/14/2005) (Amended by Ordinance 1998 03/23/2004; Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Amended by Ordinance 2249 07/09/2013)

Sec. 7-403 FIREWORKS; THROWING FIRECRACKERS. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any firecracker, or any object which explodes upon contact with another object; from or into a motor vehicle; onto any street, highway, or sidewalk; at or near any person; into any building; or into or at any group of persons. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-227, 28-1242) (Penalties refer to Sections 7- 501 through 7-503 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)





City of Blair Municipal Code                                                               Chapter 7, Article 4, page 1
 
Sec. 7-404 INSURANCE REQUIRED. Prior to the granting of any license to sell fireworks within the city, each applicant must present to the city clerk a certificate of insurance or an actual policy, underwritten by a company authorized to do business within this state, demonstrating that the applicant has and carries liability insurance, currently effective for the year of the license applied for, and in the following minimum amounts $250,000 for bodily injury to each person, $500,000 for bodily injury to all persons injured in one occurrence and $100,000 for property damage coverage for any liability incurred through the operation of said fireworks sales; said policy providing additional coverage for the city and its duly elected and appointed officers, and further providing that the City shall be entitled to receive written notice of policy cancellation reasonably in advance of such action. (Amended by Ordinance 1999 03/23/2004)

Sec. 7-405 LICENSE REQUIRED.  In addition to any license to sell fireworks which may be required to be issued by the state fire marshal pursuant to the Revised Statutes of Nebraska, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or engage in the sale of fireworks within the city limits of Blair, Nebraska without first having obtained a license issued by the City Clerk and payment of an annual license fee in the amount of $5,000.00 for each retail outlet. The applicant/license holder must be a non-profit entity that is located within the City of Blair, Nebraska. Each application must be received between February 1 and March 1 of that calendar year at the City of Blair Offices. Each license issued shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued and shall be displayed at all times within the outlet of the license holder to which it applies. An individual non-profit entity shall be allowed to submit up to three (3) applications for a license. A Vendor (Fireworks Wholesaler) may be listed on any number of applications with any number of non-profit entities. All applications must be accompanied by a bank draft or certified cashier's check in the amount of the annual license fee. If an application is not accompanied by an appropriate bank draft of certified cashier's check, the application is incomplete and will not be accepted.
Ifthere are more applications than licenses available, each eligible application will have its
application submitted to a lottery wherein the license holders for that year shall be drawn by the City Clerk. No non-profit  entity shall be awarded a second license until all other eligible non-profit entities have been selected.  Ifrequired, the lottery will be on or before March 15 of each year. (Amended by Ordinance 2000 03/23/2004; Amended 01/24/2012)

Sec. 7-406  SALES AND STORAGE; LOCATION PERMITTED, SAFETY.   No fireworks
shall be stored within or without, nor displayed at or sold from, any building structure, stand or otherwise, whether or not the same is licensed outlet, within 100 feet from any service station or other establishment selling or storing gasoline, kerosene or other flammable or explosive liquids, gases or other combustible materials, nor within or without, displayed at or sold from, any structure or building of a permanent nature; and may be sold only from a temporary structure or stand erected and used solely for such purposes only at the Veterans Memorial Field parking area located at 13th & Butler Streets in the City of Blair. Said location will safely hold a maximum of three (3) fireworks outlets.
Except as otherwise exempted or permitted by this Ordinance, the location, placement and use of all licensed outlets shall be governed by applicable zoning, building and subdivision codes which have been, or may in the future be, adopted by the City of Blair. Reasonable discretion is hereby vested in and delegated to the City Clerk with reference to the granting or disapproval of all applications for fireworks licenses, and the physical placement of temporary structures or stands



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 7, Article 4, page 2
 
upon all premises intended to be licensed and used for the sale of fireworks. All licensed sales and storage outlets shall be subject to inspection at all times by the Fire Chief, Building Inspector and State Fire Marshal. (Amended by Ordinance 2001 03/23/2004)

Sec. 7-407 FLYING LANTERN-TYPE DEVICES PROHIBITED Flying lantern-type devices are prohibited from sales, possession and use in the City. For purposes of this section, flying lantern­ type devices means devices that require a flame which produces heated air trapped in a balloon-type covering allowing the device to float in the air. Flying lantern-type devices shall not include hot-air balloons used for transporting persons.  (Amended by Ordinance No. 2299 11/24/2015)
















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 5.

Violations Bureau/Penal Provision

Sec. 7-501 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State of Nebraska, Section 28-1206, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly. (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 7-502 VIOLATIONS BUREAU. A Violations Bureau for the City of Blair is hereby created pursuant to Section 18-1729 R.R. S. Neb. for the purpose of collecting penalties for city code violation.
Any person accused of a violation as established by Sections 7-402 and 7-403 may, within ten
(10) days after the issuance of a citation of the violation and before the appearance date thereon, dispose of the citation by appearing at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair and remitting full payment of the penalty assessed for the specific violation.
Any person may plead not guilty to the citation and he or she may appear before the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on the date and at the time specified on the citation.
At the time of the commission of the alleged violation, the accused shall be served with printed notice informing the accused of his or her options in disposing of the citation as noted hereinabove.
Ifthe accused fails to appear at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair or before the
County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on or before the date specified on the citation, a warrant for his or her arrest shall be issued by the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska. (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 7-503 PENALTIES. A conviction for violation of Sections 7-402 and 7-403 shall result in afme for the first offense in any one calendar year of the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), for the second offense in any one calendar year the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), and for the third or subsequent offenses in any one calendar year the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Amended by Ordinance 2140  06/10/2008)
















(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter 8


PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY


Article 1.  General Provisions


Sec. 8-101  MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; MAINTENANCE AND CONTROL.  The Governing
Body shall have the care, supervision, and control of all public highways, bridges, streets, alleys, public squares, and commons within the Municipality, and shall cause the same to be kept open and in repair, and free from nuisances. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-609, 16-610)

Sec. 8-102 REAL ESTATE; SALES. The power to sell and convey any real estate owned by the City, (including park land), except real estate used in the operation of public utilities, and except real estate for State Armory sites for the use of the State of Nebraska, or the Nebraska Armory Board, shall be exercised by ordinance directing the conveyance of such real estate and the manner and terms thereof. Notice of such sale and the terms thereof shall be published for three (3) consecutive weeks in a legal newspaper published in or of general circulation in such City immediately after the passage and publication of such ordinance; Provided, if a remonstrance against such sale signed by legal electors thereof equal in number to thirty (30%) per cent of the electors of such City voting at the last regular municipal election held therein, be filed with the Governing Body of such City within thirty
(30) days of the passage and publication of such ordinance; said property shall not then, nor within one (1) year thereafter, be sold.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-202)

Sec. 8-103 BEN CH MARK. The bench mark or datum line to which points on the grades of sewers, streets and other improvements are to be reckoned is hereby established to be No. 1099.69 of the United States Geodetic Survey, located at the northwest comer of the Courthouse in the City of Blair, Nebraska, in the west face of the cornerstone of such building between the letters "A" and "D" four (4) feet above the ground, the deepest point of a chiseled "V" which forms a period between the letters "A" and "D" being established as such bench mark, same being at an M.S.L. elevation of 1099.2333.

Sec. 8-104 Reserved for future use. Section repealed by Ordinance 2181 03/09/2010. Refer to Section  6-326.04

Sec. 8-105  MUNICIPAL PROPERTY AND RIGHT OF WAY; OBSTRUCTIONS.
(A)	Trees, Shrubs and Other Vegetation: Trees, shrubs, and other vegetation growing upon or near the lot line or upon public ground and interfering with the use and construction of any public improvements, including sidewalks and streets, shall be deemed an obstruction under this Article. The roots, branches or other portion of such trees, shrubs or other vegetation deemed to be an obstruction by the City Administrator or the Director of Public Works may be removed by the City of Blair at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the tree, shrub or other vegetation is located should the owner fail or neglect, after written notice, to do so.
(B)	Obstructions: It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity to place or cause to be placed any fence, gate, building, structure, sign, banner, vending machine or other obstruction on any sidewalks, alleys, streets, or any other public property or public right-of-
 
way; provided, however, the following exceptions shall apply, to-wit:
(1)	Signs which are authorized under Section 8-109 through 8-111 of the Municipal Code for the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall be lawful: and,
(2)	Newspaper vending machines may be placed upon any public right of way in the City of Blair, Nebraska, which is located in any commercial zoning district, providing that the following terms and conditions are satisfied:
(a)	A request for the placement of a newspaper vending machine shall be initiated by filing an application with the City Administrator upon forms prescribed for that purpose. The application shall be accompanied by a drawing or site plan which sets forth the location of said vending machine, and, in considering whether or not to grant the application the office of the City Administrator shall consider pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic and pedestrian flow and control glare and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district.
(b)	The length of time that a newspaper vending machine may be placed upon such property shall be determined by the office of the City Administrator.
(3)	Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 8-105(b)(2) immediately hereinabove, it shall be unlawful to place or allow to be placed any newspaper vending machines on any right of way or public owned sidewalk along that portion of Washington Street which is located in the Central Business District; and,
(C)	Any unlawful obstructions may be removed by the City of Blair at the expense of the person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity, owning, placing or allowing such obstruction to be unlawfully placed, should such person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity fail or neglect to remove the same after written notice thereof.

Sec. 8-106 CLOSING HOURS OF CITY PARKS. Closing hours for Black-Elk Neihardt Park are hereby established and Black-Elk Neihardt Park shall be closed daily from thirty (30) minutes after sunset to thirty (30) minutes before sunrise, except by parties that reserve the use ofNeihardt Park facilities. Closing hours for all other City Parks in the City of Blair, Nebraska, are hereby established and said Parks shall be closed daily between the hours of twelve (12:00) o'clock Midnight and five (5:00) o'clock A.M.  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any City Park during closing hours. (Penalties refer to Sections 8-701through8-703 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008) (Amended by Ordinance 2289 10/27/2015)

Sec. 8-107 CARE OF PROPERTY BETWEEN CURB AND LOTS LINES. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owners and adult occupants of any lot or tract of ground abutting upon any street or other thoroughfare in the City to keep the space between the lot line and curb line of the street free and clear of weeds, rubbish and obstruction and to keep mown the grass and sod thereon so the same will not exceed three (3") inches in height and also to prune and clip any hedge, shrubbery or bushy growth of ornamentals thereon so that same does not interfere with or molest lawful travel on the adjacent sidewalks and traveled portion of the adjacent streets and thoroughfares and so that same, in no case, exceeds twenty-four (24") inches in height.

Sec. 8-108 MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; TREES. No person or persons shall plant any tree or trees on the public right of way unless in full compliance with this section of the municipal code and outlined in Section 8-108.1 and 8-108.2.   (Amended by 2139 04/08/2008)
 

Sec. 8-108.01 RIGHT OF WAY TREE RESTRICTION.  Any individual desiring to plant trees on city right of way shall:
1.	First apply for a permit from the City Clerk's office, which permit fee will be set and determined from time to time as necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and  said fees shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "Permit, License and Application Fees", and shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and available for public inspection during regular office hours of the said Municipal Clerk.
2.	Sign a recordable agreement, which shall be recorded against the real property adjoining the right of way and owned by the individual( s) owning the property and requesting the permit stating they and/or their assigns shall be responsible  for the perpetual care, maintenance and removal of said tree(s).
3.	Agree not to plant any tree(s) closer than ten ( 10) feet to a curb or fifteen ( 15) feet from the shoulder of the road if there is no curb.
4.	Agree not to plant any tree(s) closer than six (6) feet of any sidewalk.
5.	Plant any tree(s) in conformance with Section 6-319. (Added by Ordinance 2139 04/08/2008)

NOTE:	See Resolution No. 2008-13 dated April 8, 2008 for City policy for planting and maintaining trees located on the public right of way within the City of Blair.

Sec. 8-108.02 FAIL URE TO APPLY FOR A TREE PLANTING PERMIT. Any tree planted in the public right of way without a tree permit as required by the Municipal Code after the adoption date of this Section shall be deemed to be unlawfully planted and growing and shall, at the discretion of the Governing Body, be deemed to be a nuisance. When any such tree is declared to be a nuisance, the Governing Body shall order, with proper notice, the tree removed at the expense of the owner of the property adjacent to the street right of way upon which the tree has been unlawfully planted. If the property owner fails or neglects to remove or cause to be removed the said tree, the Governing Body shall order the same removed and assess the expense of such removal against the property adjacent to the sidewalk space wherein the tree is planted and growing. In the event the property owner is a non-resident of the county in which the property lies, the Municipality shall, before levying any special assessment against that property, send a copy of any notice required by law to be published by means of certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the non-resident property owner. The last known address shall be that address listed on the current tax rolls at the time such required notice was first published. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to apply to any existing trees now growing within the street right of way. (Added by Ordinance 2139 04/08/2008)

Sec. 8-109 POLITICAL SIGNS, GENERALLY.  Temporary political signs may be placed upon the right of way owned by the City of Blair, Nebraska, in any zoning district, provided that the following terms and conditions are satisfied:
1.	Signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in area;
2.	Signs shall be placed:
a)	not less than fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement if no
 
curb exists, or,
b)	on the interior side of the sidewalk, whichever location is the greater distance from the street;
3.	Signs must be placed at least fifty (50) feet from a comer;
4.	Signs shall not be placed within two hundred (200) feet of a polling place;
5.	Permission must be obtained from the property owner abutting the City right-of-way prior to installing any signs;
6.	Signs shall not be installed more than four (4) weeks in advance of any primary, general or special election and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the election day;
7.	The provisions of this section shall apply only to right of way owned by the City and shall not apply to City owned parks, parking lots or other City owned real estate; and
8.	Political signs shall be defined as signs in  support of or against a candidate or a proposition which is the subject of a general, primary or special election held in the City of Blair, Nebraska.
(A) Political signs placed on City owned right of way that do not conform to the foregoing terms and conditions, or any political signs placed on any City owned parks parking lots or other City owned real estate, shall be removed and disposed of by the City Administrator or by City employees designated by the City Administrator of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

Sec. 8-110 TEMPORARY  SIGNS; WHEN AND WHERE AUTHORIZED.
(A)	Temporary signs advertising real estate for sale may be placed upon right of way owned by the City of Blair, Nebraska, in any zoning district, provided that the following terms and conditions are satisfied:

1.	Signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area;
2.	Signs shall be placed:
(a)	Not less than fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement if no curb exists, or,
(b)	On the interior side of the sidewalk, whichever location is the greater distance from the street;
3.	Signs must be placed at least fifty  (50) feet from a comer;
4.	Permission must be obtained from the property owner abutting the City right of way prior to installing any signs;
5.	Such signs may only be placed on the right of way immediately abutting the specific real estate advertised for sale and may not be placed at any other location; furthermore, such signs shall be removed within three (3) days of the completion of the sale; and,
6.	The provisions of this section shall apply only to right of way owned by the City and shall not apply to City owned parks, parking lots or other City owned real estate.

(B)	Temporary commercial signs advertising business or commercial matters, other than temporary signs advertising real estate for sale as described above, may be placed upon right of way owned by the City of Blair, Nebraska, in any commercial zoning district, provided the following terms and conditions are satisfied:

1.	Commercial signs shall only be allowable upon written permit issued by the office of
 
the City Administrator of the City of Blair, Nebraska.
2.	A request for a commercial sign permit is initiated by filing an application with the City Administrator upon forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be accompanied by drawings or a site plan or other such plans and data showing the description data and other materials constituting a record essential to an understanding of the proposed commercial sign.
3.	The applicant shall submit with the application a nonrefundable application fee. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City council by resolution and shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix for permit license and application fees.
4.	In considering whether or not to grant the application, the office of the City Administrator shall consider pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic and pedestrian flow and control, glare, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district.
5.	The length of time a commercial sign may be placed upon the right of way owned by the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall be determined by the office of the City Administrator but, in no event, shall a commercial sign be allowed to be placed on any property for more than ten (10) days during any calendar year.

(C)	Signs advertising real estate for sale placed on City-owned right of way that do not conform to the foregoing terms and conditions, any signs placed on City owned parks, parking lots or other City owned real estate, and any commercial signs in violation of section 8-11O(b), hereinabove, shall be removed and disposed of by the City Administrator or by City employees designated by the City Administrator of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

Sec. 8-111 TEMPORARY YARD/GARAGE  SALE SIGNS.
(A)	Temporary signs advertising yard or garage sales may be placed upon right of way owned by the City of Blair, Nebraska, in any residential zoning district, provided that the following terms and conditions are satisfied:

1.	Signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area;
2.	Signs shall be placed:
(a)	Not less than fifteen (15) feet from the back of the curb or edge of the pavement if no curb exists, or,
(b)	On the interior side of the sidewalk, whichever location is the greater distance from the street;
3.	Signs must be placed at least fifty (50) feet from a comer;
4.	Such signs may only be placed on the right of way immediately abutting the specific real estate on which the yard or garage sale is taking place and may not be placed at any other location; such signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of the completion of the sale; and,
5.	The provisions of this section shall apply only to right of way owned by the City and shall not apply to City owned parks, parking lots or other City owned real estate.

(B)	Yard or garage sale signs placed on City owned right of way that do not conform to the foregoing terms and conditions or any such signs placed on any City owned parks, parking lots or other City
 
owned real estate shall be removed  and disposed of by the City Administrator  or by City employees designated by the City Administrator of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

Sec. 8-112 MUNICIPAL PROPERTY; PUBLIC WORKS INVOLVING ARCHITECTURE  OR ENGINEERING;  REQUIREMENTS.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, the Municipality shall not engage in the construction of any public works involving architecture or engineering unless the plans, specifications, and estimates have been prepared and the construction has been observed by an architect, a professional engineer, or a person under the direct supervision of an architect, professional engineer, or those under the direct supervision of an architect or professional engineer.
(2)	Subsection ( 1) of this section shall not apply to the following activities:
(a)	Any public works project with contemplated expenditures for the completed project that do not exceed forty thousand dollars ($40,000);
(b)	Any alteration, renovation, or remodeling of a building if the alteration, renovation, or remodeling does not affect architectural or engineering safety features of the building;
(c)	Performance of professional services for itself if the Municipality appoints a municipal engineer or employs a full-time person licensed under the Engineers and Architects Regulation Act who is in responsible charge of architectural or engineering work;
(d)	The practice of any other certified trade or legally recognized profession;
(e)	Earthmoving and related work associated with soil and water conservation practices performed on any land owned by the Municipality that is not subject to a permit from the Department of Water Resources;
(f)	The work of employees and agents of the Municipality performing, in accordance with other requirements of law, their customary duties in the administration and enforcement of codes, permit programs, and land-use regulations and their customary duties in utility and public works construction, operation, and maintenance;
(g)	Those services ordinarily performed by subordinates under direct supervision of a professional engineer or those commonly designated as locomotive, stationary, marine operating engineers, power plant operating engineers, or manufacturers who supervise the operation of or operate machinery or equipment or who supervise construction within their own plant;
(h)	The construction of municipal water wells as defined in section 46-1212 RS Neb., the installation of pumps and pumping equipment into municipal water wells, and the decommissioning of municipal water wells, unless such construction, installation, or decommissioning is required by the Municipality to be designed or supervised by an engineer or unless legal requirements are imposed upon the Municipality as a part of a public water supply; and
(i)	Any other activities described in sections 81-3449 to 81-3453 RS Neb. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-3423, 81-3445, 81-3449 through 81-3453)
 

(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2.  Street Names and Designations

Sec. 8-201 STREETS. All City streets which run north and south or east and west are aligned to or continuations of the streets originally platted in the City shall be designated as Streets. Streets running east and west shall be designated by name and streets running north and south shall be designated by number.

Sec. 8-202 AVENUES. All City streets which are out of alignment with the original platted streets of the City, being offset at least one and one half (1 112) times the width of the original street which they continue, shall be designated as Avenues.
All avenues hereafter laid out and platted shall be numbered, in the case of north-south avenues, the number of the nearest street to the east thereof, and in the case of east-west avenues, shall be designated as an avenue and bear the name of the nearest street thereto and if it is equidistant from two
(2)	named streets, shall bear the name of the nearest named street to the south thereof

Sec. 8-203 BOULEYARDS, DRIVES AND ROADS. All City streets which run diagonally fromthe direction of the original north-south or east-west City streets or which run in a winding, roundabout or varying manner or direction, shall be designated as Boulevards, Drives or Roads preceded by a proper name.

Sec. 8-204 STREET MARKERS. The Director of Public Works shall cause to be erected and maintained suitable street markers on the Streets, Avenues, Boulevards, Drives and Roads within the City.





























(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3.  Block and Building Numbers

Sec. 8-301 FURNISHING OF NUMBERS. All buildings and premises within the City and outside of the City and within one half (112) mile of such limits shall be assigned numbers by the Building Inspector in conformance to the provisions herein and the number for any building or premise shall be furnished by him upon request of any person.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-614)

Sec. 8-302 COMPOSITION OF NUMBERS. The building number of any premise in the City shall contain the block number with the frontage number added thereto. Ifthe frontage number shall be a number less than ten (10), a cipher shall be added between the block number and the frontage number.

Sec. 8-303 BLOCK NUMBERS. Each City block shall have a number determined in accordance with the following rules:

1.	All City blocks shall be numbered from the east corporate limits successively and progressively for purposes of building numbers. On east-west streets and thoroughfares, including boulevards, drives, avenues and roads, all blocks fronting on Ninth Streetto the east shall be numbered ten (10), all blocks fronting on Tenth Streetto the east shall be numbered eleven (11), and such number systems shall progress successively to the west corporate limits of the City as now or hereafter established. All City blocks hereafter added to the City fronting Eighth Street to the east shall be numbered nine (9) and such numbering system shall continue progressively and successively eastward to the east City limits as hereafter established;
2.	All City blocks shall be numbered north of Washington Street successively and progressively beginning with blocks fronting to the south on Washington Street, which last described blocks shall be numbered one (1) for purposes of building numbers on north-south streets and thoroughfares, all City blocks fronting to the south on Front Street shall be numbered two (2) for said purpose and such numbering system shall progress successively to the north corporate limits of the City as now or hereafter constituted. All City blocks shall be numbered south ofWashington Street successively and progressively beginning with blocks fronting to the north on Washington Street, which last described blocks shall be numbered one (1) for the purpose of building numbers on north-south streets and thoroughfares, all City blocks fronting to the north on Lincoln Street shall be numbered two (2) for said purpose and such numbering system shall progress successively to the south corporate limits of the City as now or hereafter constituted.

Sec. 8-304 BUILDING NUMBERS. Each ten feet (10') of frontage of any block on any street or thoroughfare, including avenues, boulevards, drives and roads, shall be numbered, as determined bythe following rules:

1.	On the north-south streets and thoroughfares north of the north line of Washington Street the building numbers shall begin with zero one (01) forthe south ten (10') feet of street frontage of such block and such numbers shall progress successively to the north line of such block.

2.	On north-south streets and thoroughfares south of the south line of Washington Street the building numbers shall begin with zero one (01) forthe north ten (10') feet of street frontage of
 
such block and such numbers shall progress successively to the south line of such block.


3.	On east-west streets and thoroughfares west of the west line of 1st Street the building numbers shall begin with zero one (01) for the eastten (1O') feet of street frontage of such block and such numbers shall progress successively to the west line of such block.

4.	On east-west streets and thoroughfares east of the east line of 1st Street the building numbers shall begin with zero one (01) for the westten (1O') feet of street frontage of such block and such numbers	shall     progress     successively     to     the     east     line     of     such     block.

5.	Building numbers on avenues, boulevards, drives, and roads shall conform, as nearly as possible, to those used on other City streets.

6.	The number of any building shall be the block number plus the frontage number applicable to the principal door or other entry into such building. On east-west streets and thoroughfares, odd numbers shall be given to the buildings on the south side of the street and even numbers on the north side of each street. On north-south streets and thoroughfares, odd numbers shall be given to the buildings on the west side of the street and even numbers on the east side of each street.

7.	As to buildings which front upon streets and thoroughfares running in a north-south direction, the street address of same shall be the building number as hereinbefore provided, followed by the number or name of the street or thoroughfare on which the building fronts, which number or name shall be preceded by the word "North" or "South", depending on the location of the building with reference to Washington Street.

8.	As to buildings which front upon streets and thoroughfares running in an east-west direction, the street address of same shall be the building number as hereinbefore provided, followed by the number or name of the street or thoroughfare on which the building fronts, which number or name shall be preceded by the word "East" ifthe location of the building is east of the east line of 1st Street.
(Amended by Ordinance 2222 05/22/2012)


Sec. 8-305   CONFLICTS.	Conflicts or disputes with reference to building numbering shall be submitted to and resolved by the City Planning Commission.

Sec. 8-306 MARKING PREMISES. It is hereby made the duty of the owner, agent, lessee or occupant of any principal building in the City to place or cause to be installed and maintained on all buildings and premises which are used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes a proper number in a conspicuous place as near as possible to the main entrance thereto so that it is plainly visible from the street extending in front of said building. In the case of a building or premises that contains occupancy by multiple parties and is served by separate or individual exterior doors, the apartment or unit number( s) or range of numbers must also be installed and maintained on the building along with the assigned address number so that both are plainly visible from the street extending in front of said building and placed in a conspicuous place as near as possible to the appropriate entrance thereto. The figures of all new numbers installed after January 1, 2011 shall be not less than four (4") inches in height. No number shall be less than three (3") inches in height. Each figure shall be plain, legible and of contrasting color with its background upon which they appear and shall be maintained in such condition
 
at all times.  (Amended by Ordinance 2122 08/08/2007; Ordinance 2196 11123/2010)



















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4.  Encroachments and Excavations

Sec. 8-401 DEFINITIONS. The word "street" as used in this Article shall include all public streets, alleys, avenues, roads, drives and boulevards of the City unless the context requires otherwise.

Sec. 8-402 ADVERSE POSSESSION. No limitation shall apply to the time within which the City may begin an action for the recovery of the title or possession of any public road, street, alley or other public grounds.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §25-202)

Sec. 8-403  BUILDING OPERATIONS AND MATERIALS.	When necessary for the repair, erection, wrecking or reconstruction of a building or other improvement in the City, permission may be given to any person to occupy temporarily not to exceed one third ( 1/3) of the traveled portion of any public street or other public place in the City with building material and equipment. Such building material and equipment shall be placed in a manner such as not to substantially interfere with water drainage along any such street or ground.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-210, 16-227)

Sec. 8-404 APPLICATION. The permission referred to herein shall only be given after written application has been made to the City and filed with the City Clerk, which application shall describe the real estate on which such building or improvement is or will be located, the owner thereof, all persons contracting with the owner or other person for such work, the time when such work shall commence and the period of time during which such encroachment by material and equipment will last and the measures which will be taken by the contracting parties to protect pedestrian and vehicular traffic from harm duringthe period of encroachment.   (Neb. Rev.  Stat. §16-210)

Sec. 8-405 LICENSE. The Director of Public Works shall examine the application and the premise affected thereby and, if satisfied that the proposed encroachment will not be hazardous to the public safety, health and welfare and will not exist for longer than a period of thirty (30) days, may grant the application by written permission. In case of an emergency, permission for such encroachment may be granted by any member of the City Police Department but in such event an application shall be made as required herein and filed with the City Clerk before noon of the following business day and none but emergency action taken under such emergency permission.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-210)

Sec. 8-406 BOND. The Director of Public Works may require the contractor or contractors applying to furnish a bond to the City, with two (2) or more personal sureties or a duly licensed corporate surety, such sureties to be approved by the City Attorney, in such sum as shall be deemed proper by the authority granting the permission, which bond shall be conditioned to save the City harmless from any liability or injury, harm or damage arising out of such encroachment.

Sec. 8-407 EAVES AND GUTTER SPOUTS. All structures and buildings in the City shall have proper eaves, gutters and spouting to conduct rain and snow waters from the roofs thereof in a manner such that same will not be discharged upon the sidewalks in front of or beside the building premises. If such waters are to be drained into the street, gutter or ditch adjacent to the building
premises, same shall be conducted through drains properly installed underneath the sidewalk between the building premises and such street.

Sec. 8-408 GASOLINE PUMPS. No gasoline pumps shall hereafter be constructed or installed within the limits of any street or alley of the City, including the sidewalk space thereof, or in such a
 
manner that motor vehicles being serviced therefrom would usually stand outside the boundary ofthe lot on which such pump is installed and on any portion of any street or alley.

Sec. 8-409  AWNINGS AND MARQUEES.	All awnings and marquees on buildings or other structures in the City shall be constructed so that all parts of same, including frame and accessories, are at least eight (8') feet above the surface of the sidewalk beneath the same and so that no part of same extends over the curb or traveled portion of any street or alley. All such structures shall be constructed and maintained with proper safeguards for the protection of persons walking under the same.

Sec. 8-410 TREES AND SHRUBS. Trees growing on or along any public street or alley shall be kept trimmed so that no limb thereof extends over the public sidewalk less than eight (8') feet above the surface of such sidewalk or over any street or alley less than sixteen ( 16') feet from the surface of the traveled part thereof
Ifthe Director of Public Works shall find any tree, shrub or other object situated within the boundaries of any street or alley to be a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic by reason of obstruction of vision, he or she shall notify the owner or occupant of the adjacent property to remove such hazard within a reasonable time fixed by the Director of Public Works and if said notice is not complied with then the Director of Public Works shall remove, trim or otherwise dispose of such hazard.

Sec. 8-411 SIGNS. No sign or other advertising device or structure or pole or other accessory thereof shall be erected in the business or industrial districts of the City which shall project over the public sidewalk or beyond the building line of the lot on which same is located more than four (4') feet and all such signs, devices and structures shall be at least eight (8') feet above the surface of any public sidewalk below the same.

Sec. 8-412 MERCHANDISE DISPLAYS. No goods, property or merchandise shall be displayed for sale on any public sidewalk or street except during the business hours of the person displaying the same. All such displays on public sidewalks shall be within three (3") feet of the building line of the lot adjacent to the display and such displays shall not be higher than five (5') feet above the surface of the sidewalk.

Sec. 8-413 POLES, LINES AND WIRES. No post, pole, wire, utility or other pole line or accessory thereto not owned by the City shall be erected or maintained on any public street or alley or other public ground in the City except upon permission of the municipality and all such posts, poles, wires, utility or other pole lines and accessories thereto shall be promptly relocated at any time at the expense of the owner thereof when so directed by the municipality.

Sec. 8-414 UNDERGROUND INSTALLATIONS. Except as specifically provided for in franchise agreements within the City, no gas line, cable line or other pipeline or underground service line, other than those owned by the City, shall be constructed or maintained under the surface of any public street, alley or public ground, except upon the permission of the municipality.
Sec. 8-415 EXCAVATIONS.  Any person desiring to make any excavation on any public street, alley
or public ground shall file with the City Clerk a written application setting forth the location, extent, purpose and character of the work proposed, the time during which the work is to be done, by whom and for whom it is to be done and the measures proposed to protect public safety during such excavation. Such application shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works who, if satisfied that such proposed excavation will not be hazardous to public safety, health and welfare and will not exist for longer than
 
five (5) days, may grant the application by written permission. In all other cases the application shall be acted upon by the City Administrator. In case of emergency, permission for such excavation may be granted by any member of the City Police Department but in such event an application shall be made and filed before noon of the following business day as herein required and none but emergency action taken under such emergency permission.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-210, 16-227, 16-232)

Sec. 8-416 BOND. The Director of Public Works or the City Administrator as the case maybe, may require the applicant for license to furnish a bond, with two (2) or more personal sureties or a duly licensed corporate surety, such sureties to be approved by the City Attorney, in such sum as shall be deemed proper by the authority granting the permission, which bond shall be conditioned to save the City harmless from any liability for injury, harm or damage arising out of such excavation and for the cost of any repair found necessary for the public street or alley and surface thereon as a consequence of such excavation.

Sec.  8-417	OBSTRUCTIONS.	The Director of Public Works or any  member of the Police Department of the City may cause the removal of any obstruction of sidewalks, curbstones, gutters and crosswalks of the City and the expense of such removal may be recovered by the City from the person placing, or causing to be placed, such obstruction. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-207) (Penalties refer to Sections 8-701 through 8-703 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule). (Amended by Ordinance  2199  1125/2011)

Sec. 8-418 PARKINGS; ALLEYS; MAINTENANCE. It shall be the duty of the owner of any lot abutting upon any street in the City to maintain at his or her cost the parking or portion of said street not used for actual travel, and abutting his or her lot, as a lawn and to keep his one half(l/2) of any alley abutting his or her said lot free of vegetative growth of a height of more than three (3") inches and free of other obstruction to travel upon such alley.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-230)

SECTION 8-419 Reserved for Future Use.

Sec. 8-420 CUTTING CURBS, DRIVEWAYS, PAVING. Any person desiring to cut, alter or change any curb, sidewalk, street or alley paving or driveway within the limits of any City street shall file a written application with the City Clerk which shall show the name and address of the owner or owners of the property abutting such proposed work, the name and address of the party by whom the work will be done, the time within which the work will be done, the estimated cost of the work and any further information reasonably required by the Director of Public Works concerning the work. Such application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the details of the proposed work, and the applicant shall pay a fee to the City Clerk, for the use of the General Fund of the City. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution and the amount of said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "Permit, License and Application Fees."
Said application shall be promptly referred by the City Clerk to the Director of Public Works who shall examine the site of the proposed work and may then grant a written permit for same to be done, under such special rules as he may endorse on the permit. Before granting such permit, the Director of Public Works may require from the applicant a bond, with two (2) or more personal sureties or a duly licensed corporate surety, such sureties to be approved by the City Attorney, in such sum asthe Director of Public Works shall deem proper, and which said sum shall not be less than a per lineal foot fee which shall be set by the Mayor and City Council from time to time as deemed necessary, by
 
resolution and the amount of said per lineal foot deposit shall be appended to the Municipal Code as a part of an appendix titled "Permit, License, and Application Fees." Said per lineal foot deposit of the proposed cut, alteration or change shall be conditioned upon the applicants bond to save the City harmless from liability for injury, harm or damage arising from the work done under permit and for the cost for any repair to City property found necessary by the Director of Public Works upon completion of the work or within a reasonable time thereafter.
Any application to cut a curb within twenty (20') feet of any street intersection or for a distance of more than thirty (30') feet shall be first referred by the City Clerk to the Mayor and Council for approval before referring same to the Street Commissioner. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-210, 16-232) (Amended by Ord. No. 1328, 6/8/82)

Sec. 8-421 PIPES; CONDUITS. No gas pipe, water pipe, underground electric or telephone conduit shall be laid nearer than three (3') feet to any sanitary or storm sewer pipe in any street, alley or other thoroughfare or other public ground of the City.





























(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 5. Sidewalks

Sec. 8-501 CONSTRUCTION; GRADE, SUPERVISION. All sidewalks hereafter constructed within the City shall be laid and constructed at a grade not less than four (4) and not more than six (6) inches above the grade level of the top of the curb abutting the sidewalk. All sidewalks shall have positive drainage toward the adjacent street and the slope side to side of said sidewalks shall be not less than one (1) inch per four (4) feet nor more than two (2) inches per four (4) feet. Said sidewalks shall also conform to any other requirements established by the municipality and shall be laid under the supervision of the Director of Public Works. All construction of sidewalks shall comply with the requirements and guidelines of the Americans With Disability Act.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-661)

Sec. 8-502 LOCATION, WIDTH. All sidewalks hereafter constructed in any part of the City zoned as commercial or industrial shall be laid from the curb of the street to the line of the abutting lot unless otherwise ordered by the Mayor and Council. All sidewalks hereafter constructed in any part ofthe City zoned as a residential district shall be not less than four (4) feet wide and shall be constructed a distance of eight (8) feet from the street curb to the front of the sidewalk. In the event existing sidewalks do not conform in width or location, subject to approval in writing from the Director of Public Works, such construction may conform in width and location to previously constructed sidewalks provided, however, all construction shall comply with Americans With Disability Act grade requirements and guidelines as then may be in effect. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-661)

Sec. 8-503 MATERIAL AND FINISH. All sidewalks hereafter constructed within the City shall be of concrete as specified by the municipality not less than four (4") inches thick. Permission to use metal or glass for manholes or other structures within the sidewalk may be granted only by the Mayor and Council upon suitable application therefor. All sidewalks shall be laid on a base properly prepared and compacted to prevent cracking and settling.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-661)

Sec. 8-504 CONDEMNATION; REPLACEMENT. The Mayor and Council may by resolution declare any sidewalk or part thereof to be unsafe and unlawful and order that same be removed and properly rebuilt, and thereupon a certified copy of such resolution shall be served upon the owners of record of the premises adjacent to such sidewalk and all adult occupants thereof  Such service may be by any member of the Police Department of the City. Ifany of such owner is a non-resident of the City, or is not found in the City, service may be had on such owner by publishing a copy of such resolution one (1) time in a legal newspaper published in or of general  circulation in the City. Unless such sidewalk or part thereof is removed and properly replaced within thirty (30) days following service of said resolution, or a written agreement and undertaking to remove and replace such sidewalk within a time and manner which shall be approved by the Mayor and Council be filed with the City Clerk within such thirty (30) day period, the Director of Public Works shall cause such sidewalk or part thereof to be thereafter removed, rebuilt and replaced and all costs of so doing shall be assessed against the adjacent lot and premise and collected, as by law provided, if so ordered by three-fourths (3/4) of the Council. (Neb. Rev.  Stat. §16-662)

Sec. 8-505 MAINTENANCE; LIABILITY. Every owner of a lot or tract of ground within the City shall at all times keep and maintain the sidewalk along and adjacent to such property in good and proper repair and in a condition reasonably safe and suitable for all lawful travel thereon, and if any such owner shall fail to construct or repair any sidewalk in front of his, her or their lot, lots or lands within the time and in the manner as directed by the Mayor and Council after having been served with notice to do so
 
either in writing signed by the City Clerk and attested by the seal of the City or by notice published in a legal weekly newspaper published in or of general circulation in the City in one ( 1) issue thereof, such owner shall be liable for all damages or injury occasioned by reason of the defective or dangerous condition of such sidewalk and the Mayor and Council shall have power to cause such sidewalk to be constructed or repaired and assess the cost thereof against such property. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-661, 16-662)

Sec. 8-506 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. Any person desiring to construct a sidewalk along any street or other thoroughfare of the City shall apply for permission to do so by applying to the City Clerk, which application shall legally describe the real estate owned by such applicant and shall state the location and width of the proposed sidewalk and shall be accompanied by plans, specifications and grade which have been approved by the municipality, and shall pay an application fee of three ($3.00) dollars to the City Clerk. Thereupon said application shall be referred to the Director of Public Works for investigation. Said applicant shall be entitled at his or her expense to construct such sidewalk in accordance with his application and said plans and specifications and the ordinances of the City upon the approval of the application.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-250)

Sec. 8-507  SIDEWALKS, SEWERS, DRAINS, RAILINGS, GRATINGS; CONSTRUCTION
AND REPAIR. The City may construct or repair sidewalks, sewers and drains on any highway in the City and construct or repair iron railings or gratings for areaways, cellars or entrances to basements of buildings, and levy a special tax on lots or parcels of land fronting on such sidewalks, waterway, highway or alley to pay the expense of such improvements, but unless a majority of the owners of the property subject to assessment for such improvements petition the Council to make the same, such improvements shall not be made until three-fourths (3/4) affirmative vote. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-250)

Sec. 8-508 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT. All assessments made as referred to herein shall be made and assessed in the following manner: Such assessments shall be made by the Council at any meeting by a resolution fixing the costs of the construction or repair of such work along the lot adjacent thereto as a special assessment thereon, the amount charged against the same, which, with the vote thereon, by "yeas" and "nays" shall be spread at length upon the minutes; and notice of the time of holding such meeting and the purpose for which it is to be held shall be published in a newspaper published in and of general circulation in the City at least ten (I0) days before the same shall be held, and all such assessments shall be known as "special assessments for improvements" and with the cost of notice shall be levied and collected as a special tax, in addition to the taxes for general revenue purposes, subject to the same penalties and collected in like manner as other City taxes; but such special assessments shall draw interest at a rate not to exceed the rate of interest specified in
Section 45-104.01 R.R.S. Neb. and as such rate may from time to time be adjusted by the Legislature; and the same shall be certified to the County Clerk at the same time as the next certification for general revenue purposes.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-666)

Sec. 8-509 SIDEWALK OPENINGS. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave uncovered any opening in any sidewalk unattended and unguarded in a manner dangerous to pedestrians on such sidewalk. (Penalties refer to Sections 8-701 through 8-703 or Addendum to Code Violations Bureau Fee Schedule).  (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008)

Sec. 8-510 Reserved for future use. Section repealed by Ordinance 218103/09/2010. Refer to
Section 6-326.05
 

Sec. 8-511 SIDEWALKS; REQUIRED.	All new residential dwellings constructed within the municipality shall have, at the time of construction, sidewalks placed adjacent to all streets bordering on the lot or parcel. Sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement concrete or other acceptable materials as approved by the Director of Public Works. Sidewalk thickness shall be not less than four
(4)	inches.  Sidewalks in all new approved subdivisions shall be constructed at the same time as the
construction of the streets therein, unless the developer at the time of filing of the plat files an agreement and covenant against each of the lots in such subdivision. Such agreement and covenant shall provide sidewalks shall be installed and constructed on each lot in the subdivision not later than: a) at such time as construction on said lot which is made which requires the issuance of a building permit, b) three (3) years after the date of City Council approval of the plat, or c) at such time as there has been construc­ tion on seventy-five percent (75%) of the lots within the subdivision, whichever is earliest. At that time the owner of each lot not having a sidewalk shall construct such sidewalk pursuant to City specifications. In the event any owner fails to construct such sidewalk within 90 days from the date of notice from the City to do so, the City shall cause such sidewalk to be constructed and the cost thereof shall be assessed against such property in the manner as provided by law.
In subdivisions or other tracts existing as of June 1, 1993, wherein the construction of sidewalks was not required at the time of construction thereon, sidewalks shall be constructed on any such lot or tract at the time any construction permit is issued for improvements on said property
except in the event the building permit is for an amount less fifteen percent (15%) of the assessed value of the property or if the construction is necessitated by a natural disaster and act of God.
In any subdivision or tract created or existing on or before June 1, 1993, the sidewalk construction requirement may be waived ifthere are no sidewalks on any adjacent lots or parcels by the City Administrator and Building Inspector if the owner of such real estate enters into an agreement with the municipality which  shall run with the land and which  shall provide in part the waiver may be withdrawn at any time by the municipality and at the time of such withdrawal, the owner or owners of said lot or parcel shall immediately construct such sidewalks as may be required by the City and that said owner or owners shall not object to such construction either privately or by an improvement district.
The municipality may also waive sidewalks on one side of the streets within subdivisions wherein all of the lots are in excess of one acre. The developer, with the approval of the Mayor and City Council, shall designate on the plat which side of said streets are designated as requiring sidewalks.




(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 6.  Street Improvements

Sec. 8-601 ALLEY IMPROVEMENTS; APPLYING ROCK. On all rock surfaced alleys within the City, rocks shall be applied from time to time as deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works and City Administrator. Said rock shall be hauled and applied by employees of the City Street Department, and the cost of the same shall be borne by the City. Property owners who own property adjacent to the alley to be rocked shall be responsible for their proportionate share of the rock applied to the alley. The amount to be paid by each property owner shall be determined according to the following formula: the total cost of the rock divided by the total front footage of the property adjacent to the alley to be rocked times the front footage owned by the individual property owner.

Sec. 8-602 STREETS; IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS, PROPERTY INCLUDED, CREATION
AND NOTICE, OBJECTIONS. The Mayor and Council shall have power to make improvements on any street, streets, alley, alleys, or part of any street, streets, alley, alleys, in said City, a street which divides the City corporate area and the area adjoining the City, or within a county industrial area as defined in Section 13-1111 RS Neb., contiguous to such City, and for that purpose to create suitable improvement districts, which shall be consecutively numbered; and such work shall be done under contract. Such districts may include properties within the corporate limits, adjoining the corporate limits, and within county industrial areas as defined in Section 13-1111 RS Neb. contiguous to such Cities.
Any paving district or other improvement district shall include only portions of different streets, or portions of town alleys, or portions of each, which abut or adjoin so that such district, when created, makes up one (1) continuous or extended street or more, except  that the district  may include a cul-de-sac, any street, alley, or portion thereof which is closed at one (1) end or which connects with only one ( 1) other existing street, alley, or portion thereof Any paving or other improvement district may include portions of different streets, or portions of different alleys, or portions of each, provided they abut or connect with each other, or provided the several portions abut on pavement or gravel already laid, or any other of aforesaid improvements already laid.
The Mayor and Council shall first, by ordinance, create a paving, graveling or other improvement district or districts. The Mayor and Clerk shall, after the passage, approval, and publication of such ordinance, publish notice of the creation of such district or districts one (1)time each week for not less than twenty (20) days in a daily or weekly newspaper of general circulation published in the City.
Ifthe owners of the record title representing more than fifty (50%) percent of the front footage of
the property abutting or adjoining any continuous or extended street, cul-de-sac, or alley of the district, or portion thereof which is closed at one ( 1) end, and who were such owners at the time the ordinance creating the district was published, shall file with the City Clerk, within twenty (20) days from the first publication of said notice, written objections to the improvement of a district, said work shall not be done in said district under said ordinance, but said ordinance shall be repealed. Ifobjections are not filed against any district in the time and manner aforesaid, the Mayor and Council shall forthwith proceed to construct such improvement.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-617, 16-620)

Sec. 8-603 STREETS; IMPROVEMENTS INCLUDED. As used in Sections 8-602, improvements shall include, but shall not be limited to, paving, re-paving, graveling, grading, curbing, guttering, and the construction and replacement of pedestrian walks, plazas, malls, landscaping, lighting systems and permanent facilities used in connection therewith.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-617.01)
 
Sec. 8-604 STREETS; PETITION FOR IMPROVEMENTS. Whenever the owners oflots or lands abutting upon any street, avenue, or alley within the city, representing three-fourths of the front footage thereon, so that such district when created will make up one continuous or extended thoroughfare or more, shall petition the mayor and council to make improvement of such street, avenue, or alley without cost to the city, and to assess the entire cost of any such improvements in any such street, avenue, or alley, including intersections of streets or avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the private property within such improvement district or districts, it shall be the duty of the mayor and council to create the proper improvement district or districts, which shall be consecutively numbered, and to improve the same and to proceed in the same manner and form as hereinbefore provided for in other paving and improvement districts; Provided, the mayor and council shall have power to levy the entire cost of such improvements of any such street, avenue, or alley, including intersections of streets or avenues and spaces opposite alleys, against the private property within such district, and to issue Street Improvement Bonds of District No. to pay for such improvements in the same manner and form as hereinbefore provided for in other improvement bonds. Such bonds shall be issued to cover the entire cost of so improving such streets or avenues, intersections of the same, and spaces opposite alleys. Ifthe assessments hereinbefore provided for, or any part thereof, shall fail, or for any reason shall be invalid, the mayor and council may make other and further assessments upon such lots or lands as may be required to collect from the same the cost of any improvements properly chargeable thereto, as herein provided. The mayor and city council shall have the discretion to deny the formation of the proposed district when the area to be improved has not previously been improved with a water system, sewer system, and grading of streets. Ifthe mayor and city council should deny a requested improvement district formation, they shall state their grounds for such denial in a written letter to interested parties. (Neb. Rev.  Stat. §16-624)

Sec. 8-605 STREETS; DRIVEWAYS/ACCESS PERMITS. No person or entity shall construct or otherwise create any access for a driveway or other ingress or egress to a street in the City of Blair unless a permit is granted as follows:

A.	Residential District. The Public Works Director is authorized to issue a driveway/ access permit to the applicant regarding any street in a Residential District within the City of Blair after taking into consideration the location of the proposed driveway/access area and also taking into consideration the safety and general welfare of pedestrians and motor vehicle traffic. In the event the Public Works Director denies a driveway/access permit, the applicant may appeal the decision to the City Council. The City Council shall have the authority to override the decision of the Public Works Director; or,
B.  Commercial, Business and Industrial Districts.  The City Council is authorized to issue a
driveway/access permit to the applicant regarding any street in Highway Commercial District, Central Business District, Light Commercial District and any Industrial District within the City of Blair after taking into consideration the location of the proposed driveway/access area and also taking into consideration the safety and general welfare of pedestrians and motor vehicle traffic.

Sec. 8-606 STREETS; CURB REMOVAL. No person or entity shall cut, grind or otherwise remove any portion of a street curb in the City of Blair unless a permit is granted as follows:
A.	Residential District. The Public Works Director is authorized to issue a curb permit to the
applicant to remove curbs on any street in a Residential District; provided, further, that any curb removal shall be performed by grinding the curb to the street level unless unusual circumstances exist whereby grinding the curb would be impractical, in which circumstance the Public Works Director of the City of Blair may authorize the curb to be cut; or,
 
B.	Commercial, Business, and Industrial Districts. The City Council is authorized to issue a curb permit to the applicant to remove curbs on any street in the Highway Commercial District, Central Business District, Light Commercial District, or any Industrial District; provided, further, that any curb removal shall be performed by grinding the curb to street level, unless unusual circumstances exist whereby grinding of the curb would be impractical, in which situation the City Council may authorize the curb to be cut.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 1880; July 13, 1999)








































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 7.  Violations Bureau/Penal Provision

Sec. 8-701 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State of Nebraska, Section 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly. (Amended by Ordinance  2140  06/10/2008)

Sec. 8-702 VIOLATIONS BUREAU. A Violations Bureau for the City of Blair is hereby created pursuant to Section 18-1729 R.R. S. Neb. for the purpose of collecting penalties for city code violation.
Any person accused of a violation as established by Sections 8-106, 8-417, 8-509 and 8-510 may, within ten ( 10) days after the issuance of a citation of the violation and before the appearance date thereon, dispose of the citation by appearing at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair and remitting full payment of the penalty assessed for the specific violation.
Any person may plead not guilty to the citation and he or she may appear before the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on the date and at the time specified on the citation.
At the time of the commission of the alleged violation, the accused shall be served with printed notice informing the accused of his or her options in disposing of the citation as noted hereinabove.
Ifthe accused fails to appear at the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair or before the
County Court of Washington County, Nebraska, on or before the date specified on the citation, a warrant for his or her arrest shall be issued by the County Court of Washington County, Nebraska. (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Ordinance 2199 1125/2011)

Sec. 8-703 PENALTIES. A conviction for violation of Sections 8-106, 8-417, 8-509 and 8-510 shall result in a fine for the first offense in any one calendar year of the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), for the second offense in any one calendar year the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), and for the third or subsequent offenses in any one calendar year the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Amended by Ordinance 2140 06/10/2008; Ordinance 2199 1125/2011)



















(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter9 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Article 1. Building Inspector

Sec. 9-101  BUILDING INSPECTOR; POWER AND AUTHORITY.  The Building Inspector
shall be the Municipal official who shall have the duty of enforcing all building and housing regulations as herein prescribed. He or she shall inspect all buildings repaired, altered, built, or moved in the Municipality as often as necessary to insure compliance with all Municipal ordinances. He or she shall have the power and authority to order all work stopped on any construction, alteration, or relocation which violates any provisions prescribed herein. He or she shall issue permission to continue any construction, alteration, or relocation when he or she is satisfied that no provision will be violated. Ifthe stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within one ( 1) hour. Such written order may be served by any Municipal Policeman. In the absence of the Building Inspector, the Director of Public Works shall be the Building Inspector ex officio and shall have all of the powers of the Building Inspector.

Sec. 9-102 BUILDING INSPECTOR; RIGHT OF ENTRY. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to  allow the Building Inspector entry into any building or structure where the work of construction, alteration, repair or relocation is taking place for the purpose of making official inspections at any reasonable hour.

Sec. 9-103 BUILDING INSPECTOR; APPEAL FROM DECISION. In the event it is claimed thatthe true intent and meaning of this Chapter has been wrongly interpreted by the Building Inspector; that the time allowed for compliance with any order of the Building Inspector is too short; or that conditions peculiar to a particular building make it unreasonably difficult to meet the literal requirements prescribed by this Chapter and the Building Inspector, the owner, his or her agent, or the occupant may file a notice of appeal within ten (10) days after the decision or order of the Building Inspector has been made. The Blair Housing Board of Appeals shall sit and act as the Municipal Board of Appeals and shall have the power and authority, when appealed to, to modify the decision or order of the Building Inspector except as to zoning and subdivision matters. Such a decision shall be final, subject only to any remedy which the aggrieved person may have at law or equity. Applications for review shall be in writing and shall state the reasons why the variance should be made. A variance shall be granted only where it is evident that reasonable safety and sanitation is assured and may include conditions not generally specified by this Code to achieve that end. A copy of any variance so granted shall be sent to both the Building Inspector and the applicant.
Sec. 9-104 BUILDING INSPECTOR; BUILDING PERMITS. It shall be unlawful to commence
or to proceed with the erection, construction, reconstruction, conversion, alteration, enlargement, or extension of the exterior of any building or any part thereof, or to move or raze any building or structure without first having applied in writing to the Municipal Clerk and being issued a building permit to do so.



Sec. 9-105  BUILDING PERMITS; DUPLICATE TO COUNTY ASSESSOR.  Whenever a
building permit is issued for the erection, alteration or repair of any building within the Municipality's jurisdiction,  and the improvement is one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or more, a duplicate of such
 
permit shall be issued to the County Assessor.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §18-1743)

Sec. 9-106 BUILDING INSPECTOR; APPLICATION AND PERMIT FORMS. Applicationfor
a building permit shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the Municipal Clerk who shall refer such application to the Building Inspector for rejection or authorization  for issuance of a permit. Such application shall be accompanied by specifications showing the size of the proposed building or structure and its location on the lot in the case of new construction, and in all cases the proposed construction materials, details and type of construction to be used. In the event such permit application is for the building, remodeling, repairing, or construction of or upon a building or structure which provides for the employment, housing, or assembly of twenty (20) or more persons or is larger than five thousand(SOOO) square feet, or the walls of such building or structure exceed thirty (30) feet in height, the application shall be accompanied by structural, mechanical, and electrical plans and specifications.
Blank forms shall be provided by the Municipal Clerk for the use of those applying for permits. Any permits authorized by the Building Inspector shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk and shall be on standard forms for such purposes and furnished by the Municipality.
A complete record of all such applications, plans and permits shall be kept in the office of the Municipal Clerk.

Sec. 9-107 BUILDING INSPECTOR; BUILDING PERMIT FEES. The fee to be charged for building permits shall be set and determined from time to time as necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and said fees shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "Permit, License, and Application Fees," and shall be on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk and available for public inspection during regular office hours of the said Municipal Clerk.

In addition to the fees to be charged for building permits, prior to the issuance of any building permit for any new construction, renovation or remodeling, a deposit shall be made to the City according to the Building Permit Deposit Fee schedule as shown on the appendix titled "Permit, License, and Application Fees".

Such deposit shall be refunded to the remitter upon completion of and the approval of a final inspection and payment of all other applicable fees due under the building permit or for the construction. (Amended by Ordinance 2089 09/26/2006; Ordinance 2196 11123/2010)

Sec. 9-108 BUILDING INSPECTOR; PERMIT DURATION. Any building permit under which no construction work has been commenced within six (6) months after the date of issue of said pennit or under which the proposed construction has not been completed within two (2) years of the date ofissue shall expire automatically and no work or operation shall take place under such permit after such expiration. Permit renewals are for one (1) year, with a maximum of two (2) renewals for a maximum permit span of four (4) years. The permit renewal fee is based on the amount of the original permit fee. Renewals will only be allowed with the stipulation that all exterior site work and outside finish work is completed and interior life-safety issues have been properly addressed. Permit Renewal fees shall be made to the City according to the Permit Renewal Fee schedule as shown on the appendix titled "Pennit, License, and Application Fees".  (Amended by Ordinance 2091 10/10/2006)

Sec. 9-109  FACTORY BUILT HOUSING AND PRE-FABRICATED COMPONENTS.

SUB-SECTION 1.  DEFINITIONS
 

CITY shall mean the corporate and jurisdictional limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

FACTORY BUILT HOUSING shall mean single or multi-family dwelling units which are either wholly or partially fabricated at an off-site location to be wholly or partially assembled on site, but not to include mobile homes or cabin trailers.

DWELLING UNIT shall mean one (1) or more rooms arranged for the use of one (1) or more individuals, and with cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.

FABRICATION shall mean to construct, build or assemble any component prior to incorporating it into one ( 1) completed structure as a factory-built house.

FABRICATOR shall mean an individual, firm, or corporation fabricating factory-built houses.

INSTALLATION shall mean the assembly of a factory-built house on site and the process of affixing the structure to land, a foundation or footings.

NON-RESIDENT FABRICATOR shall mean a fabricator fabricating outside the City limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

CABIN TRAILER shall mean every vehicle without motive power, designed for living quarters and basically designed to be towed as a transportable unit on an undercarriage or chassis which is a permanent or an integral structural part of the floor or body of the trailer, and shall include any transportable or relocatable device of any description designed for living quarters which is less than twelve (12') feet wide or only one (1) story in height when in place for using as a living quarter. MOBILE HOME shall mean every transportable or relocatable structure of one (1) or more section, and basically designed to be towed as a transportable unit on an undercarriage or chassis which is a permanent or an integral structural part of the floor or body of the unit, which is twelve (12') or more feet wide, or which is one ( 1) or more stories in height when in place for use as living quarters.

PREFABRICATED The term "prefabricated" as used in this Article shall mean floors, sidewalks, interior partitions, ceilings, roofs, or any parts or portion of any such, which are built up, assembled or put together before being incorporated into the structure.

SUB-SECTION 2.  BUILDING INSPECTOR

The City of Blair Building Inspector shall have the authority to approve materials, methods of construction, and arrangement of materials for use under this Section which are normally regulated by the City of Blair Code, but have not been specifically provided for therein. Before any such material or any such method of construction, or any such arrangement of materials shall be approved, reasonable tests, if required by the Building Inspector, shall have been made and found by him or her to be safe and in conformity with the Municipal Code of Blair, Nebraska. All tests shall be made in accordance with current standards of the American Society of Testing Materials (ASTM), and all expenses for such tests shall be paid by the applicant and security for payment of the costs thereof may be required.
This Section shall not apply to housing units bearing the seal of the State Department of Health certifying the compliance of the construction and systems of such units with Department standards.
 
SUB-SECTION 3.  FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING


A.	Structural Design. In the structural design of an assembly, due allowance shall be made for any material to be removed for the inspection of installation of pipes, conduits, electrical wiring, or other equipment at a place other than a factory, or which has been installed but not inspected at the factory.

B.	Test. Panels which are required to be tested shall be tested after all chases and cavities for such equipment have been cut.

C.	Additional Cutting. No additional materials shall be removed from any fabricated assembly during construction other than as provided in paragraph "A" hereof, unless specifically approved by the Building Inspector of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

D.	Fabricators, both resident and non-resident and/or their employees and subcontractors shall before beginning fabrication obtain the Certificate of Compliance required herein below and before a permit shall be issued to install said factory-built housing furnish to the City of Blair a signed copy of an indenmity agreement between said fabricator and the buyer certifying that the construction of said unit is in compliance with the data submitted in the application for said Certificate of Compliance and further providing that said fabricator shall indenmify the buyer for all damages incurred by said buyer by reason of any nonconfonnity with said data, which said indenmity agreement shall be operative for a period of five (5) years from the date thereof

E.	The contractor installing said factory built unit shall obtain the necessary licenses, pay fees and post bonds as required by the municipality.

F.	Application for "Certificate of Compliance". The manufacturer of the factory-built housing, or his agent, wishing to seek a Certificate of Compliance from the City of Blair, Nebraska, will submit the following information for a structural review by the Building Inspector for the City of Blair, Nebraska:
I.	Name and location of manufacturer.
II.	Typical plans, elevations and construction details that include the following:
1.	Foundation plans.
2.	Floor plan.
3.	Elevations.
4.	Building cross sections showing size and spacing of all framing members plus:
a.	Type and method of application on all covering materials such as sub-flooring, interior and exterior finish and sheathing.
b.	Complete details including computations on trussed-rafter systems.
c.	Description of materials for the factory-built house, including sizes, species and/or grade as applicable, of all building materials.
d.	Special details as necessary to show any special features of the construction, including method of fabricating, erection, joining and finishing of all elements.
e.	Engineering computations as necessary to fully justify special
 
structural features not covered by the Building, Plumbing and Electrical Codes of the City of Blair, Nebraska.
f	Any other pertinent information such as test data which could assist
in determining the acceptability of the system.
g.		The City of Blair, Nebraska may hire professional assistance from registered architects and engineers to assist the Building Inspector in reviewing the plans, specifications and other data submitted by the fabricators of the factory-built houses. justify special structural

G.	Permits, Fees and Approval of Plans. It shall be unlawful to install factory-built houses for use within the jurisdictional limits of the City of Blair until  the fabricator shall have received a Certificate of Compliance, Department of Health Seal as providedhereinabove or the manufacturer of factory-built houses and the factory- built houses themselves have been investigated and/or inspected in the plant and subsequently certified by an independent agency or testing laboratory that has been approved by the City Council, and until the installer shall have submitted an application and paid the required fees for a building pennit in the same manner and amount as any owner or contractor building the
same house on site and no permit shall be issued until there is filed with said application the indenmity agreement specified hereinabove.

H.	Field Installation. Installation of factory-built houses on the building site shall be inspected by the appropriate inspectors for compliance with the Building, Plumbing and Electrical Codes of the City of Blair, Nebraska. To determine compliance with this Section, all structural, installations, electrical and plumbing hook-ups shall be exposed for inspection, and the Building Inspector may require panels or portions of interior covering to be removed to permit the inspection of assembly, connections, joints, structural fabrication and other fabrications to determine if the fabrication is in compliance with the Certificate of Compliance.

I.	Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum not to exceed five hundred ($500.00) dollars, or be sentenced to be imprisoned not to exceed six
(6)	months in jail or any combination of such fine and imprisonment for each offense every such person firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day on which such violations shall continue.

J.		Appeal Procedure. Any person, firm or corporation aggrieved by any order or decision of the appropriate inspectors for compliance with the Building, Plumbing and Electrical Codes of the City of Blair, Nebraska, concerning the construction ofa building controlled by this Section, may be appealed as set forth in the Appeal Procedures of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

SUB-SECTION 4.  PREFABRICATED CONSTRUCTION

A.	Structural Design. In structural design, due allowance shall be made for any material to be removed for the installation of pipes, conduits or other equipment.
 
B.	Tests. Panels which are required to be tested shall be tested after all chases and cavities for such equipment have been cut.

C.	Additional Cutting. No additional material shall be removed from any prefabricated assembly during construction, other than as provided in paragraph "A" hereof, unless specifically approved by the City Building Inspector.

D.	Materials. Materials and the assembly thereof as prefabricated units may be inspected to determine compliance with this Section.

E.	In any prefabricated unit containing materials that are covered, unexposed or otherwise not visible for inspection, a Certificate of Compliance, Department of Health Seal or certificate of approval from an approved independent agency or testing laboratory shall be required in the same manner as provided hereinabove for factory-built housing and the City Building Inspector may further require that before a permit is issued to install said prefabricated unit, the indenmity agreement as provided for factory-built housing be filed with the application for said permit.

F.	Field Installation. Installation of prefabricated assemblies at the building site shall be inspected by the City Building Inspector to determine compliance with this Section and applicable	building codes and  the  City  Building  Inspector  shall  require  the removal forthwith from the premises of anything which does not comply with the requirements of this Section. The contractor installing said assemblies shall be required to obtain the necessary licenses, pay fees and post bonds required by the municipality.  (Ord. No. 1110, 4/23/74)

Sec. 9-110 REQUIREMENTS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES. The following standards are hereby adopted for manufactured homes within the corporate limits and within the zoningjurisdictional limits of the City of Blair.

A.	The home shall have no less than 900 square feet of floor area.
B.	The home shall have no less than an eighteen foot ( 18') exterior width.
C.	The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of 2 112 inches for each 12 inches of horizontal run.
D.	The exterior material shall be of a color, material, and scale comparable with those existing in residential site built, single family construction.
E.	The home shall have a nonreflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile, or rock.
F.	The home shall have wheels, axles, transporting lights, and removable towing apparatus removed.

For the purpose of this ordinance a manufactured home shall bear an appropriate seal which indicates that said home was constructed in accordance with the standards of the Department of Health or the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
All manufactured homes shall be located and installed according to the same standards for foundation system, permanent utility connections, setback, and minimum square footage which would apply to a site-built, single family dwelling on the same lot.   (Note: The home shall conform to all
 
requirements of Ordinance numbers 1762 and 1766.)

Sec.	9-111	REQUIREMENTS	FOR	ADDITIONS	AND/OR	ALTERATIONS	TO
MANUFACTURED  HOMES.	Additions and/or alterations to manufactured homes will be permissible within the corporate limits and within the zoning jurisdictional limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska, subject to the following:

A. All additions, alterations or other areas subject to remodeling in manufactured homes will conform to the Uniform Mechanical Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code and Uniform Building Code.

B.	When any structural addition or structural alteration changes or modifies the original roof orthe pitch of the original roof of a manufactured home, the owner shall provide City with a certification duly executed by a licensed and registered architect or engineer in the State of Nebraska approving the plans for structural integrity of the addition/alteration and the existing manufactured home.

C.	Electrical service forthe new addition and/or alteration shall be connected to an electrical panel in the new addition/alteration which then feeds into the original panel of the manufactured home, thus making the original panel a subpanel; provided however, this condition may be waived if a licensed and registered engineer in the State of Nebraska certifies that the original electrical service in the manufactured home is of sufficient size and quality to handle the additional electrical load created by the addition/alteration.

D.	The plumbing, including water, sewer and gas, to the new addition/alteration shall not be connected to original plumbing system of the existing manufactured home; provided further, that all sewer drain lines from the addition may be connected below the original sewer drain line connection of the manufactured home; provided however, this condition may be waived if a licensed and registered engineer in the State of Nebraska certifies that the original plumbing, including water, sewer and gas, in the manufactured home is of sufficient size and quality to handle the additional load associated with the addition/alteration.

E.	The heating and air conditioning duct work in the addition/alteration shall not be connected to the original duct work for the heating and air conditioning in the existing manufactured home; provided however, this condition may be waived if a licensed and registered engineer in the State of Nebraska certifies that the original heating and air conditioning equipment in the manufactured home is of sufficient size and quality to handle the addition/alteration.
(4/98)
 



































(END OF SECTION)
 

Article 2.  Building Code

Sec. 9-201 BUILDING CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in buildings hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated, and converted, the International Building Code, 2009 edition, including all appendices, as recommended and published by the International Code Council, Inc. in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference, insofar as said International Building Code and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska. Such International Building Code shall also include all amendments, deletions or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. Copies of the International Building Code, as amended, are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the Municipal offices are open. The provisions of the International Building Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-901, 18-132, 19-922) (Amended by Ordinance 1833 3/10/1998; Ordinance 1904 612712000, Ordinance 2266 11/11/2014)

Sec. 9-201.01: KEY LOCK BOX SAFETY REQUIREMENT.


(a)	The following newly constructed structures, if not regularly occupied for twenty- four (24) hours every day for seven (7) days of the week, shall be equipped with an approved key lock box at or near the main entrance to the structure or such other location as designated by the fire chief:


(1)	Commercial or industrial structures;


(2)	Multi-family residential structures that have restricted access through locked	doors and have a common corridor for access to the living units;

(3)	Governmental structures, places of assembly, healthcare facilities and nursing care facilities.

(4)	All vehicle access gate(s) at the entrance(s) of residential gated communities.


(b)	All existing structures with uses listed in (a)(l)- (a)(4) undertaking additions or remodeling, if not regularly occupied for twenty-four (24) hours every day for seven
(7)	days of the week, shall be equipped with an approved key lock box at or near the main entrance to the structure or such other location as designated by the fire chief.

(c)	The fire chief, working with the city's building department, shall designate the type of key lock box system and system code to be implemented within the city.
 

(d)	The owner or operator of a structure required to have a key lock box shall at all times keep a key in the lock box that will allow for access to the structure.


(e)	The fire chief shall implement and enforce rules and regulations for the authorized use of the lock box system by fire department personnel and volunteers. Such rules and regulations shall be approved by the city council.


(f)	All structures subject hereto shall be required to install a key lock box system prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit.

(g)	Building owners who object to the key lock box because of concerns regarding security may sign a waiver exempting a structure from requirements a - f. Such waiver shall clearly state the benefits of utilizing a lock box, and shall acknowledge that during a fire call the fire department shall gain access into the building through alternative means (Amended by Ordinance 2251 8/13/2013).

Sec. 9-202 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE: ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.  That the
above-described Code, a copy of which is kept on file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Blair, Nebraska, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code for the City ofBlair, Nebraska, insofar as said International Property Maintenance Code and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska Such International Property Maintenance Code shall also include all amendments, deletions or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. The International Property Maintenance Code is for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore. Copies of the International Property Maintenance Code, as amended, are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the Municipal offices are open. The provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction. (Amended by Ordinance No. 2266 11/11/2014)

The above referenced Property Maintenance Code shall be amended as follows:

 
Section 103.1 Section 103.2

Section 103.3 Section 111.1
 
Shall be eliminated
Shall be amended to state that the Assistant City Administrator or   his/her designee shall serve as the Code Official for the City of Blair.
Shall be amended to state the Code Official shall have the authority to designate technical officers, inspectors and other employees.
Board of Appeals shall be the same as the City of Blair Housing Appeal
 

City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 9, Article 2, page 2
 


Section 111.2



Section 111.2.1 Section 111.2.4 Section 111.2.5
 
Board.
Shall be amended to read as follows: The Code Official shall be an ex-official member, but shall have no vote on any matter before the Housing Appeal Board.
Shall be eliminated
The Code Official shall designate a qualified person and secretary.
Shall be amended to state that all Board Members shall serve without compensation.
 
Section 302.4	Shall state plant growth in excess of 12" in height.
(Amended by Ordinance 1904 6/27/2000; Ordinance219611/23/2010; Ordinance226611/11/2014)

Sec. 9-203   EXISTING  BUILDING  CODE;  ADOPTED  BY REFERENCE.    To provide
flexibility to permit the use of alternative approaches to achieve compliance with minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and relocation of existing buildings, the International Existing Building Code, 2009 edition, including all appendices, as recommended and published by the International Code Council, Inc. in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference, insofar as said International Existing Building Code and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska. Such International Existing Building Code shall also include all amendments, deletions or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. Copies of the International Existing Building Code, as amended, are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the Municipal offices are open. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-901, 18-132, 19-922) (Amended by Ordinance 2266 11/11/2014)

























(END OF SECTION)



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 9, Article 2, page 3
 

Article 3. Housing Code

Sec. 9-301 HOUSING CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and stable design, methods of construction, and uses of materials in houses hereafter erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, relocated, and converted, the International Residential Code, 2009 edition, including all appendices, as recommended and published by the International Code Council, Inc., in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference, insofar as said International Residential Code and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska. Such International Residential Code shall also include all amendments, deletions, or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. Copies of the International Residential Code, as amended, are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the Municipal offices are open. The provisions of the International Residential Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.  (Amended by Ordinance No. 2266 11/11/2014)

The International Residential Code, 2009 Edition, is amended with the following changes.

1.  Section R105.2 Work exempt from permit.
Permits shall be required for the following:
One-story detached accessory structures which:
Have with a floor area exceeding 120 square feet, or
Are permanently attached to the ground or a concrete pad, or
Have permanent  electrical service, either as a new service or from the primary residence.
All fences, regardless of height. All driveways.
Decks that are not more than 30 inches above grade at any point, and are not attached to a dwelling, and do not serve the exit door required by Section R3 l 1.4, which extend into the city's right of way. An easement from the city is also required.
Permits shall not be required for the following:
Decks that are not more than 30 inches above grade at any point, and are not attached to a dwelling, and do not serve the exit door required by Section R311.4, and do not extend into the city's right of way.
2.	Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems
The entire section, including all subsections, is eliminated and replaced with Section R3 l7 - Dwelling Unit Separation from the International Residential Code, 2006 Edition.

3.	Section  R314.3.1  Smoke Alarms  -Alterations,  repairs  and  additions The following Exceptions are added:
3.	Permits limited to the installation, alteration or repairs of electrical systems are exempt from the requirements of this section.
4.	Permits not involving the addition or remodeling of one or more sleeping rooms are exempt from the requirements of this section.




City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 9, Article 3, page 1
 

4.	Section R315.2 Carbon Monoxide Alarms - Where required in existing dwellings
The following Exceptions are added:
1.	Work involving the exterior surfaces of dwellings, or the addition or replacement of windows and doors, or the addition of a porch or deck, are exempt from the requirements of this section.
2.	Permits limited to the installation, alteration or repairs of plumbing, mechanical or electrical systems are exempt from the requirements of this section.
3.	Permits not involving the addition or remodeling of one or more sleeping rooms are exempt from the requirements of this section.

5.	Appendix F Radon Control Methods.
The entire appendix is eliminated.


6.	Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
Amend Section AG105.2 (10) Outdoor Swimming Pools by eliminating the following:

10.	Where an above-ground pool structure is used  as a barrier  or where the barrier  is mounted on top of the pool structure and the means of access is a ladder or steps;
10.1	The ladder or steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access; or
10.2	The ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier which meets the requirements of Section AG105.2, Items 1through9. When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a 4-inch-diameter (102 mm) sphere.

7.	Appendix G Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs
Amend Section AG 105.2 Outdoor Swimming Pools by inserting the following subsection 10:
10.	Where a wall of a dwelling does not serve as part of the barrier, the primary pedestrian access gate shall also be equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the gate is opened. A remote receiver, activated by the gate alarm, shall also be installed inside the dwelling. The alarm shall be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2017. Where the deactivation switch is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of the gate, the deactivation switch and openings shall comply with the following:
a.	The deactivation switch shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least 3 inches below the top of the gate; and
b.	The gate and barrier shall have no opening larger than Yz inch within 18 inches of
the deactivation switch.
(Amended by Ordinance 1904 6/27/2000; Ordinance 2178 11/24/2009; Ordinance 2196 11/23/2010; Ordinance 2239 3/26/13)




(END OF SECTION)


City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 9, Article 3, page 2
 
Article 4.  Plumbing, Mechanical and Fuel Gas Codes

Sec. 9-401 PLUMBING CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and stable installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials in the installation of plumbing and heating, the International Plumbing Code, 2009 edition, including all appendices, as recommended and published by the International Code Council, Inc., in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference, insofar as said International Plumbing Code and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska-Such International Plumbing Code shall also include all amendments, deletions or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. Copies of the International Plumbing Code, as amended, are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the Municipal offices are open. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction. (Amended by Ordinance  1833 3/10/1998; Ordinance 1904 6/27/2000; Ordinance 2266 11/11/2014)

Sec. 9-402 Repealed by Ordinance 2266 - 11/11/2014

Sec. 9-403 MECHANICAL AND FUEL GAS CODES; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.   To
provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and  stable design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, relocation, replacement, use or maintenance of mechanical systems, the International Mechanical Code, 2009 edition, and the International Fuel Gas Code, 2009 edition, including all appendices, as recommended and published by the International Code Council, Inc., in book or pamphlet form, are hereby incorporated by reference, insofar as said International Mechanical Code, and International Fuel Gas Code, and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska.-Such International Mechanical Code and International Fuel Gas Code shall also include all amendments, deletions or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. Copies of the International Mechanical Code and the International Fuel Gas Code, as amended, are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the Municipal offices are open. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code and the International Fuel Gas Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction. (Amended by Ordinance 1904 6/27/2000; Ordinance 2266 11/11/2014)


















City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 9, Article 4, page 1
 



























































(END OF SECTION)






 

City of Blair Municipal Code
 
Chapter 9, Article 4, page 2
 
Article 5.  Electrical and Fire Codes

Sec. 9-501 ELECTRICAL CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe and fire proof installation, methods of connection, and uses of materials in the installation of electrical wiring and appliances, the National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, as recommended and published by the National Fire Protection Association, and printed in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference, insofar as said National Electrical Code and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska. Such National Electrical Code shall also include all amendments, deletions or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. Copies of the National Electrical Code are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the municipal offices are open. The provisions of the National Electrical Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction. (Amended by Ordinance 1833 3/10/1998; Ordinance 2266 11/11/2014)

Sec. 9-502 FIRE CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions, and requirements for safe and fire proof installations and other matters affecting or relating to structures, processes, and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion, the International Fire Code, 2009 edition, as recommended and published by the International Code Council, Inc., and printed in book or pamphlet form is hereby incorporated by reference, insofar as said International Fire Code and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska. Such International Fire Code shall also include all amendments, deletions or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. Copies of the International Fire Code, as amended, are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the Municipal offices are open. The provisions of the International Fire Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction. (Amended by Ordinance 1904 6/27/2000; Ordinance 2266 11/11/2014)


















(END OF SECTION)






City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 9, Article 5, page 1
 
Article 6. Energy Code

Sec. 9-601 ENERGY CODE; ADOPTED BY REFERENCE. To provide certain minimum standards, provisions and requirements to regulate the design and construction of buildings for the effective use of energy, with flexibility to permit the use of innovative approaches and techniques to achieve the effective use of energy while not abridging safety, health or environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes or ordinances, the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition, including all appendices, as recommended and published by the International Code Council, Inc., in book or pamphlet form, is hereby incorporated by reference, insofar as said International Energy Conservation Code and any amendments or revised editions do not conflict with the statutes of the State of Nebraska. Such International Energy Conservation Code shall also include all amendments, deletions, or additions which the City Council and Mayor may make from time to time. Copies of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended, are on file at the office of the Municipal Clerk pursuant to state statutes and are available for public inspection during the regular hours the Municipal offices are open. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall be controlling throughout the Municipality and throughout its zoning jurisdiction.

Sec. 9-602 through 9-609 Repealed by Ordinance 2266 11/11/2014































(END OF SECTION)









City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 9, Article 6, page I
 
Article 7.  Stormwater Management


Sec. 9-701 STORMWATERMANAGEMENT; PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY. The purpose of
these Stormwater Management regulations is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with increased and altered stormwater runoff. Proper management of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property, reduce the harmful effects of development on land, control stream channel erosion, reduce local flooding, and maintain after development, as nearly as possible, the predevelopment runoff characteristics.

The application of these Stormwater Management regulations and provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation on such management practices. The City of Blair shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of these regulations, which shall be applicable to all property within the city and all property within the City's zoning jurisdiction.

Sec. 9-702 DEFINITIONS. The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter.

1)	BMP- see Post-Construction  Stormwater Management  Best Management  Practices.


2)	City shall mean City of Blair.


3)	Director means the Director of Public Works Department for the City of Blair or his/her authorized agent or representative.

4)	Discharge means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance to the Municipal Stormwater System.

5)	Illicit Connection means any human made conveyance that is directly or indirectly connected to the Municipal Stormwater System and allows for an illicit discharge.

6)	Illicit Discharge means any discharge to the Municipal Stormwater System that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations.

7)	Municipal Stormwater System means any inlet, pipe, ditch or gully, or system of pipes, ditches, or gullies, that is owned and operated by the City and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.

8)	Maximum Extent Practical means a standard for implementation of stmmwater management programs. It is the maximum extent possible taking into account equitable consideration of competing factors, including, but not limited to the seriousness of the problem, public health risk, environmental benefits, regulatory compliance, ability to implement, cost and technical feasibility.
 
9)	New Development means land disturbing activities, structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, the creation of impervious smfaces, and land subdivision.

10)	Post-Construction St01mwater Management Best Management Practices (BMP) shall mean stormwater management practices designed and carried out to reduce the flow rate or velocity of stormwater runoff after construction is completed. BMPs must be pre-authorized through the approval of a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.

11)	Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan (SMP) means a design, with drawings and calculations, prepared by a licensed civil engineer to reduce flooding damage by minimizing, to the Maximum Extent Practical, any increase in the flow rate or velocity of Stormwater Runoff after construction is completed from New Development and Significant Redevelopment projects; to reduce soil erosion from New Development and Significant Redevelopment projects; and to assure adequacy of existing and proposed Municipal Stormwater System components. All SMPs must contain a Required Mai:ptenance section, describing the periodic inspections and maintenance which must be perf01med by the owners or occupants to ensure the continued successful operation of all Post-Construction Stormwater Management BMPs.

12)	Private St01mwater System means any inlet, pipe, ditch or gully, or system of pipes, ditches, or gullies, including any instrumentality that drains or conveys water from a building or from or through one or more properties not owned or operated by a government agency.

13)	Receiving Waters means all surface water bodies, including all streams, lakes, ponds, impounding reservoirs, marshes, wetlands, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, irrigation ditches, gullies or channels, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulation of water, natural or artificial, public or private, situated wholly or partly within or bordering upon the extraterritorial jurisdiction  of the City of Blair.

14)	Significant Redevelopment means construction activity that results in the creation or addition of at least three thousand (3,000) square feet of impervious surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not limited to the following activities that meet the minimum standards set forth in this definition:
a)	The expansion of a building footprint;
b)	Addition of a structure;
c)	Addition of impervious surface.
Significant Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities.


15)	SMP - See Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.


16)	St01mwater Runoff means that pati of natural precipitation (rainfall or snowmelt, including that of any frozen precipitation) from a drainage area which travels via surface flow and enters the Municipal Stormwater System.

Sec. 9-703 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. No person shall install, maintain, or
 
use any connection to the Municipal Stormwater System that may result in an Illicit Discharge to the Municipal Stormwater System.

This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, Illicit Connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. For Illicit Connections made in the past, a plan to remedy the Illicit Connection shall be submitted to the Director from the present owner or occupant upon written request from the Director.

Sec. 9-704 REMOVAL OF ILLICIT CONNECTION. Ifany person fails to disconnect an Illicit Connection within 30 days of being notified by the Director to remove such Illicit Connection, the Director may cause the removal of such connection from the Municipal Stormwater System. The City may pursue the recovery of costs by appropriate means, including a suit at law against the person or persons responsible or from the present owner or occupant.

Sec. 9-705 PRIVATE STORM WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEMS. The owner of a property where a Private Stormwater System is located shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair, and proper operation of the Private Stormwater System, regardless of whether the Private Stormwater System is completely located on the private property or partially within the public right of way. The City shall have no responsibility or obligation for the maintenance, repair, or proper operation of a Private Stormwater System.

Ifthe Director determines that a Private Stormwater System is not operating properly and causes the improper discharge of stormwater to the street, sidewalk or Municipal Stormwater System, the Director may order the person or persons responsible to repair the Private Stmmwater System. Ifany person fails to repair a Private Stmmwater System within 30 days of being notified by the Director, the City may pursue legal means, including a suit at law against the person or persons responsible or from the present owner or occupant.

Sec. 9-706 DAMAGE TO THE MUNICIPAL STORMWATER SYSTEM. Itis unlawful for any person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the Municipal Stmmwater System.

Sec. 9-707 WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITED. No person shall throw, deposit, place, or permit to be thrown, deposited, or placed any pollutant, refuse, rubbish, food waste, yard waste, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects into the Municipal Stmmwater System.

Sec.   9-708   EROSION   AND   SEDIMENT   CONTROL   AT   CONSTRUCTION   AND
DEVELOPMENT SITES. Individuals and organizations undertaking New Development or Significant Redevelopment shall utilize adequate silt fencing and other sediment control measures to ensure that no sediment encroaches upon or is deposited onto adjoining property or into the Municipal Stmmwater System.

Sec.  9-709  REQUIREMENT   AND  EXEMPTION  FOR  NEW  DEVELOPMENT   AND
REDEVELOPMENT  PROJECTS. New Development and Significant Redevelopment projects
 
with the potential to affect the flow rate or velocity of Stmmwater Runoff after construction is completed must include provisions for the management of the increased post-construction runoff in a Post-Construction  Stormwater Management Plan.
1. New Development or Significant Redevelopment activity involving only one single family dwelling unit, duplex, triplex, or quadraplex, provided the single unit is not part of a larger common plan of development, are exempt from the requirement to submit a Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan.


Sec.  9-710  POST-CONSTRUCTION   STORMWATER  MANAGEMENT  PLAN.  A Post­
Construction Stormwater Management Plan (SMP) (see Section 9-702[1OJ for specific requirements) shall be submitted to the City, for approval by the Director, for all New Development or Significant Redevelopment activity (see Section 9-709 for residential exemptions). The SMP shall be submitted during the building permit application process, or during the preliminary plat application process.

Sec. 9-711 REQUIRED MAINTENANCE  OF POST-CONSTRUCTION  STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT BMPS. All Stormwater Management Plans (SMPs) must contain a Required Maintenance Agreement, describing the periodic inspections and maintenance which must be performed by the owners or occupants to ensure the continued successful operation of all Post­ Construction Stormwater Management BMPs (BMPs).
1.	The City shall record the  Required Maintenance Agreement with the Washington County Register of Deeds. The Required Maintenance Agreement shall be binding on all owners and occupants of lands on which BMPs have been installed, including subsequent owners and occupants.

2.	BMPs shall be inspected and reviewed, as described in the Required Maintenance Agreement, by the owners or occupants at least annually. A written record of inspection results and all maintenance work shall be maintained, and shall be available for review by the City as requested.

3.	The City shall be allowed access to all BMPs, at reasonable times, for review and inspection by the City or the City's authorized representative to ensure all BMPs are maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards.

4.	The owners and occupants oflands on which BMPs have been installed shall ensure those BMPs are inspected and maintained as described in the Required Maintenance Agreement, and shall themselves inspect and maintain those BMPs if other persons or entities who are also obligated to inspect and maintain those BMPs (by contract or covenant, or pursuant to these regulations) fail to do so.

5.	The responsibility to maintain a BMP may be transferred through a contract or other agreement.
The person or entity accepting a maintenance obligation in such a contract or agreement will also be legally obliged to maintain that BMP pursuant to these regulations. However, no contract or other agreement imposing an obligation to maintain a BMP can relieve a person or entity of any obligation to maintain a BMP imposed by these regulations.

6.	Whenever the Director finds that an owner or occupant of lands on which BMPs have been installed has not maintained such BMP(s), such owner or occupant oflands shall be notified in
 
writing of the required maintenance work. If, after notice by the City  of such violation, satisfactory corrections are not made by the owner or occupant within 30 days, the City may perform all necessary maintenance work to keep the BMP(s) in proper working condition. The owner of the lands on which BMPs have received maintenance work by the City shall be billed the cost of the work, along with any appropriate administrative fees.


Sec. 9-712 APPEALS. Any person aggrieved by the issuance, denial, suspension, cancellation, modification, or revocation of any order or request of the Director, may, within ten days of the receipt of written notice, appeal to the city administrator in writing.















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 8.  Penal Provision

Sec. 9-801 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the Statutes of the State of Nebraska, Section 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly.






















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter 10

BUSINESS REGULATIONS

Article 1. Alcoholic Beverages


Sec. 10-101 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; DEFINITIONS. All words and phrases herein used are to have the definitions applied thereto, as defined in the Liquor Control Act of the State of Nebraska.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-103)

Sec.10-102 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; GENERAL PROHIBITION; EXCEPTIONS.   No
person shall manufacture, bottle, blend, sell, barter, transport, deliver,  furnish or possess any alcoholic liquor for beverage purposes, except as specifically provided in the Nebraska Liquor Control Act and the provisions of the Municipal Code of the municipality. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the possession of alcoholic liquor legally obtained as provided in the Nebraska Liquor Control Act for the personal use of the possessor, his or her family and guests; nor prevent the making of wine, cider or other alcoholic liquor by a person from fruits, vegetables or grains, or the product thereof, by simple fermentation and without distillation, if it is made solely for the use of the maker, his or her family and guests; nor prevent any duly licensed practicing physician or dentist from possessing or using alcoholic liquor in the strict practice of his or her profession, any hospital or other institution caring for the sick and diseased persons from possessing and using alcoholic liquor for the treatment of bonafide patients of such hospital or other institution, or any drug store employing a licensed pharmacist from possessing or using alcoholic liquors in the compounding of prescriptions of duly licensed physicians; nor prevent the possession and dispensation of wine by an authorized representative of any church for the purpose of conducting any bonafide rite or religious ceremony conducted by such church; nor prevent persons who are sixteen years old or older from carrying beer from grocery stores when they are accompanied by a person not a minor; nor prevent persons who are sixteen years old or older from handling beer containers and beer in the course of their employment in grocery stores; nor prevent persons who are sixteen years or older from removing and disposing of alcoholic liquor containers for the convenience of the employer and customers in the course of their employment as waiters, waitresses, or busboys by any restaurant, club, hotel, or similar organization; nor prevent persons who are nineteen years or older from serving or selling alcoholic liquor in the course of their

Sec.10-103 CLASSES OF PERSONS TO WHOM NO LICENSE ISSUED. No license of any kind shall be issued to:

1.	A person who is not a resident of the state in which the premises covered by the license is located, except in case of railroad, airline, or boat licenses.
2.	A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he or she resides.
3.	A person who is not a citizen of the United States.
4.	A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a felony under the laws of the State of Nebraska, any other state, or of the United States.
5.	A person who has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to any Class I



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 10, Article 1, page 1
 
misdemeanor under a criminal statute or in another state.
6.	A person whose license issued under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act has been revoked for cause.
7.	A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first application,
8.	A partnership, unless one of the partners is a resident of Nebraska and unless all the members of such partnership are otherwise qualified to obtain a license.
9.	A limited liability company, if any officer or director of the limited liability company or any member having an ownership interest in the aggregate of more than twenty-five percent of such company would be ineligible to receive a license under this section for any reason other than the reasons stated in subdivisions (1) and (3) of this section, or if a manager of a limited liability company licensee would be ineligible to receive a license under this section for any reason.
10.	A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any stockholder, owning in the aggregate more than twenty-five percent of the stock of such corporation would be ineligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the governmental subdivision, except that the provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to railroad licenses.
11.	A person whose place of business conducted by a manager or agent unless such
manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the licensee.
12.	A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is to be issued, but if because of a change in the renewal period provided for in Section 53-124 R.R.S. Neb., the lease is for less than the full period for which the license is to be issued, the license shall be issued and a new lease covering the remainder of the license period must be filed with the Nebraska Liquor Control commission prior to expiration of the original lease or the license shall be canceled or revoked by said commission on ten days written notice to licensee.
13.	Except as provided in this section, an applicant whose spouse is ineligible under this section to receive and hold a liquor license. Such person shall become eligible for a liquor license only if the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission finds .from the evidence that the public interest will not be infringed upon if such license is granted. It shall be prima facie evidence that when a spouse is ineligible to receive a liquor license the applicant is also ineligible to receive a liquor license. Such prima facie evidence shall be overcome if the following is shown to the  satisfaction of the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission:
(a)	that the licensed business will be the sole property of the applicant, and
(b)	it appears from the evidence that such licensed premises will be properly operated.
14.	A person whose premises, for which a license is sought, do not meet standards for fire safety as established by the State Fire Marshal.
15.	A law enforcement officer, except that this subdivision shall not prohibit a law enforcement  officer  from  holding  membership  in  any  nonprofit  organization holding a liquor license or from participating in any manner in the management or administration of a nonprofit organization.



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 10, Article 1, page 2
 
16.	A person less than twenty-one years of age.
17.	A person having a beneficial interest in a total of two alcoholic beverage retail licenses, except as provided in sections 53-124.02 to 53-125 R.R.S. Neb.
Where a trustee is the licensee, the beneficiary or beneficiaries of the trust shall comply with the requirements of this section, but nothing in this section shall prohibit any such beneficiary from being a minor or a person who is mentally incompetent. (Amended by Ordinance 2041 07/26/2005)

Sec. 10-104 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; DWELLINGS. Except in the case of hotels and clubs no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail upon any premise which has any access which leads from such premise to any other portion of the same building used for dwelling or lodging purposes, and which is permitted to be used by the public. Nothing herein shall prevent any connection with such premise, and such other portion of the building which is used only by the licensee, his family, or personal guests.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-178)

Sec.  10-105 LIQUOR  APPLICATION;  RETAIL  LICENSING  STANDARDS.    The City
Council shall consider the standards and criteria as set forth in the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, or as same may be amended, at any hearing and in the evaluation of any applicant for a retail alcoholic liquor license, for the upgrading of a license to sell alcoholic liquor, or for the expansion or change in location of the premises and for the purpose of formulating a decision as to the issuance of any such license pursuant to and in accordance with the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission Act.

Sec. 10-106 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LICENSE DISPLAYED. Every licensee under the Nebraska Liquor Control Act shall cause his or her license to be framed and hung in plain public view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premise.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-148)

Sec. 10-107  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LIQUOR LICENSE RENEWAL.   Retail liquor
licenses issued by the Commission and outstanding may be automatically renewed in the absence of a request by the Governing Body to require the said licensee to issue an application for renewal. The Municipal Clerk, upon notice from the Commission, between January tenth (10th) and January thirtieth (30th) of each year, shall cause to be published  in a legal newspaper in, or of general circulation in the Municipality, one (1) time, a notice in the form prescribed by law of the right of automatic renewal of each retail liquor and beer license within the Municipality; Provided, class C license renewal notices shall be published between the dates of July tenth (10th) and July thirtieth (30th) of each year. The Municipal Clerk shall then file with the Commission proof of publication of said notice on or before February tenth (10th) of each year of August tenth (10th) of each year for class C licenses.  In the event that written protests are filed by three (3) or more residents of the Municipality against said license renewal, the Municipal Clerk shall deliver the protests to the Governing Body who shall thereupon proceed to notify the Commission that they are to require the said licensee to submit an application.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-135; 53-135.01)

Sec.10-108 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; LOCATION. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to own, maintain, manage or hold open to the public any establishment for the purpose of selling at retail any alcoholic liquor within one hundred and fifty (150) feet of any church, school, hospital, or home for aged or indigent persons or veterans, their wives or children; Provided, this prohibition shall not apply to any location within such distance when the said establishment has been



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 10, Article 1, page 3
 
licensed by the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission at least two (2) years continuously prior to making of application for the license, and to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs, or to restaurants where the selling of alcoholic liquors is not the principal business carried on, if the said hotel, club, or restaurant were licensed and in operation prior to May 24, 1935. No alcoholic liquor, other than beer, shall be sold for consumption on the premise within three hundred
(300)	feet from the campus of any college within the Municipality.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-177)

Sec.  10-109    ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES,  MUNICIPAL  POWER  AND  DUTIES.    The
Governing Body of the municipality is hereby authorized to regulate by ordinance, not inconsistent with the provisions of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act, the business of all retail and bottle club licenses carried on within the corporate limits. The Governing Body shall further have the power, function, and duties with respect to the retail bottle club licenses:

1.	To cancel or revoke for cause retail or bottle club licenses to sell or dispense alcoholic liquors issued to persons for premises within its jurisdiction, subject to the right of appeal to the commission;
2.	To enter or to authorize any law enforcement officer to enter at any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the provisions of this act or any rules or regulations adopted by it or by the commission have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of such licensee in connection therewith;
3.	To receive a signed complaint  from any citizen  within its jurisdiction that any of
the provisions of this act, or any rules or regulations adopted and promulgated pursuant thereto, have been or are being violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner hereinafter provided;
4.	To receive retail or bottle club license fees as provided in subdivision (5) or (9) of Section 53- 124 R.R.S. Neb., and pay the same forthwith, after applicant has been delivered his or her retail or bottle club license, to the city;
5.	To examine, or cause to be examined, any applicant or any retail or bottle club
licensee upon whom notice of cancellation or revocation has been served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be examined, the books and record of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and to take proof for its information in the performance of its duties. For the purpose of obtaining any of the information desired, the municipality may authorize its agent or attorney to act on its behalf;
6.	To cancel or revoke on its own motion any license if, upon the same notice and hearing as provided in Section 53-1,116 R.R.S. Neb. it determines that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this act or any valid and subsisting ordinance or regulation duly enacted relating to alcoholic liquors;
7.	Upon receipt from the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission of the notice and
copy of application as provided in Section 53-131 R.R.S. Neb. the local governing body shall fix a time and place at which a hearing will be had and at which such local governing body shall receive evidence, either orally or by affidavit, from the applicant and any other person, bearing upon the propriety of the issuance of such license Notice of the time and place of such hearing  shall be published in



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 10, Article 1, page 4
 
accordance with the requirements of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act.
8.	To make any and all decisions and determination required, allowed, or authorized by the Nebraska Liquor Control Act and as same may be amended from time to time.

Sec. 10-110 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; HOURS OF SALE. It shall be unlawful for any licensed person or persons or their agents to sell any alcoholic beverages within the Municipality except during the hours provided herein:

HOURS OF SALE
Alcoholic Liquors (except beer and wine) Secular Days
Off Sale.....6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
On Sale .....6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Sundays
Off Sale....6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
On Sale ....6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
Beer and Wine All Days
Off Sale.....6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.
On Sale .....6:00 A.M. to 1:00 A.M.

No person or persons shall consume any alcoholic beverages on licensed premises for a period of time longer than fifteen (15) minutes after the time fixed herein for stopping the sale of alcoholic beverages on the said premises. For the purposes of this Section, "on sale" shall be defined as alcoholic beverages sold by the drink for consumption on the premises of the licensed establishment; "off sale" shall be  defined as alcoholic beverages sold at retail in the original container for consumption off the premises of the licensed establishment.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prohibit licensed premises from being open for other business on days and hours during which the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by this Section. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-179) (Amended by Ord. No. 1572 08/27/91; Ordinance No. 2268 11/25/2014)

Sec.  10-111   LIQUOR;  ACQUISITION  FROM  OTHER  THAN  LICENSED  DEALER;
WHEN UNLAWFUL. It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase, receive, acquire, accept or have possession of any alcoholic liquors which shall be acquired from any person other than one duly licensed to handle alcoholic liquors under the provisions of this act, unless within the specific exemptions or exceptions in this act provided. No licensed retailer of alcoholic liquors shall purchase such liquors other than from a manufacturer or distributor having the requisite certificate of authority, and duly licensed under the laws of the state, and having his or her place of business within this state.

Sec. 10-112   ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES;  OWNER  OF PREMISES.    The owner of any
premise shall be deemed guilty of a violation of these laws to the same extent as the said licensee if the owner shall knowingly permit the licensee to use the said licensed premise in violation of any



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 10, Article 1, page 5
 
Municipal Code Section or Nebraska Statute.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-1,101)


Sec. 10-113 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; EMPLOYER.  The employer of any officer, director, manager, or employees working in a retail liquor establishment shall be held to be liable and guilty of any act of omission or violation of any law or ordinance, if such act is committed or omission made with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the employer or licensee, and each such act or omission shall be deemed and held to be the act of the employer, and will be punishable in the same manner as if the said act or omission had been committed by him personally.  (Neb. Rev. Stat.
§53-1,102)

Sec. 10-114 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; MINORS AND INCOMPETENTS.  It shall be
unlawful for any person or persons to sell, give away, dispose of, exchange, permit the sale of or make a gift of, any alcoholic liquors, or to procure any such alcoholic liquors to or for any minor, or to any person who is mentally incompetent.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-180)

Sec. 10-115 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; CREDIT SALES. No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person or persons for credit of any kind, barter, or services rendered; Provided, nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any club holding a class C license from permitting checks or statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members, or guests of members, and charged to the accounts of the said members or guests in accordance with the by-laws of any such club; and Provided further, nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any hotel or restaurant holding a retail alcoholic beverage license from permitting checks or statements for liquor to be signed by regular guests residing in the said hotel, and charged to the accounts of such guests. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-183)

Sec. 10-116  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; SPIKING BEER.  REPEALED 2010

Sec. 10-117 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; ORIGINAL PACKAGE. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own, manage, or lease any premise in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is licensed, to have in their possession for sale at retail any alcoholic liquors contained in bottles, casks, or other containers except in the original package.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-184)

Sec. 10-118  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; MINOR'S PRESENCE.  Repealed 01/26/93.

Sec. 10-119   ALCOHOLIC  BEVERAGES;  REMOVAL  OF INTOXICATED  PERSONS
FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any law enforcement officer with the power to arrest for traffic violations may take a person who is intoxicated and in the judgment of the officer dangerous to himself, herself, or others, or who is otherwise incapacitated, from any public property. An officer removing an intoxicated person from public property shall make a reasonable effort to take such intoxicated person to his or her home or to any hospital, clinic, alcoholism center, or medical doctor as may be necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury. Ifthese measures are unsuccessful or are not feasible, the officer may then place such intoxicated person in civil protective custody, except that civil protective custody shall be used only as long as is necessary to preserve life or to prevent injury, and under no circumstances longer than twelve (12) hours. The placement of such person in civil protective custody shall be recorded at the facility or jail at which he or she is delivered and



City of Blair Municipal Code	Chapter 10, Article 1, page 6
 
communicated to his or her family or next of kin, if they can be located, or to such person designated by the person taken into civil protective custody.
The law enforcement officer who acts in compliance with this Section shall be deemed to be acting in the course of his or her official duty and shall not be criminally or civilly liable for such actions. The taking of an individual into civil protective custody under this Section shall not be considered an arrest. No entry or other record shall be made to indicate that the person has been arrested or charged with a crime.

Sec. 10-120 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; INSPECTIONS. It shall be the duty of the Governing Body to cause frequent inspections to be made on the premises of all retail and bottle club licensees. Ifit is found that any such licensee is violating any provision of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or regulations of the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission, or is failing to observe in good faith the purposes of said Act, the license may be suspended, canceled, or revoked after the licensee has been given an opportunity to be heard by the Governing Body.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-116.01)

Sec.10-121 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES; CITIZEN COMPLAINTS. Any five (5)residents of
the Municipality shall have the right to file a complaint with the Governing Body stating that any retail or bottle club licensee, subject to the jurisdiction of the Governing Body, has been or is violating any provision of the Nebraska Liquor Control Act or the rules or regulations issued pursuant thereto. Such complaint shall be in writing in the form prescribed by the Governing Body and shall be signed and sworn by the parties complaining. The complaint shall state the particular provision, rule, or regulation believed to have been violated and the facts in detail upon which belief is based. Ifthe Governing Body is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation and that from the fact alleged there is reasonable cause for such belief, it shall set the matter for hearing within ten (10) days from the date of the filing of the complaint and shall serve notice upon the licensee of the time and place of such hearing and of the particular charge in the complaint; Provided, that the complaint must in all cases be disposed of by the Governing Body within thirty
(30) days from the date the complaint was filed by resolution thereof, said resolution shall be deemed
the final order for purposes of appeal to the Nebraska Liquor Control Commission as provided by law.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §53-134.04)




















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2.  Peddlers and Hawkers

Sec. 10-201 PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS; REGULATION. To prevent the sale of fraudulent, dangerous, and unhealthful goods, materials, or services, and to protect the public by maintaining records of the products sold and the persons and companies responsible for such sales, all solicitors or peddlers and hawkers shall, before doing business or soliciting within the Municipality, make appli­ cation for, and be issued a license. Application for said license shall be made to the Municipal Clerk, upon blank forms supplied by the Municipality. Any person or persons granted a peddler and hawker license shall be subject to any fees, occupation taxes, and other rules and regulations which the Governing Body deems appropriate for the purposes stated herein. Any permit so granted shall be subject to revocation prior to its termination for good and sufficient cause by the Municipal Police. Such license shall be valid for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of issuance.

Sec.10-202 PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS; HOURS OF SOLICITATION. It shall be unlawful
for any solicitor, salesman, or peddler to solicit any individual between the hours of nine (9:00) o'clock
P.M.	and eight (8:00) o'clock AM., unless they have a previous appointment with the resident or residents of the premise solicited. It shall be unlawful at any hour for a solicitor, salesman or peddler to solicit without a proper permit on his person at all times.

Sec.10-203 PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS; PROHIBITION.  Notwithstandinganyotherprovision of the Municipal Code, it shall be unlawful for any solicitor, salesman, peddler, or hawker to solicit and contact any resident or residents of the premises solicited where a no soliciting sign has been posted on the premise as provided herein. Said notice shall be located on or within two (2) feet of the front door of the premise, shall contain letters not less than one-fourth inch ( 114") in height, and shall state "No Solic­ iting".

Sec. 10-204 PENALTY. Violation of the provisions ofl 0-201, 10-202 and 10-203 shall be a Class III Misdemeanor.






















(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 3. Railroads

Sec. 10-301 RAILROAD COMPANIES; SAFE CROSSING. It shall be the duty of every railroad company doing business in, or traveling through, the Municipality to keep in a suitable and safe condition the crossings and right-of-way in the Municipality. Ifany such crossing shall at any time fall into disrepair and become unsafe, or inconvenient for public travel, the Governing Body may call upon the said company to make whatever repairs that they may deem necessary to correct the dangerous condition. Notice of the requirement of repairs shall be served upon the local agent or the closest agent of the said company. In the event that the railroad shall fail, or neglect to repair and correct the said condition as aforesaid within forty-eight (48) hours, neglect for each twenty-four (24) hours thereafter shall be deemed and is hereby made a separate and distinct offense against the provisions herein. (Neb. Rev.  Stat.  §16-211,  16-212)

Sec. 10-302 RAILROAD COMPANIES; SPEED. It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its employees, agents, or servants to operate a railroad engine, locomotive or other vehicle on its tracks within or through the Municipality at a speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour.

Sec. 10-303 RAILROAD COMPANIES; LIGHTING. It shall be the duty of all railroad companies owning, operating, and maintaining a railroad through the Municipality to sufficiently light all crossings and to install as many signal systems as the Governing Body shall deem necessary at the expense of the said company.   (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-211, 16-212)

Sec. 10-304 RAILROAD COMPANIES; OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC. It shall be unlawful for any railroad company, its employees, agents, or servants operating a railroad through the Municipality to obstruct traffic on any public street, except in the event of an emergency, for a longer period at one time than five (5) minutes.

Sec. 10-305 RAILROADS; AUTOMATIC SIGNALS AND CROSSING STANDARDS. Any
railroad company having railroad tracks crossing any street, alley, highway, or other traveled thoroughfare in the municipality shall at railroad expense install and maintain in good working order approved, adequate, and suitable automatic flashing lights signals and automatic gates as delineated and defined in the Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Traffic Control Devices Handbook. In addition thereto, the railroad, at its expense, shall install and maintain in good condition full concrete or fully rubberized crossings or an equivalent thereof at each crossing of its railroad tracks, over, across, or upon any street, alley, highway, or traveled thoroughfare in the municipality.

Sec. 10-306 RAILROADS; RUNNING SWITCHES. It shall be unlawful for any employee of any railroad company or other person to cause a running switch to be made so that any railroad car or cars shall be caused to pass over or across any street or thoroughfare of the Municipality while detached from an operating railroad engine.

Sec. 10-307  RAILROADS; TRAIN WHISTLE.	No railroad train or engine whistle shall be sounded within the limits of the Municipality for a longer period of time than three (3) consecutive seconds or again sounded thereafter until at least one (1) second intervals. Such whistle shall be sounded approximately one hundred fifty ( 150) feet before crossing any traveled street or thoroughfare in the Municipality.
 

Sec. 10-308 RAILROADS; DRAINING OF RIGHT OF WAY. Every railroad company owning any railroad or railroad right-of-way within the Municipality shall at its expense properly construct and efficiently maintain all drains, ditches, culverts and bridges on its right of way necessary for the proper drainage of water coming naturally upon its right-of-way.



















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 4.  Moving and Demolition

Sec. 10-401 MOVING BUILDINGS. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move any building or structure along, upon or across any street, alley or other thoroughfare in the City except after full compliance with the following four (4) requirements:

1.	The owner or owners of the building to be moved shall apply in writing to the City Clerk for a building moving permit, which application shall state:
(a)	The location of the building to be moved.
(b)	The location to which it is to be moved.
(c)	The route of such moving.
(d)	The date of such moving.
(e)	The time required for such moving.
(f) The name and address of the person, firm or corporation employed for the work of moving.
(g)	A statement and verification that all taxes and special assessments on the building to be moved and the land from which it is to be moved have been fully paid.
(h)	The use which will be made of the building at the new location, such
application to be filed with the City Clerk and thereupon referred to the Building Inspector and Director of Public Works for investigation and	approval;
2.	Upon approval of the application by the City Administrator, the applicant or applicants shall file with the City Clerk a written undertaking with a corporate surety or two (2) suitable personal sureties, to pay all damages that may be sustained to any property, public or private and including but not limited to curbs, paving, manholes, public utility lines and pipes, by reason of the moving of such building and for payment of actual costs of moving wires, poles, lines, pipes and accessories as provided in Sec. 10-401, which bond and the sureties thereon shall be approved by the City Attorney;
3.	A building moving permit fee shall be paid prior to the moving of any of said buildings to the City Clerk for the use of the general fund of the City.  Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "Permit, License and Application Fees."
4.	Issuance of a building moving permit by the City Clerk in accordance with the application, which shall state any special requirements made by the municipality with reference to the moving, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to fail to comply with such special requirements.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1324, 3/23/82)

Sec. 10-402 MOVING BUILDINGS; NOTICE REQUIRED. It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation to whom a building moving permit is issued to notify the Director of Public Works and also every company or individual having a franchise from the City for the operation of any public utility, including telephone, electricity and gas, at least twenty-four (24) hours before beginning to move the building described in such permit, of the time, date and route of such moving and also to promptly pay to the City or franchise holder the actual cost of moving wires, poles, lines, pipes and accessories theretofore installed for public utility purposes required to permit the moving of the building described
 
in such permit.

Sec. 10-403 DEMOLITION.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to demolish any building or structure except after full compliance with the following four (4) requirements:
1.	The owner or owners of the building to be demolished shall first apply to the City Clerk for a demolition permit, which application shall state:
(a)	The location of the building to be demolished;
(b)	The date when demolition will be commenced;
(c)	The length of time estimated for demolition;
(d)	The name and address of the person, firm or corporation employed for the work of demolition; and
(e)	A statement and verification that all taxes and special assessments against the real estate on which the building to be demolished is located have been paid.

2.	Upon approval of the application by the City Administrator, the applicant or applicants shall file with the City Clerk a written undertaking, with a corporate surety or two (2) suitable personal sureties, to pay all damages which may be sustained to any property, public or private, by reason of the demolition of such building or structure, which bond and the sureties thereon shall be approved by the City Attorney.

3.	A demolition permit fee shall be paid prior to the demolition of any of said buildings to the City Clerk for the use of the general fund of the City. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "Permit, License and Application Fees."

4.	Issuance of a demolition permit by the City Clerk in accordance with the application, which may state special requirements made by the City Administrator with reference to the demolition, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fail to comply with such special requirements.   (Amended by Ord. No. 1324, 3/23/82)














(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 5.  Accommodations for Transients

Repealed by Ordinance No. 1793 (1128/97)
























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 6.  Trailer Camps

Sec. 10-601 TRAILERS; GENERAL. No vehicle or structure mounted upon wheels or skids or designed to be so mounted shall be used or occupied for residential, business or professional purposes, except by a government agency, within the City while stopped or parked at any place within the City for more than two (2) hours unless while within a trailer camp licensed by the City or unless permanently attached to a permanent dwelling or business structure as a part thereof after obtaining a buildingpennit as provided by the City ordinances. Residential purposes as used in this Section shall mean use for sleeping or eating or as living quarters.

Sec. 10-602 TRAILER CAMPS. Trailer camps shall be located only on well-drained sites; each unit or trailer shall face on a driveway at least twenty feet (20') in width which shall give access to a public street and which driveway shall as a minimum be graveled or cindered or surfaced with crushed rock and maintained in good traveling condition with proper lighting at night for the safety of vehicular or pedestrian traffic thereon. Each application for a trailer camp license shall be accompanied by a plat plan showing the proposed location of each trailer unit within the trailer camp.

Sec. 10-603 REVOCATION OF LICENSE. Ifat any time the City Council shall consider that any licensee under the provisions herein is not properly complying with the requirements ofthe ordinances of the City, it may notify such licensee to appear before it and show cause why his license be not revoked. Ifsuch licensee shall fail to appear and show cause in accordance with such notice, such license may be revoked on motion duly passed by the Council.  The licensee shall have not less than forty-eight (48) hours after service of such notice in which to appear and show cause. Upon revocation of any license granted under this Article, the licensee shall cease the licensed business within seventy-two (72) hours after notice to do so signed by the Mayor has been served upon him or her either personally or by leaving at his or her usual place of residence or business.























(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 7.  Taxicabs

Repealed Ord. No. 1187
























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 8.  Barber and Beauty Shops

Repealed Ord. No. 1187
























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 9. Pawnbrokers, Junk & Secondhand Dealers

Sec. 10-901 DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this Article, the term pawnbroker  shall include any person or persons engaged in the business of lending money upon chattel property for security and requiring possession of the property so mortgaged on condition of returning the same upon payment of a stipulated amount of money, or purchasing property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; the term junk dealer shall include any person engaged in the business of buying, selling, receiving, collecting or dealing in scrap metal, old bottles, old rags or old rubber, and the term dealer in secondhand goods shall include any person engaged in the business or buying, selling or dealing in used clothing, used jewelry or other used goods, merchandise or personal property other than retailers whose principal business is the same of new merchandise and whose used or secondhand merchandise is received in exchange by such retailer for new merchandise. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-201 thru 69-209) (Amended  by  Ordinance  2127 02/12/2008)

Sec. 10-902 PERMIT. Every person, firm or corporation engaged in business as a pawnbroker, junk dealer or dealer in secondhand goods in the City of Blair shall obtain from the City Clerk a permit. The fee for said permit shall be set by The City of Blair and shall be paid to the City Clerk. The term of the permit shall be for a period of no more than 1 year and shall expire on December 31'' of each year issued. Application for such permit shall be on a form furnished by the City Clerk in which shall state
(1) The name and address of the owner and the manager of the business and, if the applicant is an individual, the applicant's social security number; (2) Ifthe applicant is a corporation or L.L.C., a copy of the articles ofincorporation/organization and the names ofits officers, shareholders or managers and the Tax ID number of the business; (3) The exact location where the business is to be conducted; and
(4)	The exact location where any goods, wares, and merchandise may be stored or kept if other than the business location. When reviewing applications for said permit, the City of Blair shall take into consideration the criminal record, if any, of the applicant and, if the applicant is a corporation, of its officers and shareholders. No permit shall be issued to any applicant who has been convicted ofafelony and, ifthe applicant is a corporation or L.L.C., no permit shall be issued when any officer, shareholder, or manager has been convicted of a felony. The permit holder shall give a bond to the City of Blair in the sum of five thousand dollars with surety to be approved by the Mayor, conditioned for the faithful performance by the principal, of each and all of the trusts imposed by law or by usage attached to pawnbrokers.  (Amended by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)

Sec. 10-903 PERMIT; BUSINESS LOCATION; PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES. No person shall
be allowed to do business in more than one location under one permit. Each permit shall state the place where such business is to be carried on, and shall not be assigned. Goods, wares, and merchandise shall be kept or stored only at those locations specifically listed in the permit application. It shall be unlawful for any person not having a permit as required in section 10-902 to display any sign or advertisement stating that money is lent on goods or that goods are purchased as described in section 10-901. (Amended  by  Ordinance  2127 02/12/2008)

Sec. 10-904 RECORDS REQUIRED; INSPECTION. All persons who shall be engaged in the business of pawnbrokers, dealers in secondhand goods, orjunk dealers, shall keep a ledger and complete a card, to be furnished by the city or village, on which shall be legibly written in ink, at the time of any loan or purchase, the following information: (1) The date of the loan or purchase; (2) The name of the person from whom the property is purchased or received, his or her signature, date of birth, and driver's license number  or other means of identification;  (3)   A full and accurate description of the property
 
purchased or received, including any manufacturer's identifying insignia or serial number; (4) The time when any loan becomes due; (5) The amount of purchase money, or the amount lent and any loan charges, for each item; and (6) The identification and signature of the clerk or agent for the business who handled the transaction. Entries shall not in any manner be erased, obliterated, or defaced. The person receiving a loan or selling property shall receive at no charge a plain written or printed ticket for the loan, or a plain written or printed receipt for the articles sold, containing a copy of the entries required by this section. Every pawnbroker, or employee of a pawnbroker, shall admit to the pawnbroker's premises at any reasonable time during normal business hours any law enforcement officer for the purpose of examining any property and records on the premises, and shall allow such officer to place restrictions on the disposition of any property for which a reasonable belief exists that it has been stolen. Any person claiming an ownership interest in property received by a pawnbroker for which a reasonable belief exists that such property has been stolen may recover such property as provided by sections 25-1093 to 25-10,110. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-201 thru 69-209) (Amended by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)

Sec.  10-905 POLICE  REPORTS.	It shall be the duty of every such pawnbroker, dealer in secondhand goods orjunk dealer, every day before the hour of twelve ( 12:00) o'clock noon, to make out and deliver to the Blair Police a legible and correct copy of all personal property or other valuable things received or deposited or purchased or mortgaged, during the day, together with the time received or purchased, and a description of the person or persons by whom left in pledge, and from whom the same was purchased; Provided, no person shall be required to furnish such description of any property purchased from manufacturers or wholesale dealers having an established place of business, of goods purchased at open sale from any bankrupt stock or from any other person doing business and having an established place of business in the City. Such goods must be accompanied by a bill of sale or other evidence of open and legitimate purchase, and must be shown to the Mayor or any member of the Blair Police when demanded; provided, further, dealers in scrap metals, except gold and silver, shall not be included in the provisions of this Section. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-201 thru 69-209) (Amended by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)

Sec. 10-906 PAWNED GOODS; RESTRICTIONS ON DISPOSITION; JEWELRY DEFINED.
No personal property received or purchased by any pawnbroker, dealer in secondhand goods, or junk dealer, shall be sold or permitted to be taken from the place of business for fourteen days or, in the case of secondhand jewelry, for five days, after the copy of the documents or ledger entry required to be delivered to the police department has been delivered as required by section 10-905. Secondhand jewelry shall not be destroyed, damaged, or in any manner defaced for a period of seventy-two hours after the time of its purchase or receipt. For purposes of this section, jewelry shall mean any ornament which is intended to be worn on or about the body and which is made in whole or in part of any precious metal, including gold, silver, platinum, copper, brass, or pewter. All property accepted as collateral security or purchased by a pawnbroker shall be kept segregated from all other property in a separate area for a period of forty-eight hours after its receipt. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a pawnbroker may return any property to the person pawning the same after the expiration of such forty­ eight-hour period or when permitted by the Blair police, sheriff, or other authorized law enforcement officer. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-201thru69-209) (Amended by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)

Sec. 10-907 PAWNBROKER; LIMITATION ON SALE OF GOODS. It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to sell any pawned goods purchased or received as described in §10-901, during the period
 
of four months from the date of purchasing or receiving such goods. (Amended by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)

Sec.10-908 SUNDAY PLEDGES OF SALE. Thetime between twelve (12:00) o'clock on Saturday night and twelve (12:00) o'clock Sunday night shall not be considered in the enforcement of the Sections of this Article, nor shall any property be received as a pledge or purchased by any dealer mentioned in this Article between these hours. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-201thru69-209) (Amended by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)

Sec.10-909 PAWNBROKERS; CUSTOMER FINGERPRINT REQUIRED; RESTRICTIONS ON PROPERTY ACCEPTED.

1.	All persons who shall be engaged in the business of pawnbroker shall, in addition to the requirements of Sec 69-204 RS Neb., obtain and keep a single legible fingerprint of each person pawning, pledging, mortgaging, or selling any goods or articles. The fingerprint shall be taken from the right index finger or, if the right finger is missing, from the left index finger. Each pawnbroker shall display a notice to customers, in a prominent location, stating that such pawnbroker is required by state law to fingerprint every person pawning or selling an item.
2.	No pawnbroker shall accept as collateral security or purchase any property:
a.	From any person who is under eighteen ( 18) years of age.
b.	From any person who appears to be under the influence of alcohol, narcotic drug, stimulant, or depressant, or who appears to be mentally incompetent; or
c.	On property which the serial numbers or other identifying insignia have been destroyed, removed, altered, covered, or defaced. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-204)
(Added by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)

Sec. 10-910 STORAGE OF JUNK. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep anyjunk yard or place for the processing, purchase, storage or handling of old iron or other scrap metal, hides, wrecked motor vehicles, used rubber or other used goods or merchandise for disposition for its salvage value except within a building or within an enclosure tightly fenced by board fence at least eight (8') feet high from the ground level, or in a manner as to harbor rodents, and nay time upon written complaint of the Board of Health stating that any such business is carried on or maintained so that same is harboring rodents or the provisions of this Section are not otherwise complied with, it shall be the duty of the City Council to declare same a nuisance and to notify the owner of such business and the owner of the real property upon which same is conducted, by registered mail addressed to their last known addresses, to correct the condition within ten (10) days and if such owners fail to correct the condition and to notify the City Clerk thereof within said time, the City Attorney shall bring a suit to abate such nuisance.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §69-201thru69-209)  (Added by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)

Sec.  10-911  VIOLATION;   PENALTY;   PERMIT;   SUSPENSION  OR  REVOCATION;
PROCEDURE. Every broker, agent, or dealer mentioned in sections 10-901 to 10-910 who shall violate any of the provisions thereof, shall be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor. In addition, any pennit issued pursuant to sectionl 0-902 may be revoked or suspended ifthe holder of such permit violates any provision of state law classified as a misdemeanor or felony. Before any permit may be revoked or suspended the holder shall be given notice of the date and time for a hearing before the City of Blair to
 
show cause why the permit should not be revoked or suspended.  Such hearing shall be held within seven days of the date of the notice.  (Added by Ordinance 2127 02/12/2008)
















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 10. Auctions and Auctioneers

Repealed Ord. No. 1187
























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 11.  Theaters, Shows and Entertainments

Sec. 10-1101 DOORS, EXITS, PASSAGEWAYS. The doors and exits of any building or other structure, including tents, while the building or structure is being used for any show, entertainment or public gathering or meeting shall be unbarred and unlocked, shall be not less than three (3') feet wide and six and one half (6 Yz') feet high and shall open outward or be double-acting so that same will readily open outward or inward, and it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any door, aisle, entrance, exit or passageway of any such building or structure, while so being used, with any furniture, equipment or other article which would impede or interfere with public passage on or through the same.













































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 12. Plumbing, Heating, Water and Waste Treatment

Sec. 10-1201 LICENSES; LICENSING BOARD.    The following licenses shall be available from the City:

(a)	Master plumber's license;
(b)	Journeyman plumber's license;
(c)	Apprentice plumber's license;
(d)	Master heating license;
(e)	Journeyman heating license;
(f)	Apprentice heating license;
(g)	Gas fitter's license;
(h)	Water service line installer;
(i)	Drain layer's license.

A master plumber's license shall be issued only to persons with the following qualifications:

(1)	A person having at least five (5) years actual experience as a journeyman plumber or equivalent; and

(2)	Such person shall pass an examination as to qualifications which shall be given by the City Administrator, the Public Works Director, and one other person appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, constituting a Licensing Board (the "Licensing Board") for the purposes of this Article; provided, however, that the examination requirement shall be waived if the applicant is a person holding a current master plumber's license issued by the cities ofBellevue, Omaha, Lincoln, Fremont, Papillion or Norfolk, Nebraska, Council Bluffs, Iowa or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; provided, further, that it shall be the burden of the applicant to provide the necessary documentation to the Licensing Board to demonstrate that applicant has a current master plumber's license issued by one of the cities referred to above.

A journeyman   plumber's  license  shall  be  issued  only  to  persons  with  the  following qualifications:

(1)	A person having at least three (3) years actual experience as an apprentice plumber or plumber's helper, or equivalent; and

(2)	Such person shall pass an examination as to qualifications which shall be given by the City Administrator, the Public Works Director, and one other person appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, constituting a Licensing Board (the "Licensing Board") for the purposes of this Article; provided, however, that the examination requirement shall be waived ifthe applicant is a person holding a current journeyman plumber's license issued by the cities ofBellevue, Omaha, Lincoln, Fremont, Papillion or Norfolk, Nebraska, Council Bluffs, Iowa or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; provided, further, that it shall be the burden of the
 
applicant to provide the necessary documentation to the Licensing Board to demonstrate that applicant has a current master plumber's license issued by one of the cities referred to above.

An apprentice plumber's license shall be issued only to persons with the following qualification:

(1) A person who shall pass an examination as to qualifications given by the Licensing Board; provided, however, that the examination requirement shall be waived if the applicant is a person holding a current apprentice plumber's license issued by the cities of Bellevue, Omaha, Lincoln, Fremont, Papillion, or Norfolk, Nebraska, or Council Bluffs, Iowa or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; provided, further, that it shall be the burden of the applicant to provide the necessary documentation to the Licensing Board to demonstrate that applicant has a current apprentice plumber's license issued by one of the cities referred to above.

A master heating license shall be issued only to persons with the following qualifications:

(1)	A person having at least five (5) years actual experience in the installation and repair of units and appliances used for building heating and in sheet metal work and including all types of building heating, or equivalent; and

(2)	Such person shall pass an examination as to qualifications which shall be given by the City Administrator, the Public Works Director, and one other person appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, constituting a Licensing Board (the "Licensing Board") for the purposes of this Article; provided, however, that the examination requirement shall be waived ifthe applicant is a person holding a current master heater's license issued by the cities of Bellevue, Omaha, Lincoln, Fremont, Papillion or Norfolk, Nebraska, Council Bluffs, Iowa or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; provided, further, that it shall be the burden of the applicant to provide the necessary documentation to the Licensing Board to demonstrate that applicant has a current master plumber's license issued by one of the cities referred to above.
A journeyman heating license shall be issued only to persons with the following qualifications: ( 1)	A person having at least three (3) years actual experience as an apprentice heating
worker, or equivalent; and
(2) Such person shall pass an examination as to qualifications given by the Licensing Board; provided, however, that the examination requirement shall be waived if the applicant is a person holding a current journeyman heating license issued by the cities of Bellevue, Omaha, Fremont, Lincoln, Papillion or Norfolk, Nebraska, or Council Bluffs, Iowa or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; provided, further, that it shall be the burden of the applicant to provide the necessary documentation to the Licensing Board to demonstrate that applicant has a current journeyman heating license issued by one of the cities referred to above.

An apprentice heating license shall be issued only to persons with the following qualification:
 

(1) A person who shall pass an examination as to qualifications given by the Licensing Board; provided, however, that the examination requirement shall be waived if the applicant is a person holding a current apprentice heating license issued by the cities of Bellevue, Omaha, Fremont, Lincoln, Papillion or Norfolk, Nebraska, or Council Bluffs, Iowa	or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; provided, further, that it shall be the burden of the applicant to provide the necessary documentation to the Licensing Board to demonstrate that applicant has a current apprentice heating license issued by one of the cities referred to above.

A gas fitter's license shall be issued only to persons with the following qualifications:

(1) A person having three (3) years actual experience in gas fitting under supervision of persons holding master heating licenses or gas fitter's licenses, or equivalent; and

(2) Such person shall pass an examination as to qualifications given by the Licensing Board; provided, however, that the examination requirement shall be waived if the applicant is a person holding a current gas fitter's license issued by the cities of Bellevue, Omaha, Fremont, Lincoln, Papillion or Norfolk, Nebraska, or Council Bluffs, Iowa or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; provided, further, that it shall be the burden of the applicant to provide the necessary documentation to the Licensing Board to demonstrate that applicant has a current gas fitter's license issued by one of the cities referred to above.

A water service line installer license shall be issued only to persons with the following qualifications:

(1)	A person having at least three (3) years actual experience as an apprentice plumber or plumber's helper, or equivalent; and

(2)	A person with written recommendation or endorsement of a master plumber.

A drain layer's license shall be issued only to persons with the following qualifications:

(1)	A person having at least three (3) years actual experience in drain laying or plumbing; and

(2)	Such person shall pass an examination as to qualifications given by the Licensing Board; provided, however, that the examination requirement shall be waived if the applicant is a person holding a current drain layer's license issued by the cities of Bellevue, Omaha, Fremont, Lincoln, Papillion or Norfolk, Nebraska, or Council Bluffs, Iowa or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; provided, further, that it shall be the burden of the applicant to provide the necessary documentation to the Licensing Board to demonstrate that applicant has a current drain layer's license issued by one of the cities referred to above.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 1879, July 13, 1999; Ord. No. 2177, 10/13/2009)
 
Sec. 10-1202 APPLICATION. All applications for the licenses shall be upon forms provided by and filed with the City Clerk, which forms shall state the name, place of residence and place of business of the applicant and the type oflicense applied for. Each application shall be promptly referred by the City Clerk to the Licensing Board.

Sec. 10-1203 BOND. Every applicant for a master plumber's license, master heating license, or gas fitter's license shall file with the City Clerk, at the time of applying for license, and keep in force during the term of his license a surety bond which shall be approved as to form and sufficiency of sureties by the City Attorney, in the sum of five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars, conditioned so that such applicant upon being licensed will indenmify and save harmless the City from all liability for damage or injury resulting from negligence of the licensee or his employees in the work and materials furnished by him or her in the course of his or her licensed business and to do and perform all work permitted under such license in accordance with the provisions of this Article and to replace and properly repair any paving, curbing, water system, sewer system or other property of the City damaged by him or her or such employees in the conduct of the licensed business. (Amended Ord. No. 2177, 10/13/2009)

Sec. 10-1204 LICENSES; FEES, TERM, ISSUANCE. The licenses shall be issued by the City Clerk for the remainder of the current calendar year, upon direction of the Licensing Board and upon the payment to the City Clerk, for the use of the General Fund, a license fee, which said license fees for master plumbers, journeyman plumbers, apprentice plumbers, master heating, journeyman heating, apprentice heating, gas fitters, water service line installer, and drain layers licenses shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and the amount of said license fees shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "License Fees and Bonds".  (Amended by Ord. Nos. 1324, 3/23/82; 1328, 6/8/82; 1807, 5/13/97.)

Sec. 10-1205 SCOPE OF LICENSES. A master plumber's license shall entitle the holder thereof to place, replace, repair, install and construct pipes, fittings, appliances, accessories, fixtures, materials and systems for the conveyance, use and treatment of water, wastes and fluids and to carry on a general plumbing business.
A journeyman plumber's license shall entitle the holder thereof to do all things which a master
plumber may do, but only while under the direct supervision of a person licensed as a master plumber hereunder.
An apprentice plumber shall do no plumbing except under the direct personal on the job supervision and control and in the immediate presence of a journeyman or master plumber. No more than three (3) apprentice plumbers may be supervised by a master plumber or a journeyman plumber. The direct personal on the job supervision and control and in the immediate presence of a master or journeyman plumber shall mean the master orjourneyman plumber and the apprentice plumber shall be working at the same project location which shall not require the master orjourneyman plumber and the apprentice plumber must be within sight of one another at all times.
A master heating license shall entitle the holder thereof to carry on a general business in the installation, repair, manufacture, replacement and fitting of any system, unit, equipment accessory, appliance or device for the production of heat for household, commercial or industrial use.
A journeyman heating license shall entitle the holder thereof to do all things which a master heating worker may do, but only while under the direct supervision of a person holding a master heating license.
An apprentice heating worker shall do no heating work except under the direct personal on the job supervision and control and in the immediate presence of a journeyman or master heating worker.
 
No more than three (3) apprentice heating workers may be supervised by a master heating worker or a journeyman heating worker. The direct personal on the job supervision and control and in the immediate presence of a master or journeyman heating worker shall mean the master or journeyman heating worker and the apprentice heating worker shall be working at the same project location which shall not require the master or journeyman heating worker and the apprentice heating worker must be within sight of one another at all times.
A gas fitter's license shall entitle the holder thereof to install, repair, replace and fit appliances, accessories and units for the use of natural or artificial gas for household, commercial or industrial use, but shall not entitle such holder to make connections with any water or sanitary sewer system.
A water service line installer license shall entitle the holder thereof to tap water mains, install curb stops and install water service lines from the main to the point of metering inside a structure.
A drain layer's license shall entitle the holder thereof to install, construct, lay, replace or repair sanitary sewer tile lines, including mains and septic tank systems and the fields outside of buildings, and a master plumber's license shall entitle the holder to all privileges of a drain layer's license. (Amended by Ordinance No. 1801, April 22, 1997)

Sec. 10-1206 LICENSE; RE-EXAMINATION. No person who fails to pass an examination given by the Licensing Board shall be entitled to apply for re-examination for a period of thirty (30) days thereafter.  (Amended  Ord. No.  2177  10/13/2009)

Sec. 10-1207 LICENSE RENEWALS. Any person holding a license provided for under the terms of this Article shall, upon expiration thereof, be entitled to renew the same by applying to the City Clerk on or before the twentieth (20th) day of January of the succeeding year and paying the appropriate license fee as hereinabefore provided and furnishing and filing the bond as required by the terms of this Article; Provided, however, that any person issued a Blair license as a result of such person holding a current license issued by the cities of Bellevue, Omaha, Lincoln, Fremont, Papillion or Norfolk, Nebraska, or Council Bluffs, Iowa or a standard national block test or any other state recognized block test; shall provide the necessary documentation to the City Clerk on or before the twentieth (20th) day of January of each renewal year to demonstrate that the applicant's license from such other city is current and in good standing at the time of the renewal request; Provided, further, that the City Clerk shall not issue such renewal license ifhe shall have been notified not to do so, prior to the application for such renewal, by the Licensing Board.  (Amended by Ordinance 1789, 07/13/99; Ord. No. 2177 10/13/2009)



Sec. 10-1208 LICENSE SUSPENSIONS AND REVOCATIONS. Any license issued under the terms of this Article may be suspended by the Licensing Board if in the opinion of such Board there is credible evidence that the holder of such license has failed to perform his work under such license in accordance with the provisions of the City Ordinances and the Laws of the State ofNebraska and in a manner consistent with public health, safety and welfare or has grossly overcharged or overreached his customers or some of them. Written notice of such suspension shall be served personally by said Board on the license holder, if found in the City, or at his usual place of residence or business if not personally found. A hearing on such suspension shall be held at the time and place stated in such notice, which shall be within ten (10) days of the date of service of the notice unless the licensee and the Licensing Board shall both agree to a subsequent time of hearing. Ifthe Licensing Board at such hearing shall determine that such suspended license should be revoked, it shall enter a written order revoking the license, and no further license under the provisions of this Article shall be issued to the holder of such revoked license unless so ordered by the City Council.
 

Sec. 10-1209 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The City Administrator, any other member of the Licensing Board, or the Building Inspector shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to enter upon any premise or property for the purpose of examining, inspecting or testing any plumbing, sewage, water treatment or heating installation, line, unit appliance, apparatus or work.

Sec. 10-1210 DUTY OF REPAIR. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premise or property within the City to neglect or ail to properly repair or replace any defective plumbing, sewage, waste, water treatment or heating installation, system, unit, accessory, line, appliance or work found by the City Administrator to be hazardous to the health, safety or welfare of the public or any person using or residing in such premise or property, upon being personally served with notice to do so by the City Administrator,  such notice to allow reasonable time under the circumstances for compliance therewith.

Sec. 10-1211 CLOSING PREMISES. Whenever the City Administrator shall determine that any premise or property shall be unfit for human habitation or use by reason of a defective plumbing, heating, water treatment, sewage or drainage system, appliance of accessory, the City Administrator may order the premise or property vacated by posting a copy of his or her order of vacation in a conspicuous place in such premise or on such property and by serving a copy thereof upon every person owning or occupying such premise or property, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to comply with such notice.

Sec. 10-1212 DISCONNECTION OF SERVICE. The City Administrator, any member of the Licensing Board, or the City Administrator shall have the duty and authority to order water, sewer, electric or gas service lines or pipes shut off and service disconnected during any period when the use of such lines, pipes or service appears hazardous to public health, safety or welfare.

Sec. 10-1213 WORK INSPECTION. The Building Inspector shall inspect all work of and materials used in the construction, repair and installation of units, systems, equipment, appliances, devices and accessories for the use, disposal or treatment of water, wastes and fluids and for the heating of any building, habitation or place in which business is conducted or persons shall reside, and for the use of fuel oil, kerosene, natural or artificial gas, as frequently as he shall deem necessary, but in all events at the following times:
(a)	When the lines or pipes to convey water, wastes, fluids, sewage, gas heating oils, heat or ventilation has been installed and before same have been covered from view;
(b)	When appliances, accessories, units, equipment and devices using water or some type of fuel, including gases and oils, have been put in place, and
(c)	At the time of completion of the work of construction, repair or installation and before the completed work and materials are placed in use.
A written or printed record of each such inspection shall be given to the contractor or other person in charge of the construction, repair or installation, signed by the Building Inspector and a duplicate copy retained by the municipality for at least twelve (12) months next after such final inspection.

Sec. 10-1214 UNLAWFUL WORK. It shall be unlawful for any person to work atthe installation, repair or alteration of any plumbing, heating, water treatment or sewer system, fixture or unit inthe City unless such person be licensed by the City, as by this Article provided, to do such work.

Sec. 10-1215 RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.  Nothing in this Article shall be construed to
 
lessen the responsibility or liability of any person furnishing, constructing, or installing units, systems, equipment, appliances, devices and accessories for the use, disposal or treatment of water, wastes and fluids or for the heating of any building, habitation or place in which business is conducted or persons shall reside or for the use of fuel oil, kerosene, natural or artificial gas, nor to place any responsibility or liability upon the City therefor by reason of such requirements for inspection and licensing.



























(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 13.  Electrical Work

Sec. 10-1301 ELECTRICAL LICENSE REGISTRATION. Each individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, railroad, or other business association doing electrical work within the municipal limits shall register and place on file with the municipality a copy of their current license issued by the Nebraska State Electrical Board or such other evidence of such license as need be provided by said Board. Said registration requirement shall apply to Master Electrician licenses, Electrical Contractor licenses, Journeyman Electrician licenses, Apprentice Electrician licenses and Fire Alann/Security  Systems licenses.   (Amended by Ordinance No.  1800, 4/22/1997.)

Sec. 10-1302 REGISTRATION APPLICATION. All applications for registration of electrical licenses shall be upon forms provided by and filed with the City Clerk, which form shall state the name, place of residence and place of business of each applicant and the type oflicense held by the applicant. (Amended by Ordinance No.  1800, 4/22/1997.)

Sec. 10-1303 LICENSE; BOND. Every applicant for a master electrician's license shall file with the City Clerk, at the time of applying for license, and keep in force during the term of such license a surety bond which shall be approved as to form and sufficiency of sureties by the City Attorney, in the sum of five thousand ($5,000.00) dollars, conditioned so that such applicant, upon being licensed, will indenmify and save harmless the City from all liability for damage or injury resulting from negligence of the licensee or his or her employees in the work and materials furnished by the licensee in the course of his or her licensed business and to do and perform all work permitted under such license in accordance with the provisions of this Article and to replace and properly repair any City property damaged by him or her or his or her employees in the conduct of the licensed business.
(Amended Ord. No. 2177, 10/13/2009)

Sec.10-1304 REGISTRATION FEE TERM ISSUANCE. The Registrationofanyelectricallicenses shall be issued by the City Clerk for the remainder of the current calendar year and upon payment to the City Clerk, for the use of the general fund of the City, a registration fee for the electrician. The license fees referred to in this section shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the mayor and City Council, by resolution, and the amount of said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an index titled "Application, Permit, and License Fees." (Amended by Ordinance No. 1800, 4/22/1997.)

Sec. 10-1305 LICENSES; SCOPE. The Board shall entitle the holder thereof to do all types of electrical construction, installation, alteration and repair as set forth in Section 81-2101 R.R.S. Neb., et seq., commonly known as the State Electrical Act. (Amended by Ordinance No. 1800, 4/22/1997.)

Sec. 10-1306 LICENSE RE-EXAMINATIONS.   (Repealed by Ordinance No.  1800, 4/22/1997.)

Sec. 10-1307 REGISTRATION;  RENEWALS.	Any person holding a license provided by the Nebraska State Electrical Board shall renew the registration thereof with the municipality by applying to the City Clerk on or before the 20th day of January of the succeeding year and paying the appropriate registration fee as here and above provided and furnishing and filing the bond as required bythetenns of this article; provided, that the City shall not issue such renewal registration ifhe or she shall have been notified not to do so, prior to the application for such renewal by the Licensing Board. (Amended by Ordinance No.  1800, 4/22/1997.)
 

Sec.  10-1308  LICENSES;  SUSPENSIONS  AND  REVOCATIONS.	Any electrical license registered under the terms of this Article may be suspended by the Licensing Board if in the opinion of such Board there is credible evidence that the holder of such license has failed to perform his or her work under such license in accordance with the provisions of the City ordinances and the laws of the State of Nebraska and in a manner consistent with public health, safety and welfare. Written notice of such suspension shall be served personally by said Board on the license holder, if found in the City, or at his or her usual place of residence or business if not personally found. A hearing on such suspension shall be held at the time and place stated in such notice, which shall be within ten (10) days and not less than three (3) days of the date of service of the notice unless the licensee and the Licensing Board shall both agree to a subsequent time of hearing. Ifthe Licensing Board at such hearing shall determine that such suspended license should be revoked, it shall enter a written order revoking the license and no further license under the provisions of this Article shall be issued to the holder of such revoked license unless so ordered by the City Council.   (Amended by Ordinance No.  1800, 4/22/1997.)

Sec. 10-1309 RIGHT OF ENTRY. The City Administrator, any other member of the Licensing Board, or the Building Inspector referred to herein shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to enter upon any premises or property for the purpose of examining, inspecting or testing any electrical wiring, system, installation, appliance or accessory thereon.

Sec. 10-1310 DUTY OF REPAIR. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any premise or property with the City to neglect or fail to properly repair or replace any electrical wiring, system, installation, appliance or accessory found by the Building Inspector to be hazardous, unsafe, dangerous, defective or inadequate, unless such person shall cease using the same, upon being personally served with notice to do so by the Building Inspector, such notice to allow a reasonable time under the circumstances for compliance therewith.

Sec. 10-1311 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE. Whenever the City Administrator, Building Inspector, and the Director of Public Works shall determine that any premise or property is unsafe or dangerous by reason of defective, unsafe, hazardous or inadequate electrical wiring, systems, installations, appliances or accessories, they may order electric service to such premise suspended until such objectionable condition has been repaired or remedies to their satisfaction.

Sec. 10-1312	WORK INSPECTION.	The Building Inspector shall inspect all work of and materials used in electrical construction, repair and installation (a) before wiring, accessories or appliances, the installation of which will be concealed, is concealed, and (b) when the installation has been completed and before same is placed in use.

Sec. 10-1313 UNLAWFUL WORK. It shall be unlawful for any person to work atthe installation, repair, construction or alteration of any electrical wiring, system or installation, including television antenna, within the City unless such person is licensed by the City as by this Article provided to do such work.

Sec. 10-1314 RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to lessen the responsibility or liability of any person furnishing, constructing or installing electric wiring, systems, appliances, accessories or construction of any kind nor to place any responsibility or liability upon the City therefor by reason of such requirements for inspection and licensing.
 





















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 14.  Construction Work

Sec. 10-1401 CONSTRUCTION LICENSE. No person, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of contracting with customers for the painting, decorating, remodeling, adding to, constructing or repairing of any building within the City without first obtaining a license from the City, to be termed a "contractor's license."

Sec.10-1402 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. Applications forthe license shall bemadetotheCity Clerk on a form supplied by the City, which form shall include the following information from the applicant: Name of applicant, business address of applicant, residence address of applicant, nature of construction work to be done by applicant under the license, and applicant's experience and qualifications for such work.

Sec. 10-1403 LICENSE; FEE; TERM, ISSUANCE. Every application for such construction shall be referred to a Licensing Board consisting of the City Administrator, the Director of Public Works, and one ( 1) other person appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, for investigation. If a majority of such Licensing Board shall consider that the applicant is competent to carry on the business described in the application, such application shall be approved and a license issued the applicant bythe City Clerk, specifying the type of construction work to be done, which license shall be for the remainder of the calendar year in which same is issued. Prior to the issuance of said license, the applicant shall pay a license fee and submit a Certificate of Insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000 Aggregate/$300,000 each occurrence, which shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and said fee appended to the Municipal Code of the City of Blair as part of an appendix designated by the title "Permit, License, and Application Fees." Said license fee shall be paid to the City Clerk for the use of the General Fund of the City (Amended by Ordinance 1324, 3/24/82; Ord. No. 2177 10/13/2009)

Sec.10-1404 LICENSE; RENEWALS, REVOCATIONS,  SUSPENSIONS. Anypersonholdinga
license applied for under the terms of this Article shall, upon expiration thereof, by entitled to renew the same by applying to the City Clerk on or before the twentieth (20th) day of January of the succeeding year and paying said license fee hereinbefore provided; Provided, that the City Clerk shall not issue such renewal license ifhe or she shall have been notified not to do so, prior to application of such renewal, by the Licensing Board.
Any license issued under the terms of this Article may be suspended by the Licensing Board ifin
the opinion of such Board there is credible evidence that the holder of such license has failed to perform his or her work under such license in accordance with the provisions of the City ordinances and the laws of the State ofNebraska and in a manner consistent with public health, safety and welfare or has grossly overcharged his or her customers or some of them. Written notice of such suspension shall be served personally by said Board on the license holder, if found in the City, or at his or her usual place of residence or business if not personally found or, in the case of a nonresident, by mailing such notice of suspension by certified mail to the business or residence address of the license holder as shown by his or her application for license.
A hearing on such suspension shall be held at the time and place stated in the notice of suspension, which shall be held within ten (10) days and not less than three 93) days of the date of service of the notice or, in the case of a nonresident, from the date of mailing same, unless the licensee and the Licensing Board shall both agree to a subsequent time of hearing. Ifthe Licensing Board at such hearing shall determine that the suspended license should be revoked, it shall enter a written order
 
revoking the license and no further license under the provisions of this Article shall be issued to the holder of such revoked license unless so ordered by the City Council.

Sec. 10-1405 RIGHT OF ENTRY. Any member of the Licensing Board referred to herein shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to enter upon any premise or property for the purpose of examining, inspecting or testing any construction work performed by any license holder under the provisions ofthis Article.

Sec. 10-1406 RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to lessen the responsibility or liability of any person doing any construction work as referred to in this Article nor to place any responsibility or liability upon the City therefor by reason of such requirements for inspection and licensing.









































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 15.  Construction Inspection Fees

Sec. 10-1501 PLUMBING INSPECTION FEES. The contractor, master plumber or other person having charge of any construction, repair or installation shall pay a fee for the inspection of the rough in of any of said construction, repair or installation, and shall also pay a fee for the final inspection of construction, repair or installation. Said fees shall be paid prior to said inspection to the City Clerk of the City of Blair, for the use of the City General Fund. The amount of said fee for the rough in inspection and final inspection shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary bythe Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code of the City of Blair, Nebraska, as part of an appendix titled, "Permit, License, and Application Fees."
Whenever any building or structure is initially connected to the City Sanitary Sewer System or Water System, a fee shall be paid to the City Clerk, for the use of the City General Fund, prior to the initial connection. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code of the City of Blair as part of an appendix titled, "Permit, License, and Application Fees."
Whenever a new connection is made to the mains of the City Sanitary Sewer System, a fee shall be paid to the City Clerk for the use of the Sewer Maintenance Fund and there shall be credited on such payment any unused sum paid for sewer outlet charge previously paid on the property where such connection is made. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and shall b appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "Permit, License, and Application Fees." (Amended by Ord. No. 1324, 3/23/82)

Sec. 10-1501.01 HEATING INSPECTION FEES. The contractor, master plumber or other person having charge of any construction, repair or installation shall pay a fee for the inspection of the rough in of any said construction, repair or installation and shall also pay a fee for the final inspection of construction, repair or installation. Said fee shall be paid prior to said inspection to the City Clerk ofthe City of Blair, for the use of the City General Fund. The amount of said fee forthe rough in inspection and final inspection shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and the amount of said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled "Permit, License, and Application Fees." (Ord. No. 1324, 3/23/82)

Sec. 10-1502 ELECTRIC INSPECTION FEES. The contractor, master electrician or other person having charge of any construction, repair or installation of any electrical work within the City of Blair, shall pay prior to said inspection a fee to the City Clerk, for the use of the City General Fund, for each inspection of rough in  construction, repair or installation and a fee for the final  inspection of the construction repair, or installation. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and the amount of said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled, "Permit, License and Application Fees." (Amended by Ord. No.  1324, 3/23/82)

Sec. 10-1503 AIR CONDITIONING INSPECTION. The contractor, master plumber, electrician or other person having charge of any installation of central air conditioning equipment shall pay a fee to the City Clerk for the use of the City General fund, before any such installation is made. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and the amount of said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix titled, "Permit, License, and Application  Fees."  (Amended by Ord. No.  1324, 3/23/82)
 
Sec. 10-1504 SPECIAL INSPECTION FEES. Ifany person, firm or corporation shall have actually connnenced any work of construction, repair, improvement or installation without first obtaining a permit therefor, an additional permit fee in an amount equal to double the initial fee shall be paid by such person, firm or corporation to the City Clerk, for use of the City General Fund, in addition to any other fees for permits required by resolution or ordinance for the inspection of such work so done without permit. Such special inspection fees shall be paid forthwith upon demand of the City Administrator.  (Amended by Ord. No. 1324 3/23/82)













































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 16.  Bingo

Sec. 10-1601 BINGO; REGULATION. Games ofbingo shall be conducted within the Municipality in accordance with all laws of the Municipality and the State of Nebraska ifthe said game ofbingo is played for or involves profit or gain. Any association duly licensed by the State ofNebraska to conduct the game ofbingo shall obtain a written permit from the Governing Body before commencing operation of said game. Application shall be made to the Municipal Clerk for such permit. Said application form shall contain such information and documents or copies thereof as the Governing Body deems necessary to determine whether to grant or reject the application. Upon the determination that granting the application would be proper, the Governing Body shall immediately direct the Municipal Clerk to issue the said license to the applicant. Said license shall be subject to revocation at any time for good cause. Any person or persons, so licensed, shall be subject to any other fees, rules, and regulations which the Governing Body may designate. All permits so issued will automatically expire on March thirty-one (31), following its issuance or renewal. The permit shall be on display at any place where a game of bingo is conducted.

SECTIONS 10-1602through10-1609 Repealed by Ordinance No.	_





































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 17.  Games of Chance and/or Lotteries

Sec.10-1701 DEFINITION.  For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

1.	The phrase "games of chance and/or lotteries" shall mean those forms of gambling authorized by the State of Nebraska pursuant to Article III., Section 24 of the Constitution of the State of Nebraska.	The phrase "games of chance and/or lotteries" shall not include any forms of gambling which by State Statute a municipality is prohibited in any manner from imposing an occupation tax or a license fee.

2.	The phrase "gambling device" shall mean any and all machines or devices used by a person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries.

3.	The phrase "person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries" shall mean any person who operates, owns, or is the lessee of a place of business where any game of chance and/or lottery activity is conducted, whether or not any other type of business is conducted on the premises; or, any person who either directly controls or manages the games of chance and/or lotteries, or owns any machine or device used to engage in the occupation of games of chance and/or lotteries, but does not sell, lease, or deliver possession or custody of such a device to other persons.

4.	The word "distributor" shall mean any person who engages in the business of selling, leasing, or delivering possession or custody of gambling devices for consideration to a person engage din the occupation of conducting games of chance and/or lotteries.

Sec. 10-1702 OCCUPATION TAX. An occupation tax is hereby imposed on each person engaged in the occupation of conducting games of chance and lottery activities within the City. Every person conducting games of chance and lottery activities within the City shall pay the tax in the amount and manner specified in Sec. 10-1703.

Sec. 10-1703 AMOUNT OF OCCUPATION TAX FOR PERSONS ENGAGED IN THE OCCUPATION  OF  CONDUCTING  GAMES  OF  CHANCE  AND  LOTTERIES.	The
occupation tax for each person engaging in the occupation of conducting games of chance and lottery activities within the City shall be ten (10) percent of the gross receipts received by said person in each quarter of a calendar year.

Sec. 10-1704 AMOUNT OF OCCUPATION TAX FOR DISTRIBUTOR. The occupation tax for engaging in the occupation of distributing gambling devices within the City shall be five (5) percent of the gross receipts received by a distributor in each quarter of a calendar year.

Sec. 10-1705 PROHIBITION. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the occupation of conducting games of chance or lottery activities without first obtaining a license to do so.

Sec. 10-1706 LICENSE APPLICATION. Every person desiring a license required by the provisions of this Article shall make application to the municipal clerk of the City of Blair. Accompanying each application shall be:
 
1.	A sworn statement by each designated supervising member that such member will be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations for each occasion of games of chance and/or lotteries which he supervises.

2.	A sworn statement by the member designated as responsible for the proper utilization of gross receipts that no commission, fee, rent, seller profits, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person or organization not sanctioned by the laws of the State of Nebraska and the City of Blair; and that all profits will be spent for a lawful purpose.

Sec. 10-1707 DISPLAY OF LICENSE. Every license issued under the provisions of this division shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where the game of chance and/or lottery activity is conducted at all times during the conduct thereof

Sec. 10-1708 LICENSE FEE. The license fee for engaging in the occupation of conducting games of chance and lotteries within the City shall be $10.00 for each location wherein such activity is conducted.

Sec. 10-1709 EXEMPTION. Nonprofit organizations that desire to participate in games of chance and/or lotteries, that are in compliance with the Small Lotteries and Raffles Act of the State ofNebraska, are exempt from the provisions of this Article.





























(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 18.  Occupation Tax

Sec. 10-1801 OCCUPATION TAX; GENERAL; PURPOSE. For the purpose ofraising revenue there is hereby levied an occupation tax upon each and every occupation and business carried on within the City of Blair, Nebraska, as hereinafter specified and enumerated. Every person, firm, association or corporation carrying on the occupations or businesses herein specified within the limits of said City shall pay to the City Clerk annually on or before January first (l'')the sum hereinafter named as a tax upon the occupation or business. All money so collected shall be paid over forthwith by the City Clerk to the credit of the General Fund of the City. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §16-205)

Sec 10-1802 OCCUPATION TAX AMOUNTS. There is hereby levied an occupation tax upon each and every occupation and business within the corporate limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska, as hereinafter enumerated in the several different amounts and upon the several respective occupations, professions and lines of business as follows:

Billiard Hall or Pool Hall: First (l'')table per year twenty-five ($25.00) dollars. Each additional table five ($5.00) dollars per year.

Bottle Club: Two Hundred fifty ($250.00) dollars per year except that said occupation tax shall not apply to non-profit corporations as exempted from payment of federal income taxes, as provided by Sections 50l(c), (4),(7) or (8), Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as Amended. Bottle Club or Class "H" license operated by non-profit corporation as exempted from payment of federal income taxes, two hundred ($200.00) dollars per year.

Hawkers, Peddlers or sellers of goods at retail by sample or by taking orders, from door to door, including itinerant magazine or Book agents for each such person, ten ($10.00) dollars per day or seventy five ($75.00) per year.

Manufacturer of Alcohol and Spirits, or either, one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per year. Alcoholic Liquor Distributor, except beer, one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars per	year. Beer Distributor, five hundred fifty ($550.00) dollars per year.
Retailer of Beer only, for consumption on the premises, two hundred ($200.00) dollars per year (Class A)

Retailer of Beer only, for consumption off the premises, sales in original package only, two hundred ($200.00) dollars per year (Class B).

Retailer of Alcoholic Liquors for consumption on the premises and off the premises, six hundred ($600.00) dollars per year, except that nonprofit or charitable license holders shall be three hundred twenty-five  ($325.00) dollars per year (Class C).

Retailer of Alcoholic Liquors for consumption off the premises, sales in original package only, four hundred ($400.00) dollars per year (Class D).
 
Retailer of Alcoholic Liquors for consumption on the premises only, five hundred ($500.00) dollars per year (Class I).

Pinball Machines, Electronic Games and Other Coin or Token Amusement Games: twenty-five ($25.00) dollars per year per machine.
(Amended by Ordinance 2053 11122/2005)

Sec. 10-1803 HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS. There is hereby imposed an occupation tax fee inthe amount of seven percent (7%) upon the total consideration charged for occupancy of any space furnished by any hotel in the City of Blair, Nebraska. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-3715) (Amended by Ordinance   1984  10/9/2003)

Sec. 10-1804 HOTEL, DEFINED. Hotel shall mean any facility in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations in any space ordinarily used for accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist hotels, campgrounds, courts, lodging houses, inns, and nonprofit hotels; but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, chronic care centers, or dormitories or facilities operated by an educational institution and regularly used to house students.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-3707)

Sec. 10-1805 OCCUPANCY, DEFINED. Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any space in a hotel, ifthe space is one ordinarily used for accommodations and ifthe occupant's use, possession, or right to the use of possession does not exceed a period of thirty
(30)	days.  (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-3708)

Sec. 10-1806 OCCUPANT, DEFINED. Occupant shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess, any space in a hotel, if the space is one ordinarily used for accommodations.

Sec. 10-1807 CONSIDERATION, DEFINED. Consideration shall mean the monetary charge for the use of space in a hotel, only if the space is one ordinarily used for accommodations and shall not include the charge for any food or beverage served or personal serviced rendered to the occupant of such space. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-3706)

Sec.  10-1808  EXCEPTION  TO  OCCUPATION  TAX.	Consideration paid for sleeping accommodations which are not subjectto the hotel sales tax imposed by Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-3715 shall not be subject to this occupation tax.

Sec. 10-1809 COLLECTION. The tax imposed by this Article shall be collected by the hotel operator from the occupant of each room to which the tax applies. The tax may be shown as an add-on to the charge for occupancy of the rooms and shall be collectible at the time the lodging is furnished, regardless of when the charge for the occupancy is paid. The operator shall remain responsible for payment of all taxes imposed, whether or not the taxes are actually collected from the guests.

Sec. 10-1810 RECORDS. It shall be unlawful for any hotel operator subject to this Article to fail to maintain or fail to make available to the City, upon seventy-two (72) hours notice, written records accurately and completely evidencing the number of rooms occupied, the dates the rooms are occupied, the amount of occupation tax due or paid under this Article, and such other information as is required by
 
the City Administrator. Such records shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years after the occupation tax is due.

Sec. 10-1811 DUE DATE. Notwithstanding any contrary provision of this Section, the tax imposed by this Article shall be due and payable on the first day of each calendar month next succeeding the month during with the room was occupied. All taxes not paid by the twenty-fifth day of the month in which they are due and payable shall be deemed to be delinquent. The operator shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent ( 10%) on all delinquent amounts as well as interest of one percent ( 1%) per month or fraction thereof from the first of the month in which such tax becomes due and payable until the date of payment.

Sec. 10-1812 OCCUPATION TAX PROCEEDS; USE. It is the intent of the City Council of the City of Blair that the City of Blair shall use the revenue generated by the occupation tax imposed by this Article for community betterment purposes as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat.§ 9-604, for economic development purposes as defined in Neb. Rev. Stat. §13-315, and/or for grants for expanding and improving facilities at any existing visitor attraction, acquiring or expanding exhibits for existing visitor attractions, or planning or developing such expansions, improvements or additions; and, furthermore, grants shall be available for any visitor attraction in the City of Blair owned by the public or any nonprofit organization, the primary purpose of which is to operate the visitor attraction, except that grants shall not be available for any visitor attraction where pari-mutuel wagering is conducted. For purposes of this Article, visitor attraction shall mean a defined location open to the public, which location is of educational, cultural, historical, artistic, or recreational significance or provides entertainment or in which are exhibits, displays or performances of educational, cultural, historic, artistic, or entertainment value. (Neb. Rev. Stat. §81-3720; 13-315; 9-604)

Sec. 10-1813 PENALTY. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation violating any ofthe provisions of this Article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a maximum fine of $500.00. In addition, the City of Blair may, by an action in the District Court, enforce the provisions of this Article through equity and injunctive processes. Each distinct act or violation of the terms of this Article shall constitute a separate offense.











(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 19. Cable Television
(Editor's Note Article 19 was adopted in its entirety by Ordinance No. 1627 dated February 23, 1993)

Sec.10-1901 CONSTRUCTION. This ordinance shall be construed in light of applicable Federal and State laws and regulations governing multi-channel service practices which specifically includes cable television.

Sec. 10-1902 SCOPE. This ordinance shall be effective within the geographical limits of the City, including any areas subsequently annexed by the City.

Sec. 10-1903 SEVERABILITY. If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this ordinance, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid for any reason, such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed application thereof, shall be severable and the remaining provisions of this ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

Sec. 10-1904  DEFINITIONS.

1.	"AIB switch" or "Input selector switch" means any device that enables a viewer to select between a multi-channel service and off-the-air television signals. Such a device may be more sophisticated than a mere two-sided switch, may utilize other multi-channel system interface equipment, and may be built into television receivers.

2.	"Access channel" or "non-broadcast channel" means a government, education, or public channel which is carried on a multi-channel system, but which is not part of any institutional network.

3.	"Activated channel" means a channel engineered at the headend of the cable system for the provision of services generally available to residential subscribers of the cable system, regardless of whether such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for governmental, educational, or public use.

4.	"Alternative user charge" means a charge used in place of a franchise fee that the Council requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, easements, public ways, or rights-of-way of the City in order to construct, maintain, and operate a multi­ channel system. An alternative user fee is not based on an MCS provider's gross annual revenues (as is the case in a franchise fee), but rather is based on the value of the City property that an MCS provider is using to construct, maintain, and operate its multi­ channel system.

5.	"Annual gross revenues" means any and all compensation which is derived from the operation of the MCS system, and which is attributed to the subscribers or customers within the City, or the grant of a franchise granted to a franchisee to operate a multi­ channel system. Further, "annual gross revenues" means any and all compensation in whatever form (except as exempted by this definition), exchange or otherwise derived from all multi-channel services, MCS operations, and MCS-related activities within the
 
City including but not limited to revenues from subscriber rates, pay television, premium channels, service tiers, service clusters, institutional networks, advertising, installations, rebates or commissions received from services carried or provided on the system, or commercial access. Also, unless prohibited or pre-empted by either Federal or State law, "annual gross revenues" shall mean any and all compensation from all ancillary multi-channel services, MCS operations, and MCS-related activities within the City, including but not limited to sale ofMCS or MCS equipment, advertising stuffers inserted into periodic billing statements, or other notices, rental or sale of video disc, rental or sale of video cassettes, rental or sale of descrambling converters, or other devices, rental or sale of remote control devices (including those with volume control), rental or sale of a/b or input switches, rental or sale of channel lock-out devices or technology, rental or sale of interactive games or software, rental or sale of digital radio equipment, sale of satellite antenna dishes, sale of satellite antenna-received programming for a programmer or distributor of services, or from revenues received as the billing agent, collector, or retailer of satellite antenna-received service. Annual gross revenues shall include revenues derived outside of the municipal limits where MCS utilizes City street, right of ways, easements, and public ways to provide service to any MCS subscriber outside of the municipal limits. However, "annual gross revenues" does not mean any taxes imposed and/or assessed by law on subscribers (including State sales taxes, but excluding any state or local franchise fees) which an MCS provider is obligated to collect and pay in full to the applicable authorities.

6.	"Application" or "Proposal" are synonymous for the purposes of this ordinance. An "application" or "proposal" means the process by which the applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a license or franchise (where required) for all or a part of the City. An "application" or "proposal" includes all written documentation and verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the Council concerning the construction, rendering of services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the proposed multi-channel system.

7.	"Assignment of a franchised MCS provider's franchise" or "Transfer of a franchised MCS provider's franchise" means any transaction or action which effectively or actually changes operational or managerial control from one person or entity to another.

8.	"Auxiliary equipment" means equipment supplied by the MCS provider (such as a converter, remote control unit, or input selector switch), which enhances or assists inthe reception or provision of multi-channel service.

9.	"Basic cable television service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission oflocal television broadcast signals and shall include the retransmission of all services required by 10-1968(A).

10.	"Cable channel" or "Cable television channel" or "Data channel" means a portion ofthe electromagnetic or light frequency spectrum which is capable of delivering a television channel (as "television channel" is defined by the FCC regulation).

11.	"Cable operator" or "operator" means any person or group of persons who:
 

a)	provides cable television service over a cable system and directly or through one (1) or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or

b)	otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.

12.	"Cable service" means:

a)	the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programmmg, or other programming service; and

b)	subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video
.	.
programmmg  service.

13.	"Cable system" or "Cable television system" means a facility consisting of a set of closed  transmission  paths  and  associated  signal  generation,  reception,  and  control equipment  that  is  designed  to  provide  cable  service  which  includes  video,  voice  or data  programming,   and  which  is  provided  to  multiple  subscribers  within  the  City.
However, such terms do not include the following:

a)	A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one ( 1) or more broadcast stations; or

b)	A facility that serves only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way; or

c)	A facility or common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 USC 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or service directly to subscribers or;

d)	Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility.

14.	"CCPA" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended.

15.	"Charge" means a one-time or non-regularly occurring cost paid by the subscriber and which is associated with the installation, maintenance, service, or repair of the multi­ channel service.

16.	"Cherry-picking" or "cream-skimming" means the process whereby an MCS provider targets only selected areas of the City for service (either through a new-build, overbuild, or selective upgrade), and then primarily for reasons of higher than average density, or the relative affluence of the area.
 
17.	"City" means the City of Blair, Nebraska, or its lawful successor.

18.	"Collection charge" means a charge or fee imposed on a customer by an MCS provider for such provider's efforts at collecting, or attempting to collect a past due account.

19.	"Commercially impracticable" means with respect to any requirement applicable to an MCS provider, that it is commercially impracticable for such an MCS provider to comply with such requirement as a result of a change in conditions which is beyond the control of such an MCS provider, and the non-occurrence of which was the basic assumption on which the requirement was based.

20.	"Converter" means any electric, electronic, or other device, separate and apart from the subscriber's receiver that is capable of converting or changing signals to a frequency not intended to be susceptible to interference within the television, video, or data receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel or other type of selector may also permit a subscriber to view or otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations, or such other reception and use allocations as may be applicable and required for the practical use of the signal.

21.	"Council" means the City Council for the City of Blair, Nebraska.

22.	"Customer" means a subscriber or user of the services and/or facilities of the multi­ channel system provided by an MCS provider.

23.	"DBS" means direct broadcasting satellite.

24.	"DBS provider" or "Direct Broadcast Satellite provider" means any person who delivers and/or provides multi-channel services from a satellite to a subscriber's residence through the use of a small earth or satellite station.

25.	"Decoder" or "Descrambler" means a device which enables a subscriber to convert a scrambled signal into a viewable or otherwise usable signal.

26.	"Disaster emergency" or "Disaster" or "Emergency" means any imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of all, or a representative portion of the residents of the City is threatened.

27.	"Drop" means a small branch of cable, or other transmitting medium which connects the terminals on the back of the subscriber's receiver to the feeder cable or future technical equivalent on the street, easement, rights-of-way, or public way.

28.	"Easement" means and shall include and public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the City for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable television, or any other MCS provider. "Easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of cable service or any other multi-channel service.
 
29.	"FCC' or "Federal Communications Commission" means the Federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multi­ channel regulation on a national level.

30.	"Fiber cable" or "Fiber optic cable" means very thin and pliable cylinders, or strands of glass or plastic, or any future developed technical equivalent, used to carry wide bands or multiple frequencies.

31.	"Franchise" means the initial authorization or subsequent renewal granted by the Council in order for a person to construct, operate, and maintain a franchised MCS system in all or part of the City.

32.	"Franchised MCS provider" means a person that is awarded a franchise by the Council to construct and operate a franchised multi-channel system within all or part of the City. The term "franchised MCS provider" specifically includes the term "cable operator."

33.	"Franchise expiration" means the date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchised MCS provider as provided under a franchise agreement.

34.	"Franchise fee" means a fee or charge thatthe City requires as payment forthe privilege of using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways, and easements of the City in order to construct, maintain, and operate a franchised MCS system.

35.	"Headend" means the electronic control center where incoming signals, including those of television broadcast stations are amplified, modulated, filtered, converted, or in any way processed or converted for redistribution to subscribers.

36.	"Hub" means the satellite or remote receiving, processing, and/or transmitting facility enabling the signal to be extended beyond the physical/electronic capabilities of the multi-channel electronics and/or to serve as a remote switching facility.

37.	"Late charges" means a charge which is added to a subscriber's account or bill for non­ payment of a previously due and delinquent account.

38.	"MCS" means multi-channel service.

39.	"MCS Provider" or "Multi-channel service provider" means any person or group of persons who:

a)	provides multi-channel communications service over a multi-channel system and directly or indirectly owns a significant interest in such multi-channel system; or

b)	who otherwise controls or is responsible through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a multi-channel system.

The term "MCS provider" or "multi-channel service provider" specifically includes the terms "cable operator," "DBS operator," or "direct broadcast satellite provider," "MDS
 
provider,"  or  multi-point  distribution  system  provider,"  MMDS  provider,"  and "SMATV operator."

40.	"MDS" means multi-point distribution system.

41.	"MDS provider" or "Multi-point distribution system provider" means any person or group of persons who is authorized by the FCC to transmit (via Super High Frequency) specialized multi-channel programming or date or facsimile transmission to subscriber­ selected locations.

42.	"Multi-channel programming service" or "Multi-channel service" means:

a)	the  one-way  transmission  to  subscribers  of  video  programming  or  other programming service; and

b)	subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service.

43.	"Other programming service" means information that an MCS provider (specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers generally.

44.	"Pay-per-view" or "Premium channel" means the delivery over the multi-channel system of audio and/or video signals in an unintelligible form to subscribers for a fee or charger (over and above the charge for standard or basic service) on a per program or per channel basis where said unintelligible or unusable form for viewing is made intelligible only to subscribers paying a separate fee or charge for viewing or using of the signals.

45.	"Person" means any individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association of two (2) or more persons having a joint common interest, governmental agency, or other legal entity including the City.

46.	"Proposed abandonment of multi-channel service" or "Proposed withdrawal of multi­ channel service" or "Proposed cessation of multi-channel service" means the anticipated, imminent, or expected (either voluntary or involuntary) disruption, discontinuance, desertion, or removal of an MCS provider's operation and provision of multi-channel service from all, or part of the City projected period exceeding three (3) months in duration.

47.	"Public, educational, or governmental access facilities" means:

a)	Channel capacity designated exclusively for public, educational, or governmental use; and

b)	facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.

48.	"Public way" means any public street, public way, public place, or rights-of-way
 
now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto in the area served by the MCS provider.

49.	"Rate" means the price paid by a subscriber in order to receive standard or basic, tiered, clustered, premium, or pay-per-view multi-channel service.

50.	"Revocation," "Termination," or "Non-renewal" means an official act by the City whereby the Council removes, repeals, or rescinds previously approved authorization for a licensed or franchised MCS provider to conduct the running of a multi-channel system within the City.

51.	"Service cluster" means the grouping, aligning, or packaging of one (1) or more multi­ channel programming services by category (such as sports and/or news), or by rate, or by some other identifiable method, and charging a separate price or rate for each service cluster.

52.	"Service day" means any day, other than a Sunday or MCS provider holiday in which employees of the MCS provider (including customer service representatives and service technicians) regularly respond to service requests, inquiries, and complaints.

53.	"Service outage" means the loss of picture or sound on all standard or basic subscriber channels, or one (1) or more auxiliary programming channels (including tiers and clusters), and which is not caused by the subscriber's television receiver or by the subscriber.

54.	"Service tier" means a category of multi-channel service or other programming service provided by an MCS provider and for which a separate rate is charged by an MCS provider.

55.	"SMATV" means Satellite Master Antenna Television.

56.	"SMATV operator" or "Satellite Master Antenna Television operator" means any person or group of persons who:

a)	provides multi-channel service over an SMATV system; or

b)	otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management of an SMATV system.

57.	"SMATV system" means a private multi-channel system not crossing any publicrights­ of-way and which is located on private property and servicing private dwellings. Multi­ channel programming services are obtained via an earth station, amplification, and a distribution system.

58.	"Standard multi-channel service" means the lowest priced or least comprehensive service cluster or service tier available to residential subscribers.
 
59.	"Street" means the surface of and the space above and below a public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by the City (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now or hereafter held by the City (including any easements or rights-of-way acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with their proper use and meaning, entitle the City and MCS provider to use therefore for the purpose of installing or transmitting multi-channel system transmissions over poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, viaducts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may ordinarily be necessary and pertinentto a multi­ channel system.

60.	"Subscriber" means a person lawfully receiving multi-channel service delivered by he MCS provider.

61.	"User" means a person or organization utilizing a multi-channel system and/or its equipment for purposes of production and/or transmission of material as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.

62.	"Video programming" means programming provided by or generally considered comparable to programming provided by a television broadcast station.

Sec. 10-1905 ADMINISTRATION;  DELEGATION OF POWERS AND AUTHORITY.

1.	Unless prohibited by federal or State law, the Council may delegate its power and authorities with respect to an MCS provider to a duly authorized representative of the City, including the Mayor, the City Administrator, a City Cable Advisory Committee, or an outside consultant.
2.	The City may never delegate its franchising or revocation power to another person. Sec.10-1906  APPLICABILITY OF THIS ORDINANCE TO AN MCS PROVIDER.  Unless
exempted entirely from this ordinance, or exempted under one ( 1) or more provisions of this
ordinance, or granted relief (by the Council) from one (1) or more provisions and/or requirements of this ordinance, then this ordinance shall be applicable to an MCS provider, and this ordinance shall have full effect and be enforceable in its entirety.

Sec. 10-1907 EXEMPTION FROM THIS ORDINANCE FOR CERTAIN MCS PROVIDERS.

1.	Recognizing the inherent technological differences between various types of MCS providers, and taking into account a number of financial, operations, and maintenance considerations, the Council exempts certain MCS providers from complying with the provisions contained in this ordinance.

2.	MCS providers who are exempted from complying with the provisions of this ordinance are as follows:
 
a)	An MCS provider who is exempted from this ordinance as a result of an applicable FCC ruling; or

b)	An MCS provider who is exempted from this ordinance as a result of an applicable judicial ruling.

3.	An exempted MCS provider remains exempted only as long as it meets one (I) or more of the specifications of this particular section.

4.	The extent of the exemption for a qualified MCS provider is only for this ordinance.
Consequently, such an exempted MCS provider is expected to abide by and comply with any other applicable City, State, or Federal laws and regulations, including any applicable federal, or State consumer protection, or customer service laws and regulations.

Sec. 10-1908  NON-EXEMPT MCS PROVIDERS SEEKING RELIEF FROM THIS ORDINANCE.

1.	Any MCS provider affected by this ordinance may file a written petition at any time with the Council seeking relief from one ( 1) or more provisions of this ordinance. The relief requested may specifically include the delay in implementation (as to the petitioning MCS provider only) on one (I) or more provisions of this ordinance.

2.	In order to receive any relief from one (I) or more of the provisions of this ordinance, a non-exempt MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the Council that at least one (I) of the following facts exist:

The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by Federal law,	the FCC, or State law; or

a)	Where applicable, that the provision in questions materially affects and is in conflict with an expressed right that is specifically noted in an existing franchise agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise); or

b)	The imposition of such provisions and/or requirements will create such an undue economic hardship on an MCS provider so as to imperil or eliminate an MCS provider's ability to provide multi-channel service to a majority of current subscribers; or

3.	As an alternative to seeking an exemption or requesting relief, an MCS provider may petition for clarification on the precise intent and effect that one (I) or more provisions or sections of this ordinance has on the petitioning MCS provider.

4.	In accordance with this ordinance, the Council may charge the petitioning MCS provider with the actual costs for processing such petition, including any costs incurred by outside consultants who are retained by the City to review an MCS provider's petition.
 

5.	In those instances where the Council grants an exemption or relief or clarification to a franchised MCS provider, or deems a franchised MCS provider's  operational policy to be comparable to an ordinance provision, then the franchise  agreement (initial, existing, or renewal) shall be amended within thirty (30) days to reflect     the exact extent of such exemption and/or relief  It should be specifically noted            that the benefit of such exemption, relief, clarification, or comparable policy         extends only to the MCS provider granted such exemption, relief, or clarification.

Sec. 10-1909  FAILURE OF THE COUNCIL TO ENFORCE THIS ORDINANCE.   A  non­
exempt MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this ordinance, or any subsequently adopted amendments to this ordinance by any failure of the Council on any one ( 1) or more occasions to seek or insist upon compliance with such requirements or provisions.

Sec. 10-1910  MCS PROVIDERS OR THEIR ASSIGNEES SUBJECT TO PRESENT AND FUTURE ORDINANCES.

I.	Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to and expected to comply with all ordinances now or hereafter adopted and in effect with the City, including this ordinance, to the extent that said MCS provider has not received an exemption or relief from said ordinance( s).

2.	Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to and expected to comply with all Federal and State laws and with all rules issued by all applicable regulatory agencies now or hereafter in existence.

3.	Any non-exempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the City's policy power.

4.	With respect to future ordinances noted in this section, nothing contained herein prevents an MCS provider from exercising any and all of its administrative and legal rights as to the constitutionality, applicability, and enforceability of said future ordinances.

Sec. 10-1911  REGULATION OF INCONSISTENCIES WITH FEDERAL OR STATE RULES, REGULATIONS, OR LAWS.

1.	In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section of this ordinance, and any provision or section of a Federal or State rule, regulation, or law, then the Federal or State rule, regulation, or law shall not only supersede the effect of the ordinance, but also control in any local application.

2.	The above subsection specifically includes any situation wherein an applicable Federal or Statejudicial decision creates an actual inconsistency with any provision or section of this ordinance. In such a situation, the Federal or State judicial decision shall not only supersede the effect of the ordinance but also control in any local application.
 
Sec. 10-1912 PENALTIES. Any violation or failure to abide by and comply with any provision or requirement of this ordinance shall be a violation of this ordinance and shall be subject to any civil remedies by State law, including (where permissible) the imposition of monetary fines.

Sec. 10-1913  THE COUNCIL'S RETAINED RIGHTS AND AUTHORITIES.

I.	Subject to pre-emption by or other approval authority of the FCC or any other Federal or State governmental entity or agency, the Council retains the authority to provide for:

a)	The regulation and control of any multi-channel system within the geographical limits of City, and within the limits prescribed by applicable law;

b)	The award and grant of an MCS franchise (where required) subsequentto review of an application or proposal by the Council;

c)	The periodic review and/or amendment or repeal of all or part of this ordinance; and

d)	Ifmutually agreed to with a franchised MCS provider, the periodic review and/or amendment of any existing franchise agreement.

2.		Subject to pre-emption by or other approval, authority of the FCC or any other Federal or State governmental entity or agency, the Council retains the jurisdiction to enforce all laws and regulations relating to multi-channel customer service practices and consumer protection.

Sec. 10-1914 MCS PROVIDER MAY PROMULGATE RULES. To the extent that they are consistent with the requirements and responsibilities detailed in this ordinance, an MCS provider is authorized to promulgate such rules and internal practices as shall be necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its duties under this ordinance, the state, and the rules of any federal agency charged with the responsibility ofregulating MCS providers.

Sec. 10-1915  NOTICES.

1.	Both the Council and each non-exempt MCS provider shall provide the other party with the name and address of the contact person designated to receive notices, filings, reports, records, documents, and other correspondence. All notices shall be delivered to each party's contact person by certified mail, return receipt requested, personal service with a signed receipt of delivery, or overnight with receipt verification. The delivery of all notices, reports, records, and other correspondence shall be deemed to have occurred at this time of receipt.

2.	Ifthe non-exempt MCS is required to maintain a franchise, then the designation of such contact person for notices purposes may be contained within a franchise agreement.

Sec. 10-1916  INDEMNITY.

I.	To the extent permitted by law, a non-exempt MCS provider shall at all times defend,
 
indemnify, protect, save and hold harmless and exempt the City, the Mayor, the City Administrator, the Council, their officers, agents, servants, and employees from any and all penalty, damage, or charges arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might be claimed now or in the future which may arise out of or be caused by the construction, erection, location, products performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of the multi-channel system within the City by a negligent act of omission of an MCS provider, its agents or employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or implied or authorized representatives. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included as those costs which may be recovered by the Council.

2.	The City, Mayor, and the Council specifically reserve the right to retain counsel of their own choice.

3.	With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions noted in this Section, it is understood that such MCS provider reserves the right to select and retain, without the Council's approval, counsel of the MCS provider's choice at such provider's expense.



Sec.10-1917   LIABILITY INSURANCE.

1.	An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides multi-channel service to subscribers, public liability, property damage insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts:



a)	Public liability: $2,000,000.00 per person/per occurrence;
b)	Property damage: $2,000,000.00 per any one (1) claim;
c)	Umbrella liability: $4,000,000.00 with up to a
$50,000.00 deductible and/or base insurance.

2.	An MCS provider's  public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall specifically include the City, the Mayor, the Council, their  officials, agents, employees or representatives as additional named insured.

3.	The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business  m the State and which has one ( 1) of the Three highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company and which is acceptable to the City.

4.	Whenever needed to protect the interest of the citizens of the City, the Council may require an MCS provider to provide insurance for greater amounts than listed herein.

5.	The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain an endorsement  obligating the insurance  company to furnish the Council with at least
 
thirty (30) days written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.

6.	Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the Council at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the insurance which such policies are	to renew or replace.

7.	Before a multi-channel system provides multi-channel service to subscribers, the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates representing the insurance to the Council and each policy or certificate delivered shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of the premium thereon.

Sec. 10-1918  PERFORMANCE AND CONSTRUCTION/COMPLETION  BOND.

1.	An MCS provider shall furnish to the Council in an amount totaling at least One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($100,000.00) a performance bond or security bond executed by a surety licensed to do business in this  State. The purpose of the performance bond is to ensure performance of any requirements imposed by this ordinance on an MCS provider. Further, the purpose is to guarantee that should the MCS provider not fulfill any obligations imposed by this ordinance (or where applicable a franchise agreement), then the surety will make whole (to the extent of the policy) and monetary losses incurred by the City.

2.	An MCS provider shall furnish to the Council, a construction/completion bond prior to the time it commences a construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance project that has a capital construction cost or outlay exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) in value. The amount of the bond shall equal at least ninety percent (90%) of the projected capital construction cost or outlay. The construction/ completion bond shall remain in force at all times, unless relief  is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement between the Council, and the MCS provider.

3.	The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by its construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance schedule for the multi-channel system and/or any time table for technical and service improvements or additions to the multi-channel system as may be committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time by the Council and MCS provider.

4.	If the City draws on a performance or completion bond, or cash deposit, or letter of credit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely discharge its obligations, or failure to construct and activate the multi-channel system, or failure to complete a multi-channel system upgrade or rebuild or repair/maintain, then the MCS provider shall be required, within thirty (30) days to replenish the completion and performance bond or security bond to the minimal level required by the Council.

5.	Based upon such reasons as the Council might feel is necessary to protect the public interest and welfare, the Council may raise the minimal amount of the performance bond.
 
6.	The performance bond and construction/completion bond, the Council may accept a written guarantee of an MCS provider pledging the full faith and credit of the affected MCS provider should there be a breach in a material franchise term or failure to meet any construction schedule.

Sec. 10-1919  THE COUNCIL POLICY WITH RESPECT TO REPORTS AND RECORDS.

1.	The Council recognizes that advances in technology, and the adoption and application of multi-channel laws, rules, regulations, and court decisions may have a profound effect and impact on an MCS provider in any given year.

2.	Consequently, it is incumbent that the Council take measurer to reduce the risk that multi-channel service or the multi-channel system will be adversely affected m any given year.

3.	Therefore, the evaluation oflegal, technical, financial, and character qualifications of an MCS provider is viewed as a constant undertaking on the part of the City. As a result, the Council requires that the operator maintain and retain all records and reports necessary for a City to determine compliance with the obligations imposed on an MCS provider, and to determine the MCS provider's (legal, technical, financial, and character) qualifications. The information is primarily intended to assist the MCS provider to maximize service rather than to identify incidents of non-compliance.

Sec. 10-1920  FURNISHING OF REPORTS.

1.	At any time the FCC of another Federal of State agency requires or requests the submission of reports, data, or other information by a non-exempt multi-channel service provider, then such MCS provider shall at the same time, without a separate or specific request, submit those reports, data, or other information to the Council. An MCS provider shall not be required to submit State or Federal tax returns, or any information exempted under federal privacy laws, including 47 USC 551.

2.	With respect to the reports required by this ordinance, it is noted that a non-exempted MCS provider shall timely submit any required report including but not limited to the following:

a)	An annual compliance statement in the manner set forth in this ordinance;
b)	A periodic gross revenue report in the manner set forth in this ordinance;
c)	Preventative maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this ordinance;
d)	Copies, if applicable, of the MCS provider's FCC Form 395-A (or successor form), or any supplemental forms relating to equal employment opportunity, and fair contracting practices; and
e)	Any other reports or information required by another Section of this ordinance or by the Council which are necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the City.

Sec.10-1921 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
 

1.	An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of the business and operations under and in connection with the MCS system.

2.	The Council shall have the right to review (either by mail or atthe MCS provider's local office) all records (pertaining to an MCS provider's cable and/or multi-channel operations) on seven (7) days written notice, unless specifically exempted by the Council. Such review, unless mutually agreed upon or judicially ordered should occur within the MCS provider's regular office hours.

3.	The Council shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an independent certified public accountant or other business or financial expert to review the books and records of an MCS provider. Ifafter a financial audit it is determined that the MCS provider has underpaid amounts owed to the City, then the MCS provider shall reimburse the City for the actual cost of the audit.

4.	A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider made by an MCS provider of a material and substantial fact shall constitute a material violation of this ordinance.

5.	An MCS provider at the local office shall keep complete and accurate books and records of the key aspects of the multi-channel system's operation for at least the preceding five (5) years in such a manner that all matters pertaining to the City can be easily produces and/or verified at the City's request. Also, the MCS provider shall keep, at it local office, any other applicable records and information that may be required by any other Federal or State agency having jurisdiction over MCS providers.

Sec. 10-1922 ANNUAL COMPLIANCE STATEMENT REQUIRED.

1.	Prior to December 31 of each calendar year each non-exempt AMCS provider shall return to the Council a completed and executed (by owner or officer) compliance statement if a form acceptable to the City.

2.	There shall be no charge or fee associated with returning the annual compliance statement.	However, if the MCS provider supplies incomplete information which requires independent verification by the City or a consultant hired by the City, then the MCS provider shall reimburse the City for all costs associated with the independent verification. Moreover, failure to submit a statement by the deadline or the provision of false information within a statement may subject an affected MCS provider to any and all penalties and fines listed in this ordinance.

Sec. 10-1923. NOTIFICATION OF CUSTOMERS AND MCS PROVIDER'S RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES;  GENERAL POLICY.

1.	In order to provide customers with the variety of information needed to make an informed decision and to ensure that customers are notified of their and the MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respectto the multi-channel system, an MCS provider must provide a customer with a written "Notice of a Customer's and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service."
 

2.	The "Notice of a Customer's  and MCS Provider's Rights and Responsibilities With Respect to the Provision of Multi-Channel Service" shall be provided at the time of initial installation.  Thereafter, a subscriber shall be provided with a  written "Notice" at least once every twelve (12) months. If, however, an MCS provider amends, repeals, adds, deletes, modifies, or makes other changes to any customer service practice that is required in this ordinance, then said MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with such written notification at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of such amendment, repeal, addition, deletion, modification,  or other change.

Sec. 10-1924 NOTICE OF CUSTOMER'S AND MCS PROVIDER'S  RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES WITH RESPECT TO THE PROVISION OF MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE; MINIMUM CONTENTS.

1.	At the time an MCS provider is required to furnish an initial or annual "Notice," such "Notice" shall contain, at a minimum, the following:

a)	An up-to-date listing of the specific multi-channel services provided clearly indicating and isolating the standard and/or basic, premium, and informational services offered as well as the service tiers or service  clusters offered;

b)	Notification ofa subscriber's ability to purchase or lease from the MCS provider a lock box, parental control mechanism, or other device which will prohibit the viewing of a particular multi-channel  service during a period selected by the subscriber;

c)	Pursuantto FCC regulations, a subscriber's ability of purchasing or using an A!B or input selector switch;

d)	A comprehensive listing and explanation of all rates and charges (including rates for standard or basic and premium channels/services, particular service tiers or service clusters, current discount or promotional fees, installation charges, and security deposits, if any);

e)	Ifservice clustering is available, then a description and explanation of any penalties, credits, restrictions, upcoming (within sixty (60) days of the "Notice") service clustering changes or differing alignments, or other pertinent information;

f)	A comprehensive listing and explanation of all billing options available;

g)	The customer service office hours and telephone number( s) in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;

h)	The billing practices of an MCS provider in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;

i)	The specific customer complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is adopted and
 
followed by an MCS provider and which is consistent with the parameters set forth in this ordinance.

j)	The method of securing a voluntary disconnection in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;

k)	The extent of the credit/refund policy in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance;

1)	The equipment use and return policy together with any required security deposits in
a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance; and

m) The additional rights ofblind, hearing-impaired or ambulatory impaired customers in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this ordinance.

2.	The "Notice" shall be written in plain, simple to understand English.  The "Notice" shall contain no fine print, and any exclusions, limitations, or caveats shall be
clearly indicated as such in the "Notice."

3.	The "Notice" shall be delivered to a subscriber via mailing.

Sec. 10-1925  BILLING PRACTICES.

1.	Within the "Notice" that is required by this ordinance, subscribers shall be informed of any least the following practices of an MCS provider;

a)	Billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid discontinuance of service);
b)	Payment due and delinquent dates;
c)	Amount or percentage of late charges, if any;
d)	Advance billing options;
e)	Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints, and inquiries;
f)	Refund policy for service interruptions, substandard signal quality, or un-contracted
service;
g)	Current service rates in a detailed and understandable format;
h)	Procedure and amount of charges for installation or relocation of an MCS provider's facilities and/or equipment;
i)	Current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other non-regularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers; and
j)	Any lower-income or fixed-income rates together with any qualifications to obtain such
rates.

2.	All bills shall plainly state that service may be paid for on an individual monthly basis by the end of the month for which the service was delivered with no late penalty of charge assessed.

3.	Existing subscribers shall be informed of the items listed in subsection (1) at least once every 12 months.
 
4.	Whenever there is a change in a MCS provider's billing practices or payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at least thirty (30) days before such billing practices or payment requirements become effective.

5.	In any case where a subscriber requests a cancellation or reduction of service within thirty (30) days after the notification of a scheduled rate or charge adjustment, then the subscriber's liability for the newly implemented rate or charge shall cease from the moment that the rate of charge adjustment becomes effective.



Sec.	10-1926	BILLING	CREDIT	OR	REFUNDS	FOR	SERVICE	OUTAGES, INTERRUPTIONS; SUBSTANDARD SIGNAL OR PICTURE QUALITY OR UNSOLICITED SERVICE.

1.	An MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with credit or a rebate for a service outage or interruption exceeding eight (8) hours in duration, which credit, for purposes of determining the amount of the credit or rebate, shall be deemed to be equivalentto orthe dame as a twenty-four (24) hour service outage.

2.	Where not expressly prohibited by the State, the Council may prescribe rules for giving credit to a subscriber is cases of substandard signal or picture quality.

3.	In the case of a charge for unsolicited service, an MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit in the next available billing statement. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for unsolicited service.

Sec. 10-1927 PROHIBITION AGAINST MULTIPLE CHANGES OF SERVICE TIERS OR SERVICE CLUSTERS WITHIN A 365 DAY PERIOD.

I.	An MCS provider may not switch any particular multi-channel service from one (I) service tier or service cluster more than once during any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period.

2.	Nothing contained in this Section should be construed as mandating any particular programming service being provided to a subscriber. Nor should this Section be construed as requiring any particular programming service be provided on a particular tier or cluster. Rather, this Section is designed to promote tier or cluster stability, sothat a subscriber may choose a tier or cluster that bests suits the subscriber's individual programming and informational needs.

Sec.10-1928 CUSTOMER SERVICE HOURS; CAPABILITIES OF CUSTOMER SERVICE OFFICE; AND TELEPHONES.

I.	In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers, an MCS provider shall maintain a customer service office which is both within the City and easily accessible to customers.
 
2.	The customer service office shall be open at least forty (40) hours per week (exclusive of holidays).

3.	The customer service office should have an adequate and knowledgeable staff in order to handle customer service inquiries, specifically including but not limited to: billing inquiries, refunds, service outages, equipment service and repair, payment of bills and other charges, and inquiries from disabled or physically-impaired customers.

4.	MCS providers shall for a reasonable charge provide customers with a monthly, bi­ monthly, or weekly multi-channel programming service guide listing and/or detailing the programs and services available during the time period. In lieu of providing a programming service guide via the mail or a newspaper or third party, the MCS provider may disseminate the information over a channel designated as a program preview or program preview or program listing channel.



5.	An MCS provider shall maintain at least one (1) toll-free and/or local telephone number to accommodate normal business inquiries.

6.	An MCS provider shall maintain a twenty-four (24) hour toll-free telephone number to facilitate calls concerning repair of equipment and extended interruption of service. During and hours that the customer service office is open, the MCS provider must have or make available in-house personnel to address a customer's inquiries. During other hours, a telephone may be manned by an automatic answering device, provided that the use of an answering device or answering service still results in an initial phone call by the MCS provider within ninety (90) minutes in order to determine the outage. The MCS provider shall not be required to make in-person telephone contacts to subscribers at a rate which exceeds sixty (60) calls per hour and shall not be required to make such calls between the hours ofl 0:00 P.M. and 6:00 AM. for situations other than reports of service outages.

7.	An non-exempt MCS provider shall have adequate staff and/or extension lines (except during special marketing promotion periods, peak billing cycles, and service outages) in order to handle calls to the general information number.

8.	With respect to the specifications listed in subsection I. of this Section, it shall be the MCS provider's responsibility to quarterly certify to the Council thatthe affected MCS provider is meeting the minimal specifications.

Sec. 10-1929 SPECIAL SERVICE REQUIREMENTS FOR BLIND, HEARING-IMP AIRED, OR AMBULATORY-IMPAIRED  CUSTOMERS.

In addition to any other requirements mandated by this ordinance or by Federal or State law, an MCS provider shall comply with the following special service requirements for blind, hearing-impaired, or ambulatory-impaired customers:

1.	Provide wheel chair accessibility to an MCS provider's customer service office;
 
2.	For any customer declared legally blind by the State, an MCS provider must provide if requested by such customer, large type, braille, voice synthesized or functionally equivalent notices, bills, and other pertinent multi-channel system information;
3.	Provide at a non-discriminatory cost a special closed-captioned converter forthe hearing impaired;
4.	Provide a non-discriminatory cost a remote control device and/or converter for wheel chair subscribers with a permanent medical or physical ambulatory impairment;
5.	Where applicable, provide modified or special instructions for use of equipment by individuals who have physical impairments; and
6.	In times of disaster emergency or other instances requiring an emergency alert mandating an all channel video blanking capability so that all channels would be blanked simultaneously with the audio alert signal in order to increase the likelihood that hearing and sight-impaired customers would be alerted.

Sec. 10-1930  PREFERENTIAL OR DISCRIMINATORY  PRACTICES PROHIBITED.

1.	An MCS provider shall not as to rules, regulations, rates, charges, provision of service, or use of a provider's facilities and equipment, make, allow, or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious affiliation or location of residence.

2.	Consistent with 47 USC 541 (a)(3), MCS providers classified as cable operators shall not deny cable service or the extension of cable service to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.

3.	Consistent with subsections (A) and (B) of this Section, an MCS provider shall not provide multi-channel service in a "cherry-picking" of"cream skimming" manner or fashion to the exclusion of other residents based on the excluded residents' income.

4.	Subsection (A) of this section, however, does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or charge as long as the rate or charge does not exceed three hundred seventy (370) days in length. This subsection does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering special incentive rates such as one (1) month basic service free if twelve (12) months of basic service are paid in one payment or within a certain time-frame.

5.	Subsection (A) of this Section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from denying service based on location of residence if that residence is outside the parameters for line extension as detailed in a franchise agreement (if applicable).

6.	Subsection (A) of this Section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from implementing a carefully designed no-frills service tier or service cluster for "lower income" and/or fixed income individuals.

7.	Subsection (1) of this Section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from making
 
agreements or entering into multi-channel service agreements with multiple dwelling unit owners (including hotel, motel, and mobile home park owners) to provide multi­ channel service under a bulk billing or other type of arrangement.

Sec. 10-1931  USE OF EQUIPMENT, RETURN OF EQUIPMENT SECURITY DEPOSITS, AND THEIR RETURN.

1.	Prior to formally delivering any equipment, including auxiliary equipment (such as a converter, input selector switch, or video control recorder) to a customer, an MCS provider shall have tested a representative sample (at least one percent ( 1%)) of such equipment to make sure that it is in proper working order.

2.	If needed for proper operation or requested by a customer, an MCS provider shall deliver to a customer handwritten or typed instructions detailing the proper use of rented, loaned, or purchased equipment. Unless required by another Section of this ordinance, an MCS provider may comply with this Section by delivering the manufacturer's instructions to a customer.

3.	An MCS provider is not required to seek a security deposit from a customer for use or rental of the MCS provider's equipment.

4.	An MCS provider shall comply with any and all applicable State rules concerning security deposits.

5.	Ifthe State is silent on the security deposit for a particular piece of equipment, then the MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for equipment which exceeds the replacement cost to the MCS provider.

6.	As a matter of consumer protection, an MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for multi-channel service which exceeds twice the basic monthly rate.

7.	An MCS provider shall return a security deposit (together with any interest earned) after the equipment is satisfactorily returned or the subscriber maintains a satisfactory payment history (which is determined as no payment delinquencies within the preceding twelve (12) month period).

8.	A customer shall totally and fully reimburse an MCS provider for any damage or loss to an MCS provider's equipmentthat is due to the customer's failure to properly maintain and operate such equipment.

9.	A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing an MCS provider for equipment which malfunctions or does not operate due to hidden or latent defect in the equipment or for equipment which fails to operate or improperly operates due to natural occurrences conditioned by the normal wear and tear of such equipment, or for equipment damaged or destroyed by act of nature, and which is not covered by a customer's home or apartment insurance policy.
 

Sec. 10-1932  SERVICE INQUIRY LOGS.


1.	An MCS provider  shall keep  and maintain  service mqmry  logs,  subject to any limitations imposed by State or Federal law.

2.	The purpose of the service inquiry logs is to assist the City in assessing the type, degree, and rate of resolution of customer service requests, inquiries, and complaints.

3.	At a minimum, the service inquiry logs should contain the following:


a)	The time and date of initial receipt of any service request, inquiry, or complaint together with the time and date of initial response to that service request, inquiry, or complaint;
b)	The nature of the service request, inquiry, or complaint;
c)	The precise action taken by an MCS provider in order to resolve the service inquiry, request, or complaint;

d)	Whether the service request, inquiry, or complaint was resolved by allowing a credit or refund of some sort; and
e)	The area, location, or quadrant of the City where the service request, inquiry, or complaint was generated.

4.	In addition to any other right of inspection that the Council may possess, it shall have the right to review and inspect a compilation of such logs. However, the Council shall not have the right of access, review, or inspection for any service inquiry logs or any information contained within service inquiry logs that are otherwise protected from access, review, or inspection by State or Federal law.

5.	This Section does not require MCS providers to maintain service inquiry logs on scheduled  installations.

Sec. 10-1933  RESTORATION OF PROPERTY.


1.	At any time an MCS provider (in furtherance of its right to construct, operate, and maintain a multi-channel system), disturbs a yard, residence, or other real or personal property, such MCS provider shall ensure that the yard, residence, or other personal property is returned, replaced, and/or restored to a condition that is sufficiently comparable to the condition that existed priorto the commencement of the work.

2.	The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return, replacement, and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider. This subsection also requires the MCS provider to reimburse a private property owner for any damage caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor in connection with the disturbance of an owner's property.

3.	The types of acts specifically included in this Section are the following:
 

a)	Removal of sod, lawn, plants, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveway, or fence to install trench, repair, replace, remove, or locate cable or other equipment of an MCS provider;

b)	Installation or removal of cable or other equipment of an MCS provider within a residence which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the MCS provider;

c)	temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning or heating unit, or the like) in order to perform some sort of construction, maintenance, or repair on the multi-channel system; or

d)	Permanently removing an MCS provider's cable or equipment due to either the revocation, termination, or non-renewal of a franchise (if applicable), or the abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation of multi-channel service to any portion of the City.

4.	The requirements imposed upon the MCS provider extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the MCS provider might employ to perform the tasks outlined in this Section.



Sec. 10-1934 SERVICE INQUIRIES, REQUESTS, COMPLAINTS, AND RESPONSE TIMES, AND NEW INSTALLATIONS OR RECONNECTIONS OF SERVICE.

1.	Except in times of a natural or man-made emergency, or an appointment scheduled with the mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider shall respond to the service inquiries, requests, and complaints of subscribers within the time schedules detailed in subsections B through I of this Section. Moreover, except in emergency situations, an MCS provider shall inform the customers whether the service call is scheduled for the morning, afternoon, or evening hours. If the service call has to be canceled or rearranged, then the MCS provider shall make every effort to notify the customer as soon as possible, and if desired by the subscriber, shall reschedule the service call for a time within twenty-four (24) hours of the cancellation.

2.	In the case of a signal or service interruption, a non-exempt MCS provider shall respond to and make repairs as are necessary to resume the signal or service to the subscriber within twelve (12) hours from the time the non-exempt MCS provider first received notification of the signal or service interruption.

3.	In the case of repair to a piece of equipment in a subscriber's residence, or repair to the cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent), the repair should be completed and the situation resolved at the conclusion of the first service visit. If the repair is not completed and resolved within three (3) visits, and if as a result of the insufficient repair a situation remains wherein there is a visually or audibly detected degradation of a multi-channel signal by human eye or ear, then the MCS provider must immediately and completely replace all drop cable (coaxial, fiber, or its functional equivalent), and/or any necessary MCS provider equipment at no charge.

In no case shall a subscriber's service request or inquiry go unresponded or unattended
 
to for more than twelve (12) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the service inquiry or request. Moreover, except in emergency situations, all requests and inquiries shall be handled or corrected within thirty-six (36) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification. Ifa cancellation of a service call occurs, then the MCS provider shall reschedule the call in a manner consistent with the guidelines expressed in subsection A of this Section.

4.	A complaint/inquiry regarding loss of channels comprising a service level, cluster, or tier will be responded to and corrected within six (6) hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the loss of all channels comprising a service level, or service tier, or service cluster.

5.	In case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS provider received notification, or the precise circumstances surrounding the MCS provider receiving the notification, or whether notification was received at all, the Council shall reserve the right and authority to settle such a dispute.

6.	New installations, upgrades, or re-connections of multi-channel service by an MCS provider shall be performed and completed within five (5) days of a customer requesting such a new installation, upgrade, or re-connection.





Sec.10-1935     MCSPROVIDERSREQUIREDTOMAINTAINSUFFICIENTREPAIRPARTS AND SUFFICIENT REPAIR PERSONNEL.

1.	Except in times of natural or man made emergency, an MCS provider shall at all times have access to and be able to secure sufficient maintenance and repair parts and equipment for the MCS system, so thatthe MCS provided can respond to and correct all subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in this ordinance.

2.	Except in times of natural or man-made emergency or strike (whose duration has been less than seventy-two (72) hours), an MCS provider shall have sufficient maintenance and repair personnel so that the MCS provider can respond to and correct subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in this ordinance.

3.	Notwithstanding the other requirements and provisions in this Section, an MCS provider shall maintain at least one ( 1) service technician on call twenty-four (24) hours per day and which technician can respond within the City within twenty   (20) minutes of a service call request.

Sec. 10-1936  DISCONNECTION  FOR NON-PAYMENT.

1.	A subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment until at least forty-five (45) days after the posting of the bill to the subscriber and payment has not been received by an MCS provider.
 

2.	Before disconnection of a subscriber's multi-channel service (either physically or electronically) takes place, the following must occur:

a)	The subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment of multi-channel service; and

b)	At  least five (5) days have  elapsed  after the subscriber has either signed for or refused to accept a written notice of impending disconnection.

3.	The written notice of disconnection must expressly  and clearly state the amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider, the minimum amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection, and the date and address of the local office where such payment must be made.

4.	An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment including converter, remote control unit, or digital audio tuner), from a subscriber must do  so  between  7:00 o'clock AM. and 7:00 o'clock P.M.

5.	An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this ordinance and any applicable State regulations are followed.

Sec. 10-1937  VOLUNTARY DISCONNECTIONS AND DOWNGRADES.

1.	At any time a subscriber may request that a particular service tier, service cluster, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or the entire multi-channel service be disconnected.

2.	Where provided by an MCS provider, a subscriber may request a downgrade from a particular level of service to a less comprehensive level of service or a less expensive level of service.

3.	From the date that such a subscriber makes such a request for either a disconnection or downgrade, then the MCS provider shall have three (3) service days to disconnect or downgrade the service tier, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or entire multi-channel service. In the event that an MCS provider does not disconnect or downgrade service within three (3) business days, a subscriber's obligation to pay for the more comprehensive and/or highest priced service shall cease.

4.	For a service tier, service cluster, premium channel or informational service which is voluntarily disconnected, a subscriber shall pay a pro rata share of the monthly rate for such service tier, service cluster, premium channel or informational service.

5.	No separate disconnect or downgrade charge may be passed on to a subscriber if it chooses to take advantage of a lower-priced service tier/cluster or an optional service tire/cluster. However, to prevent subscriber abuse of this voluntary disconnection, or downgrade policy, a subscriber shall be charged a minimum one ( 1)months full rate for
 
any one service tier/cluster which is disconnected and/or downgraded at least three (3) times within a span of one hundred eighty (180) days.

6.	If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is or has been damaged by a subscriber prior to such disconnection, then the MCS provider may charge the subscriber with the entire cost for such damage provided that the MCS provider notifies the subscriber within ten
(10) days of the disconnection. A subscriber shall not be required to pay for equipment failure if the circumstances fall within the normal wear and tear guidelines established in this ordinance.

7.	Any refund due to a subscriber after disconnection (both for non-payment and voluntary) shall be made within sixty (60) days after such disconnection.

8.	In no event will this Section be viewed as abridging or otherwise limiting the rights and remedies afforded by the subscriber complaint/inquiry resolution process outlined inthis ordinance.

Sec. 10-1938  PROTECTION OF SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY.

1.	An MCS provider shall abide by any and all subscriber privacy rules or regulations of the Federal or State governments.

2.	For MCS providers classified as cable operators, such operators shall also abide by and comply with any subscriber privacy protection requirements and procedures listed in 47 USC  551.

Sec.10-1939   RESOLUTION  OF COMPLAINTS/INQUIRIES.

1.	An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is consistent with the rules and regulations outlined in this ordinance.

2.	An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced to writing and such policy shall be available upon request to any person. In any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy in the manner that is prescribed by this ordinance.

3.	The Council  may establish a neutral, third-party appeal process to handle complaints/inquiries that are not satisfactorily resolved at the MCS provider level.

4.	An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall contain at least the following minimal standards:

a)	The initial response to a complaint/inquiry shall occur no later than twenty-four
(24) hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;

b)	Every attempt will be made to resolve the complaint/inquiry within twenty-four hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry;
 
c)	Complaints/inquiries that fall into the category of service inquiries shall abide by the procedure set forth in this ordinance;

d)	Informing subscribers of the credit/refund policy which is consistent with this ordinance and any applicable State regulations; and

e)	Informing subscribers of the billing disputes policy which is consistent with this ordinance and any applicable State regulations.

Sec.  10-1940	POLICY  WITH  RESPECT  TO  CONTINUITY  OF  MULTI-CHANNEL SERVICE PROVISIONS.

1.	The Council declares that as part of its right to establish multi-channel customer service guidelines, it has the duty to ensure continuity of multi-channel service for all subscribers.

2.	In addition to the principals and ideals enumerated in subsection A, the Council also expresses that its policy covers the following:



a)	To provide for continuity of multi-channel service in the event of acquisition by the City;
b)	To provide for continuity of service in the vent of a proposed abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation of multi-channel service by an MCS provider;
c)	To provide for continuity of service in the event of revocation, termination, or non­ renewal of a franchised MCS provider's franchise;
d)	To provide for continuity of service in the vent that a transaction occurs that affects the ownership or control of the MCS provider, such as an assignment, sale, transfer, or merger;
e)	To provide for continuity of service in the event of an explanation of a franchise;
f)	To prevent disruption of multi-channel service which would provide a hardship on those subscribers who rely on a multi-channel system as their primarily or secondary source for information; and
g)	To prevent the interruption or cessation of multi-channel service which would disrupt or eliminate the diversity of programming choices enjoyed by subscribers of a multi-channel system, and thereby restricting their ability to receive information.

3.	In any situation (including those mentioned above) which threatens the City and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the  continuity  or multi-channel  service, then the MCS provider shall provide the Council with at least forty-five (45) days' notice (except in extreme circumstances) prior to the effective date  of any  action which would cause a loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service. The purpose of the notice is to apprize the Council of the possibility of such loss or interruption in the continuity of multi-channel service so that is might explore its options and take appropriate measurers.

4.	Whenever any situation occurs (including those mentioned above) which threatens
 
the City and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the continuity of multi­ channel service, then the Council may direct the MCS provider for a period of up to twenty-four (24) months to de everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-channel service of the same quality, mix, and level(s) regardless of the circumstances.

5.	During the interim period, the Council shall work with the MCS provider in order to secure a new multi-channel system owner or rectify the problem so that the threat of loss of continuity is removed at the earliest possible instance.

6.	During any interim period in which the MCS provider continues to provide multi- channel service to subscribers, the MCS provider is entitled to all revenues collected, except any sums owed (including franchise fees, alternative user charges, and taxes)  to the City or to other persons.

7.	In the event that the threat of loss of continuity is not resolved within  twenty-four
(24) months,  then the  Council may extend the interim period on a month-to-month basis until the situation is satisfactorily resolved. Also, in such a circumstance, the Council may adopt any emergency rules or procedures which will ensure that the subscribers will receive continuous, uninterrupted multi-channel service of the same quality, mix, and level(s).

Sec. 10-1941  PERIODIC MULTI-CHANNEL SUBSCRIBER SURVEYS.

1.	At least every three (3) years after the adoption of this ordinance, the City and any affected MCS provider shall at the cost ofMCS conduct a survey of current subscribers of that particular MCS provider in order to ascertain the degree of customer satisfaction/dissatisfaction with the subscriber sensitive aspects of the multi-channel system including (but not limited to) billing practices, response times, programming choices available and receivable, responsiveness to inquiries, and use, availability, and accessibility of any customer service office.

2.	Ifthe survey results indicate or demonstrate that the customer service practices set forth in this ordinance are not sufficient to meet reasonable or identified projected City needs, then the Council may take whatever measurers are appropriate in order to rectify the deficiency or insufficiency in a particular customer service practice by one or more MCS providers.

Sec.	10-1942	CONSTRUCTION	SCHEDULE   AND   CONSTRUCTION	RELATED REQUIREMENTS.

1.	In order to establish minimum uniform standards, the Council requires any MCS provider to adopt the following minimal construction schedule and construction-related requirements:

a)	Construct, install, maintain, and repair the multi-channel system in accordance with the requirements noted in this ordinance;
 

b)	Use streets and public ways as set forth in this ordinance;

c)	Where applicable, remove franchise property from public streets as set forth in this ordinance;

d)	Adopt the construction standards as set forth in this ordinance;

e)	Adopt the system expansion standards as set forth in this ordinance;

f)	Adopt the construction schedule as referred to in this ordinance;

g)	Abide by and act in strict accordance with all current applicable technical codes adopted by the City, or the State, or the United States; and

h)	Maintain all permits and licenses as noted in this ordinance.

Sec. 10-1943  CONSTRUCTION OF GOOD QUALITY. During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of the multi-channel system, the MCS provider shall use materials of good and durable quality and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and reliable manner.

Sec.10-1944  CONDITIONS ON USE OF STREETS AND PUBLIC WAYS.

1.	All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent), and other property and facilities of an MCS provider shall be so located, constructed, installed, and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic, and travel upon the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways ofthe City.

2.	In the event an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous of unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, then at its own expense such MCS provider shall voluntarily, or upon the request of the Council, remove that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition from the subject property.

3.	An MCS provider shall not place equipment where it will interfere with the rights of property owners or with gas, electric, or telephone fixtures or with the City's water and sewer system or any other service or facility that benefits the City's or its residents' health, safety, or welfare.

4.	An MCS provider, at either its own expense or that of a private contractor shall protect rights-of-way,  easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public way, any property of such MCS provider when necessitated by reason of;

a)	traffic conditions;
b)	public safety;
 
c)	street closing;
d)	street construction or resurfacing;
e)	change or establishment of street grade;
f)	installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift stations, force mains, power or signal lines; or
g)	any improvement, construction or repair related to the City's or its residents health safety or welfare.

5.	It shall be the responsibility of and MCS provider (acting alone or in conjunction with another person) to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) before employees, agents, or independent contractors of such MCS provider, install cable inthe marked off area.

6.	An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to allow the moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the person requesting it, and such MCS provider may require payment in advance. The affected MCS provider shall be given not less than five (5) days notice of a contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire exchanges.

7.	For all construction and installations occurring after the effective date of this ordinance, all cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) shall be placed underground.

Sec.  10-1945	FRANCHISE  MCS  PROVIDER'S  DUTY  TO  REMOVE  FRANCHISED PROPERTIES FROM THE PUBLIC STREETS.

1.	This Section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a franchise to operate within the City.

2.	Whenever the following occurs:


a)	A franchised MCS provider ceases to operate all or part of the multi-channel system for a continuous period of six (6) months;

b)	A franchised MCS provider ceases and fails to construct the multi-channel system outlined in the application or proposal for renewal or renewal franchise agreement;

c)	The Council elects not to renew the franchise pursuant to the provisions set forth in the ordinance;

d)	The franchised MCS provider's franchise is revoked pursuant to the provisions set forth in this ordinance.

Then, unless the City or another MCS provider uses such multi-channel system under the continuity provisions outlined in the ordinance, the affected franchised MCS provider shall promptly remove its multi-channel system property from the streets,
 
public ways, and private property located within the City.

3.	Ifnot removed voluntarily by a franchised MCS provider, then the Council may notify such franchised MCS provider that if removal of the property is not accommodated with two hundred seventy (270) days or substantial progress towards removal is not made within two hundred ten (210) days, then the  Council may direct  officials or representatives of the City to remove such franchised MCS provider's system property atthat franchised MCS provider's expense. The performance and/or construction bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or full faith and credit guarantee required as set forth in this ordinance shall be available to pay for such work.

4.	If officials or representatives of the City remove a franchised MCS provider's system property and such franchised MCS provider does not claim the property within ninety
(90) days of its removal, then the Council may take whatever steps are available under State law to declare the property surplus and sell it with the proceeds of such sale going to the City.

5.	When such franchised MCS provider removes its multi-channel system property from the street, public ways, and private property located within the City, the franchisedMCS provider shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the Council replace and restore such public or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing the disturbance was done.

Sec.10-1946   CONSTRUCTION  STANDARDS.

1.		Methods of construction, installation, maintenance repair of any multi-channel systems shall comply with the most current editions of the National Electrical Safety Code, and the National Electric Code, as affects the construction, installation, and maintenance of electrical supply and communication lines and attachments and supports. To the extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise, or State or local law, then the more stringent shall govern in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.

2.	All installations shall treat the esthetics of the property as  a priority shall not substantially affect the appearance of the structure, and shall not be installed on
the bias across property of the face or side of a home or building without the owner's perm1ss1on.

3.	All drops shall be underground and shall follow property lines and cross property only at right angles unless otherwise permitted by the owner.








Sec.   10-1947	SYSTEM   CONSTRUCTION	SCHEDULE   FOR   FRANCHISED   MCS PROVIDERS.
 

1.	This Section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a franchise to operate with the City.

2.	A franchised MCS provider's construction schedule for the multi-channel system shall be detailed in the franchise agreement in a from and format determined by the Council.

3.	A franchised MCS provider shall abide by the system construction schedule.


Sec.10-1948 SYSTEM EXPANSION FOR MCS PROVIDERS. A franchised MCS provider shall extend multi-channel service to any area within the City that has a density often (10) houses or building passings per mile or fractional equivalent thereof as measured from the extremity of the system nearest the unserved area. Also, in such a case, a newly installed subscriber shall not be assessed or apportioned the cost for installation, except for the usual and normal connection fees paid by subscribers, so long as the system expansion is technically feasible.

Sec. 10-1949 PERMITS AND LICENSES. An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by law, rule, regulation, or ordinance, and maintain the same in full force and effect for as long as required.

Sec. 10-1950 COUNCIL'S POLICY WITH RESPECT TO SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.


1.	The Council requires thatthe MCS provider's construction, operation, and maintenance of the multi-channel system meet certain threshold safety levels which are designed to protect the public and lessen the likelihood of interruption of multi-channel service.

2.	Consequently, the Council may require may non-exempt MCS provider to adopt the following safety requirements:



a)	Emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this ordinance;


b)	Minimum standby power as noted in this ordinance;


c)	The provision of an indoor signal or safety alert technology in the manner noted in this ordinance;

d)	Implementing a periodic preventative maintenance program as set forth in this ordinance;

e)	Follow all FCC rules and regulations concerning maximum cumulative leakage index (CLI) limits; and

f)	Comply with and abide by and construction, safety, or fire codes as noted in this ordinance.

Sec.  10-1951	PROVISIONS  TO  ALERT   SUBSCRIBERS  IN  THE  EVENT  OF  AN
 
EMERGENCY; STANDBY POWER.

1.	In order that subscribers may be alerted in the event of an impending, imminent or actual, natural, or man-made emergency, then all MCS providers shall ensure that the multi-channel system providing multi-channel service to all or part of the City is designed so as to permit an authorized official of the City to override the audio portion of all channels by tough tone phone (or functional equivalent) from any location.

2.	In addition to any other requirements listed in this Section, an MCS provider shall:

a)	Designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video;

b)	Reasonably inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel;

c)	Maintain all channel video blanking capability to facilitate the needs of hearing and sight-impaired customers;

d)	Test the emergency override system not less than once a month;

e)	Cooperate with the City on the use and operation of the emergency alert override system; and

f)	Develop a plan (with the City's concurrence) in order to provide continuity ofmulti­ channel service and response to service calls in the event of a natural or man made emergency

3.	As one method of providing continuity of multi-channel services in the event of a natural or man made emergency, an MCS provider shall, unless exempted by the Council, have the capacity for four (4) hour automatically activated standby power on all trunk and feeder cable, and all headbands, hubs, and receive sites associated with the distribution of cable service to and throughout the City.

Sec. 10-1952  SAFETY ALERT TECHNOLOGY.

1.	The Council considers the need for an indoor signal or safety alert technology available to both subscribers and non-subscribers of an MCS provider's lowest level of programming service of paramount interest and need and as such should be an integral part of an MCS provider's system. Though in some ways similar to the concept of emergency alert override, signal alert technology is different and distinct in that it may be used by both subscribers to basic service and non-subscribers to the basic service of an MCS provider's system. Moreover, such safety alert technology is connected to the National Weather Service twenty-four (24) hour radio service including its new WRSAME/"Site Select" weather and warning system which specifically allows for an indoor warning and notification via an audio alert voice path regardless of whether an individual has a television receiver or monitor, or an FM receiver and, moreover, can provide effectively instantaneous alert and warning, as well as needed instructions in
 
addition to allowing key connnunity oriented entities to connnunicate with both the general populace and selected segments of the connnunity.

2.	In realization and recognition of the preceding, a non-exempt MCS provider shall offer for use throughout the City (within twelve (12) months of the effective date of this ordinance) a signal or safety alert monitoring technology for purposes of altering both subscribers and non-subscribers of a multi-channel system to impending or occurring disaster emergencies and allowing the City to connnunicate with subscribers and the public as the need to do so may exist at any time.
3.	Anon-exempt MCS provider shall cooperate with the City and the provider of said technology in the marketing and distribution of the necessary on premises alert receiving devices, including the installation and replacement of such as maybe needed from time to time.

4.	A non-exempt MCS provider shall install the necessary electronics, processing, and distribution equipment in the MCS provider's headend, and will ensure the maintenance, operating condition, and replacement of such equipment as is necessary to protect its continued use.

5.	Notwithstanding the preceding, a non-exempt MCS provider has no responsibility for repair of such equipment beyond obtaining (in a timely manner) replacement from the manufacturer for inoperable components.

6.	It is explicitly understood that one need not be a subscriber to a multi-channel system to use the safety alert device and receive the safety alert service so long as a drop is installed into the address to which said device is attached. It is also understood that the user need not have a television receiver.

7.	The Council recognizes the positive effect on the safety of the public in general, and the ability to save lives and property of those who would otherwise be prevented from receiving the most expeditious warning or alert possible without such a device and technology. Consequently, the Council requires that all non-exempt MCS providers shall participate in a periodic public awareness campaign as deemed appropriate by the Council in cooperation with the Council and the manufacturer to
inform the citizenry and non-cable subscribers of the availability and capability of such safety alert technology.

8.	An MCS provider shall assure that all subscribers to multi-channel service receive printed material fully describing the technology and its benefits, at least annually, and at the time of installation/

9.	An MCS provider shall allow non-subscribers of Basic Cable Service the choice of purchasing or leasing the necessary equipment which shall include the cost of installation on a non-discriminatory basis and so inform such persons of both options.

10.	Given the significant public safety and life and property saving benefits of this technology and the resultant need of as much of the general public as possible to be
 
protected from the otherwise unnecessary greater risk to life, limb, and property associated with other alert/warning systems, an MCS provider shall assure that the service is placed on the same level of service and is priced commensurate with that for like technology/service in the Mid-Western United States.

11.	Given the importance and critical nature of preventing the loss oflife and property, and the need and ability of the Council to communicate directly with the public in any number of situations, including but not limited to those potentially involving matters of life and death, and as this technology is clearly not a programming service, the Council deems it appropriate to designate the use of the capability of such technology as s governmental use of the system, and it is the intent of the City that it be made available to all subscribers.

Sec.10-1953  IMPLEMENTATION OF A PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE PROGRAM.

1.	It shall be the duty of an MCS provider to devise and implement a quarterly preventative maintenance program for the multi-channel system in order to ensure that there is no material degradation of the multi-channel system that would effect the citizens' health, safety, and welfare, or negatively affect the quality of multi-channel services being provided.

2.	Before the MCS provider implements such a program, it shall be reviewed and approved by the Council. Within forty-five (45) days after the completion of the quarterly preventative maintenance program, the MCS provider shall prepare and submit a written report to the Council detaining the results of the tests conducted and all items performed or addressed during the quarterly program. Although not exhaustive, the following areas should be  included in a preventative maintenance program and subsequent report:

a)	Inspection and repair, if needed, of the headend;

b)	Inspection and repair, if needed, of the antenna tower;

c)	Requiring weather proofing and protection of the antenna lead connectors, and on any other exposed fittings;

d)	Requiring the conducting of signal leakage tests that are in accord with FCC requirements;

e)	Removing tree roots, limbs, and branches that interfere with or come in contact with the MCS provider's cable;

f)	Requiring the periodic servicing, testing, and calibration of the MCS provider's equipment including equipment on service vehicles and field test equipment;

g)	Employing a status monitoring system to identify problems or situations in which the multi-channel electronics are operating outside pre-programmed parameters;
 

h)	Testing of the emergency alert system to ensure that it will function property during an emergency situation;

i)	Testing of the safety alert system or technology.

Sec. 10-1954  CONSTRUCTION, FIRE, AND SAFETY CODES.

1.	An MCS provider shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove, replace, or restore the multi-channel system in strict compliance with all current technical codes adopted by the Council, the State, or the United States.

2.	The codes referred to specifically include but are not limited to construction, fire and safety, and zoning codes.

Sec. 10-1955  ALTERNATIVE USER CHARGE.

1.	This Section is applicable to any un-franchised but otherwise authorized MCS provider and to any MCS provider who has had its franchise ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid. For all franchised MCS providers the provisions concerning franchise fees shall be applicable.

2.	Where not specifically prohibited by Federal or State law and as an alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in this ordinance, the Council may impose, extract, and collect a charge from an affected MCS provider for the use by such provider of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City.

3.	The alternative user charge shall be based on the following mathematical mode:

a)	Determine the present value of all public streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City in which are located multi-channel system facilities and equipment of the affected MCS provider;

b)	Take the average percentage increase in land appraisals within the City (as determined by the Washington County Assessor for the City, for the five preceding years);

c)	Take the average percentage increase for the five preceding years and use it to determine the dollar amount of property value increase for the remaining term ofthe franchise (if no franchise applicable then use five years);

d)	Add the present value to the dollar amount of property value increase for the remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable then use 5 years);

e)	Divide the adjusted value by the remaining number of years on the term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable then use 5 years);
 
f)	Multiply that figure by five percent (5%) to arrive at the annual user charge that is to be collected from the affected MCS provider. For purposes of illustration only, the formula reads as follows:

present value the dollar amount of the property value increase for remaining term of the franchise (based on average percentage increase ofland appraisals for past years of franchise term; divide the adjusted present value by the remaining years on the term of the franchise; multiply that figure by five percent (5%),  (equals) the annual alternative user charge.

4.	The Council adopts such an alternative user charge in order to receive fair compensation for the affected MCS provider's use of the public streets and public ways if such compensation cannot be obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on such MC provider's annual gross revenues. However, an affected MCS provider may agree to an alternative charge that is based on a flat percentage of gross revenue, as long as that charge did not exceed the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee calculated as a percentage of an affected MCS provider's annual gross revenues.

5.	It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time for the same period.

6.	An affected MCS provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to pay an alternative user charge that exceeds the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee calculated as a percentage of such MCS provider's gross revenues (as defined by this ordinance) for any particular reporting period. In the event that the alternative user charge does exceed the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee and calculated as a percentage of gross revenues, then such alternative user charge should be reduced to reflect an amount not greater than the maximum amount previously allowed under law that was assessed as a franchise fee and calculated as a percentage of gross revenues.

7.	An affected MCS provider shall pay twenty-five percent (25%) of the alternative user charge at the end of every three (3) months.

Sec. 10-1956  FRANCHISE REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.

1.		Except as provided in this Section, no person or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate, or maintain a multi-channel system which requires the laying or positioning of cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-ways of the City without having first obtained a franchise and then entering into a franchise agreement with the City.

2.	Pursuant to the CCPA, a local government may own and operate a multi-channel system classified as a cable system. Consequently, should the Council directly or indirectly, through any legal means available to the Council, decide to purchase, acquire, construct, lease, control, or otherwise own a cable system within the territorial limits of the City,
 
then the Council shall not be required to submit a proposal for a receive a franchise in order to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the geographical limits of the City.

3.	In the case of a person or MCS provider lawfully providing multi-channel service without a franchise on July 1, 1984, then such person or MCS provider shall not be required to obtain a franchise and enter into a franchise agreement unless the Council expressly required the person or MCS provider to do so.

4.	If, as a result of annexation (either previous to or subsequent to, the effect date of this ordinance), an MCS provider comes under the jurisdiction of the City, then such MCS provider shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance, including (if applicable) obtaining a franchise. Any such franchise shall extend only to the territory comprising the annexed area.

5.	Where a person or MCS provider is required by the Council to obtain a franchise, then the Council shall notify the person or MCS provider in writing within thirty (30) days of the Council's formal action.

6.	After receipt of notification the affected person or MCS provider has ninety (90) days to submit an application or proposal in substantially the same form and format as required by the Council. Then the affected person or MCS provider's application will be handled as set forth by either State or local law.





Sec. 10-1957  AUTHORITY TO GRANT NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISES.

1.	Consistent with 47 USC 541, the Council may award one (1) or more nonexclusive multi-channel service franchises within its geographical limits. With the exception of existing non-exempt MCS providers in an area annexed by the City and subject to Section 10-1948 of this ordinance, the Council shall not award a franchise for a service area comprising less than the entire City limits. Existing non-exempt MCS providers as of the effective date of this ordinance may, but are not limited to, serve any subsequently annexed area of the City in a manner consistent with line extension policies outlined in this ordinance, and which are specifically noted in the MCS provider's franchised agreement. Further, any MCS provider not exempt on the effective date of this ordinance may not commence service to subscribers until it has completed construction of its cable system to fifty percent (50%) of the service area. The provisions of Section 10-1908 of this ordinance do not apply to this subsection.

2.	A franchised MCS provider shall be selected as part of a public proceeding and hearing which affords due process to both the City and the applicant and after which, if the applicant is selected as a franchised MCS provider, then such applicant will enter into a franchise agreement with the City pursuant to the provisions ofFederal, State, and local laws and regulations.
 

Sec. 10-1958  FRANCHISE AGREEMENT; MINIMAL REQUIREMENTS.

1.	Ifthe Council awards an applicant a franchise to construct, operate, or maintain a multi­ channel system within the City of approves a proposal for a renewal of a franchise, then within one-hundred eighty (180) days an applicant or a renewal franchised MCS provider and the City shall enter into a franchise agreement which details the rights, duties, responsibilities,  and liabilities of both parties.

2.	A newly franchised MCS provider may not lay any cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) until the franchise agreement is executed by both the newly franchised MCS provider and the Council.

3.	A franchise agreement shall be in sufficient detail in order to clearly delineate the rights and duties of the franchised MCS provider and the Council.

4.	At minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the following:
1)	a detailed definition of"annual gross revenues" or "gross revenues" which specifically includes an explanation of what constitutes the revenue base for determining what revenues are subject to any franchise fee or alternative user charge;
2)	the term or duration of the franchise; 3) indenmity and hold harmless clauses; 4)
insurance; 5) performance and completion bonds or security deposits; 6) construction, upgrade, or rebuild schedule; 7) franchise fee; 8) continuity of multi­ channel programming service; 9) repeal of prior inconsistent franchise agreements; and 10) a severability clause.

Sec. 10-1959  EXTENT OF GRANT OF FRANCHISE.

1.	Upon an award of a franchise and the subsequent execution of the franchise agreement, an MCS provider required to obtain and maintain a franchise may construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove, or restore a multi-channel system within the geographical limits set forth in the franchise agreement.

2.	The franchised multi-channel system may be located in, upon, along, across, over, and under the street, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the City.

3.	Ifnecessary, the responsibility of obtaining easements for private property (including privately owned utility or street light poles) shall be that of a franchised MCS provider.

4.	A franchised MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multi-channel system on or within the property of such utility company. This provision specifically includes MCS providers classified as cable operators.

Sec. 10-1960  TERM OF FRANCHISE.

1.	The term of an initial renewal franchise may be for a period notto exceed ten (I0) years
 
from the date that a franchise renewal agreement is approved by the Council.

2.	Ifan initial franchise or renewal franchise is for a period of six (6) years or less, then the franchise agreement shall detail the reasons for granting the shorter franchise term.

3.	The reasons for a franchise term of six (6) years or less include and are limited to the following:

a)	Multiple or repeated violations of the prior franchise agreement;
b)	Multiple of repeated violations of this ordinance, or any mandated provisions of the Cable Act of 1984;

c)	A continuing and documents pattern of substandard or non-responsive service;

d)	Reckless disregard for the safety and welfare of the Citizens of the City;

e)	Failure to comply with any construction, rebuild, or upgrade schedule; and

f)	Failure to timely pay in their entirety any franchise fees or taxes or other charges due to the City.

4.	The Council reserves the right to grant a franchised MCS provider a variable franchise term wherein the initial or renewal term may be extended by up to two (2) years (not to exceed ten (10) years total) upon the franchised MCS provider attaining an "excellent" rating during the course of a periodic performance evaluation.

5.	The Council reserves the right to grant a franchised MCS provider a variable franchise term wherein the initial or renewal term may be extended by up to two (2) years (not to extend ten (10) years total) should the franchised MCS provider consistently an continually meet the Council's  objectives with respect to the provision of broad categories of video programming as noted in this ordinance.

6.	The Council reserves the right to reduce the term of the franchise by one (1) year for each material, repeated occurrence of an uncured/unremedied violation of the franchise or this ordinance, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 10-1964 of this ordinance or when the MCS provider fails to attain a minimum rating of "adequate" (on a scale of"excellent," "adequate," and "poor") for any two (2) successive periodic performance reviews as set forth in Section 10-1965 of this ordinance.

7.	Should the highest court of the nation or State invalidate, void an unenforceable or unconstitutional the concept of a franchise of franchise duration, then the Council map adopt emergency rules and regulations in order to preserve and protect the rights and duties of both the Council and any franchised MCS provider. During the interim, the invalid franchise may be considered (unless prohibited by the State) and interpreted in the same manner and fashion as a business license or other comparable authorization. Upon the adoption of emergency rules, the Council should enter into a new agreement
 
which describes which terms and conditions of the franchised MCS provider's system may be re-viewed and examined, and under what circumstances may a franchised MCS provider forfeit its right to operate a multi-channel system within the City.

Sec. 10-1961  APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE; APPLICATION FEE.

1.	The Council may develop rules and regulations with respect to the submission and processing of applications for a franchise. Such rules and regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal, financial, technical, and character qualifications of the applicant.

2.	Unless prohibited, an applicant shall pay an application fee which shall be equal to the administrative and consulting costs associated with processing an application for a franchise. The total application receives or does not receive a franchise. The total application fee must be paid (or waived) prior to the Council's formal action on the applicant's request for a franchise.




Sec.10-1962   FRANCHISE  FEES.

1.	Any non-exempt franchised MCS provider (specifically including any MCS provider classified as a cable operator) awarded a franchise or renewal franchise after the date this ordinance becomes effective shall pay to the City for the privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways, and other facilities of the City in the operation of the multi-channel system and for the City's supervision thereof duringthe term of the franchise a sum equal to five percent (5%) of the annual gross revenues of such non-exempt franchised MCS provider. Such fee shall explicitly be separate from and in addition to any fees or charges for the use or occupancy of any municipally owned conduits or other facilities owned by a municipally owned utility.

2.	Ifthe FCC, Congress or other governmental entity with authority over multi-channel service ever allows a governmental entity or Council to increase the franchise fee beyond five percent (5%) then the Council shall have the authority to increase the franchise fee to the maximum rate allowable.

3.	The five percent (5%) franchise fee shall be deposited into the general revenues of the City unless specifically authorized elsewhere.

4.	Anon-exempt franchised MCS provider shall file with the Council within forty-five (45) days after the expiration of each of the franchised MCS provider's fiscal quarters a detailed financial and revenue report clearly showing the gross revenues received by such franchised MCS provider during the preceding quarter and certified by a certified public accountant or officer of a franchised MCS provider attesting to the accuracy, completeness, and veracity of the revenue figures. Such report shall be in the form and format acceptable to the Council. Such report shall include revenue from whatever source, directly or indirectly derived from or allowed or caused to be derived from or applicable to the operation of the multi-channel system, or the provision of any multi­ channel service by or to the multi-channel system. Revenue will be reported by service
 
category, type, and level showing computations and using incremental billing rates for all sources, levels, tiers, and types of service and other revenue sources of all kinds and types.

5.	Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be rendered to the City at the time the revenue report is filed.
6.	In the event that payment is not made within thirty (30) days after the date specified in this Section, then such franchised MCS provider may be declared in default of the franchise, and the franchise may be revoked, terminated, or canceled in the manner prescribed by this ordinance.

7.	The Council reserves the right to audit a franchised MCS provider books ifthe Council deems it necessary. If such audit discovers an under payment of franchise fees that exceeds two percent (2%)ofthe total fee paid for any reporting quarter, then the affected franchised MCS provider shall reimburse the City for the cost of such an audit. It is specifically understood that the right of audit and re-computation of any and all amounts paid under a franchise fee shall always be accorded to the Council.

8.	All annual reports due and pertaining to the payment of franchise fees will be certified by an officer of the franchised MCS provider and such provider shall maintain records used in the preparation of said report to be produced in their originality and totality upon request or demand by the Council.

9.	No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim that the City might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this ordinance or for any other performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider hereunder.

10.	Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the City pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance shall be considered in addition to and exclusive of any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect or subsequently adopted.

11.	A franchise fee does not include any items excluded by Section 47 USC 542 (g)(2)(D).

Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the Council to impose a tax, fee, or other assessment of any kind on any person (other than a franchised MCS provider) with respect to multi-channel service or other programming or communications service provided by such person over a multi-channel system for which charges are assessed to subscribers but not received by a franchised MCS provider. For purposes of illustration only, this subsection shall include the situation(s) where a premium service directly bills a subscriber, or the franchised MCS provider merely act as collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a subscriber, or where a person leases a channel for commercial use and sells advertising or goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or through a third party.

12.	For any twelve (12) month period, the fees paid by any person subjectto subsection (L)
 
who provides any such multi-channel service shall not exceed five percent (5%) of such person's gross revenues derived in such period from the provision of such service over the multi-channel system.

13.	Ifat any time the highest court of the nation or the highest court of the state invalidates, voids, or rules as unconstitutional the concept of franchise fees, then the Council may impose an alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider in the manner ser forth in this ordinance.




Sec. 10-1963  ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OR FRANCHISE.

1.	Where required for operation, an MCS provider's franchise may not be assigned or transferred in whole or in part by the affected MCS provider without the prior express written approval by the Council.

2.	Any attempted assignment or transfer without such prior written consent shall constitute a default of such franchise.

3.	In the event of such a default the Council shall proceed according to the procedure set forth in this ordinance and any applicable State law.

4.	At least ninety (90) days before a proposed assignment or transfer of an MCS provider's franchise is scheduled to become effective, such franchised MCS provider shall petition in writing for the Council's written consent for such a proposed assignment or transfer.

5.	The Council will not unreasonable withhold its consent to such an assignment or transfer. However, in making such a determination, the Council may consider the following:

a)	Experience of proposed assignee or transferee (including conducting an investigation of proposed assignee or transferee's service record in other communities);

b)	Qualifications of proposed assignee or transferee;

c)	Legal integrity of proposed assignee or transferee;

d)	Financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee or transferee;

e)	Ifrequested by the Council, submittals from the proposed assignee or transferee on what, if any, changes it intends to make in the operation and maintenance of the present multi-channel system;

f)	The economic viability or non-viability of the multi-channel system in the future based upon certain factors including the impact of the purchase  price on the City
 
and/or the proposed assignee or transferee; and

g)	Any other legitimate aspect of the proposed assignee's or transferee's background which could affect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry of City as it relates to the operation of the multi-channel system.

6.	A copy of the completed sales agreement or a functionally equivalent instrument between the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee shall be provided by the Council so the Council may discover the assumption of obligations by the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee with respect to the multi-channel system. In lieu of the sales agreement, the Council may accept an attested summary of obligations assumed by the above referenced parties.

7.	Before an assignment or transfer is approved by the Council, the proposed assignee or transferee shall execute an agreement acknowledging that it has read, understood, and intends to abide by both this ordinance and the applicable franchise agreement.

8.	In the event of any approved assignment or transfer, the assignee of transferee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former franchised MCS provider except as noted in subsection (I).

9.	An assignment or transfer shall not relieve the former franchised MCS provider of its liabilities under the franchise agreement until the assignment
actually takes place or unless specifically relieved by Federal or State law, or unless specifically relieved by the Council at the time an assignment or transfer is approved.

Sec.   10-1964	DEFAULT	OF   FRANCHISE;	REVOCATION,	TERMINATION	OR CANCELLATION OF FRANCHISE.

I.		When any event, act or omission (on the part of the franchised MCS provider) occurs which represents a violation of an integral provision of this ordinance, or compromises the corporate character, or legal, financial or technical integrity and/or stability of the multi-channel system or the franchised MCS provider to such a degree thatthe interests of the subscribers and users are negatively affected, then such event, act or omission may be considered a major breach of this ordinance. Under such circumstances, the Council shall notify the affected MCS provider to comply with all such provisions of its proposal, franchise agreement, or this ordinance.

2.	For illustrative purposes only, the events, acts and omissions include but are not limited to bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes or franchise fees (including the alternative user charge if applicable), failure to receive written Council approval for an assignment of transfer, or failure to abide by the integral terms and conditions of the franchise agreement or integral provisions of this ordinance.

3.	Where a franchised MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the enumerated conditions within thirty (30) days, then in no event shall the enumerated condition by
 
weighed against such franchised MCS provider in any subsequent review of franchise performance.
4.	A copy of such notice of material breach shall be  mailed to the surety on the performance bond.

5.	Within seventy-five (75) days after such written notice is mailed to a franchised MCS provider the Council shall conduct a public hearing on the matter.

6.	The Council shall provide written notice to a franchised MCS provider and the surety of the time and place of said public hearing in a manner consistent with either State law or approved by the Council.

7.	At the time of the hearing, the affected franchise MCS provider may present information on the current status of the alleged breach of the franchised agreement. Ifthe situation has been resolved or steps are being taken to resolve the situation, then the franchised MCS provider should present the information at the hearing.

Ifthe affected franchised MCS provider fails to attend the hearing and has not requested a continuance of the hearing, then such franchised MCS provider shall be deemed to have waived its right to a further continuation of the matter and may be declared in default of the franchise agreement.

8.	After the public hearing the Council may determine the franchised MCS provider to be in compliance and dismiss the matter or may determine that the MCS provider has cured any non-compliance and thereby dismiss the matter. However, the Council may determine that an ordinance violation exists and remains incurred. Consequently, upon finding that the MCS provider violated an integral ordinance provision or failed to cure an outstanding ordinance violation, the Council may direct the affected franchised MCS provider to take corrective action within a specified period of time or may declare such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise agreement and thereby may revoke, terminate, or cancel the franchise unless the franchised MCS provider presents sufficient mitigating circumstances.

9.	Ifthe Council directs corrective action to take place within a specified time or declares such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise agreement, then that declaration shall be reduced to writing and the notice of corrective action or default shall be mailed to such franchised MCS provider and surety within fifteen (15) days of the Council's action.

10.	Ifwithin forty-five (45) days the affected franchised MCS provider or surety does not take significant action to rectify the breach or submit a plan detaining how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach, then the Council shall revoke such MCS provider's franchise and shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider and surety forthwith unless there are mitigating circumstances.

Sec. 10-1965  PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS. The Council is authorized to design a performance evaluation procedure which periodically monitors compliance of the franchised MCS
 
provider with the terms and conditions ofboth the franchise and this ordinance. Moreover, the Council may periodically review and examine whether a franchised MCS provider's financial, technical, legal, and character qualifications continue to meet required operational, maintenance, and performance levels in order to ensure the uninterrupted provision of multi-channel services. Such performance evaluations may be conducted every three (3) years during the franchise term and may be done as part of any required survey.

Sec. 10-1966  SPECIFIC ADDITIONAL RULES FOR MCS PROVIDERS CLASSIFIED AS CABLE OPERATORS.

1.	In addition to any requirements contained within this ordinance, all non-exempt MCS providers that are classified as cable operators shall be expected to abide by and comply with all applicable provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.

2.	The specific provisions of the Cable Act of 1984 include but are not limited to the following:

a)	Cable channels for public, educational, or govermnental use;

b)	Cable channels for commercial use;

c)	General franchise requirements;

d)	Franchise fees;

e)	Regulation of rates;

f)	Regulation of services, facilities, and equipment;

g)	Modification of franchise obligations;

h)	Franchise renewal;

i)	Conditions of sale of a franchise;

j)	Subscriber privacy; and

k)	Equal employment opportunity.

3.	Further, as an additional requirement, before the second anniversary of the effective date of this ordinance, any non-exempt MCS provider classified as a cable operator and providing cable service within the City shall have designed, built, and activated a multi­ channel service with a channel capacity of at least fifty-four (54) channels. Thereafter the Council may evaluate the availability of new programming available on the market to any non-exempt MCS provider and the usage of the existing channels of the system and the Council may then require an expansion of the system and the addition of channels exceeding the original fifty-four (54).
 

4.	Further, the Council is conunitted thatthe goal of the CCPAas set forth in 47 USC 521
(4) is met at all times. The Council expressly required  that upon the advent, implementation, and transmission of high definition television (HDTV), its functional equivalent, or any subsequently developed technological advancement effecting channel capacity or needed bandwidth for any video progranuning source of service, the cable operator shall not lessen, dilute, or decrease the mix, level, quality, or quantity of progranuning services carried on the cable system for reasons of lack of adequate channel capacity or technically modern equipment. All progranuning services which may be received with stereo signals shall be shall be provided to all subscribers with the stereo signal.

5.	The Council in the interests of minimizing on going operating costs to the cable operator and the resultant increases in rates and changes paid by subscribers is conunitted to the introduction of technological advancements that could realize such benefits to both the cable operator and subscriber. Therefore, unless an operator can demonstrate that it is both technologically and economically unfeasible, the affected cable operator shall within eighteen ( 18)months of the effective date of a franchise renewal agreement, or at the time of initial construction under a new franchise agreement, introduce addressable technology allowing cable service levels to be changed without the expense (eithertothe operator or subscriber) of a separate trip or call.

Sec.10-1967 SPECIFIC ADDITIONAL PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENTAL RULES FOR MCS PROVIDERS CLASSIFIED AS CABLE OPERA-TORS.

I.		The Council recognizes that under 47 USC 531, the Council has certain power with respect to certain aspects for public, educational, or governmental (PEG) use that is provided by MCS providers classified as cable operators.

2.	To the extent permitted by law, and in order to fulfill the Council's desired goal of a public, educational, and governmental (PEG) access policy that will facilitate the long range needs of the City, the Council adopts the following:



A.	At the time of an initial application for an MCS franchise for a cable system and contained within any renewal franchise agreement, an MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall include the following guarantees:

a)	An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, one channel for local educational purposes by any local education system or institution.

b)	An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, one governmental channel that is available to the City of Blair for any governmental purpose.

c)	An MCS provider  classified as a cable operator shall provide,  at its own
 
expense,  one  public  access  channel  that  1s  available  for  use  by  various connnunity  groups and organizations.

3.	A such time as the Council determines the need for more channel time to exist on any given access channel, an MCS provider shall make any or all of the access channels available for more than twelve (12) hours per day upon thirty (30) days written notice.

4.	Both the Council and the affected cable operator shall review use after every six (6) months, including the percentage of use of every PEG channel. At the end of each six
(6) month period, the Council shall evaluate the response and actual use of such channels. Ifafter any six (6) month period, the percentage of use for any required PEG channel drops below twenty-five percent (25%) of the total time allocated, then the required number of hours shall be reduced to a number that most closely approximates the average hours of use per day. Ifthe Council determines the average hours of use per day for any required PEG channel is less than one ( 1)hour then the requirement for that channel's availability shall cease and an affected cable operator may use such channel for any lawful purpose unless and until the Council determined that need for the use of the channel again exists.

5.	If at any time ninety percent (90%) of the total time allocated for any required PEG channel is consistently used five (5) days a week for a period of three (3) months, then the cable operator shall provide an additional PEG channel.

6.	A non-exempt MCS provider shall provide basic cable service to all City of Blair and to all School District No. 1 of Washington County (Blair Connnunity Schools) facilities.

Sec. 10-1968  THE COUNCIL'S OBJECTIVE WITH RESPECT TO THE PROVISION OF BROAD CATEGORIES OF VIDEO PROGRAMMING.

1.	MCS providers shall be required to include at least the following broad categories

a)	All local broadcast stations including all off air channels available, including but not limited to Omaha, Lincoln, Sioux City, and Nebraska and Iowa educational stations.

b)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day variety channel with a Christian influence similar to the progrannning provided on CBN network.

c)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day channel that provides customers with a continuously updated schedule of progrannning for all cable channels and services similar to progrannning provided by the Preview Channel.

d)	At least three satellite delivered 24-hour a day Superstation channels similar to progrannning provided by Superstation channels WGN, WWOR, and TBS.
 

e)	At least two satellite delivered governmental affair channels similar to programming provided by C-SPAN and C-SPAN II.

f)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day channel that solicits goods and services to home shoppers similar to programming provided by the Home Shopping Network.

g)	At least two satellite delivered 24-hour day sports channels similar to programming provided by ESPN and the Prime Sports Network.

h)	At least two satellite delivered 24-hour a day all news channels similarto programming provided by the Cable News Network and CNN Headline News channels.

i)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day country music channel similar to programming provided by the Nashville Network.

j)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day weather channel similar to programming provided by the Weather Channel.



k)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day commercial free classic movie channel similar to the programming provided by the American Movie Classics channel.

1)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day science fiction channel similar to programming provided by the SCI/FI channel.

m)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day fine arts and entertainment channel similar  to the programming provided by the Arts & Entertainment Network.

n)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day channel that programs for children similar to the programming on Nickelodeon.

o)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day variety channel similar to the programming on the TNT channel.
p)	At least one satellite delivered 24-hour a day music channel similartothe programming provided by the MTV and VH-1 networks.

q)	At least two satellite delivered commercially produced educational/instructional channels similar to the programming on the Discovery Channel and Lifetime.

2.	All off air channels shall be carried on the same cable channel as is their off air channel designation.  All other channels shall be carried on their off air channel designation, if
 
any, it does not conflict with an off air channel designation.

3.	MCS providers shall make available to their subscribers available pay for view services and programming.

Sec.10-1969  THE COUNCIL'S POLICY REGARDING THE PROVISION OF SEAMLESS OR "SEE THROUGH" TECHNOLOGY.

1.	The Council recognizes the fact that it is in the public's interest to be able to utilize the functions inherent in subscriber receiving equipment without having to incur additional costs to obtain the same functions.  Consequently, the Council may require that:



A.	Unless an MCS provider can demonstrate to the City that it is technically or economically unfeasible or commercially impracticable, then such MCS provider shall provide the ability to utilize the functions inherent in subscriber equipment in a seamless or "see through" manner which allows:
a)	the use of any built in remote control capability of a subscriber's television for the control of any and all television channels provided by the MCS provider without the use or necessity of additional equipment; and

b)	the ability to record video programming on any channel provided by the MCS provider while watching programming on any different channel, without the use or necessity of any additional in home equipment other than the television receiver/monitor and a recorder.



Sec.  10-1970   MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS-TAMPERING  AND UNAUTHORIZED RECEPTION OF CERTAIN SERVICES.

1.	Consistent with 47 USC 553, no person shall intercept or receive or assist in intercepting or receiving any communications service offered over a multi-channel system unless specifically authorized to do so by an MCS provider or as may otherwise by specifically authorized by law.

2.	For the purpose of this Section, the term "assist in intercepting or receiving" shall include the manufacture or distribution of equipment intended by the manufacturer or distributor (as the case may be) for the unauthorized reception of multi-channel service as noted in subsection (A) of this Section.

3.	Without securing permission from an MCS provider or making payment to an MCS provider, then no person shall be authorized to make any connection whether physically, electronically, acoustically, inductively, or otherwise with any part of an authorized or franchised multi-channel system for the purpose ofreceiving or intercepting or assisting others to receive or intercept any cable service provided lawfully by the MCS provider.

4.	No person shall be authorized to willfully tamper with, remove, or damage any cable,
 
wires, equipment, or facilities used for the distribution of multi-channel services.

5.	Any and all MCS providers are encouraged to work with the Council in developing and implementing a plan designed to control and eliminate the unauthorized reception of certain cable services within the City.

































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 20.  Well Driller

(Repealed by Ordinance No. 1793, 01/28/97)
























































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 21.  Tree Trimmers

(Editor's Note: Article 21, was adopted in its entirety by Ord. No. 1328, 6/8/82)

Sec. 10-2101 TREE TRIMMERS; LICENSE. No person, partnership, corporation or other business association shall engage in the business of tree trinuning, cutting or removal within the City of Blair without first obtaining a license from the City to be termed a "Tree Trinuning License."

Sec. 10-2102 TREE TRIMMERS; APPLICATION FOR LICENSE. Applications forthe Tree Trinuners License shall be made to the City Clerk on a form supplied by the City, which form shall include the following information from the applicant: name of applicant, business address of applicant, residence address of applicant, equipment to be used by the applicant for tree trinuning, cutting or removal, and the applicant's experience and qualifications for such work.

Sec.10-2103  TREE TRIMMERS; LICENSE, FEE, TERM, ISSUANCE.  Every application for
such Tree Trinuners License shall be referred to a Licensing Board consisting of the City Administrator, the Director of Public Works and one ( 1) other person appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Council, for investigation. If a majority of such Licensing Board shall consider that the applicant is competent to carry on the business described in the application, such application shall be approved and a license issued to the applicant by the City Clerk, which license shall be for the remainder of the calendar year in which same is issued. Provided, however, that the applicant shall pay a license fee to the City Clerk for the use of the General Fund of the City, the amount of which said license fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council, by resolution, and the amount of said fee shall be appended to the Municipal Code of the City of Blair as part of an appendix designated by the title, "Permit, License and Application Fees." Provided, further, that said license shall not ne issued until the applicant has filed with the City Clerk a surety bond in an amount not less than fifteen thousand ($15,000.00) dollars indemnifying the Municipality for any property damage or personal injury sustained by the City or its personnel or for any other damage to said Municipality resulting from the activities for which he is licensed. (Amended by Ord. No. 1388, 12/14/82)

Sec.	10-2104	TREE	TRIMMERS;	LICENSE,	RENEWALS,	REVOCATIONS,
SUSPENSIONS. Any person holding such license applied for under the terms of this Article shall upon expiration thereof, be entitled to renew the same by applying to the City Clerk on or before the 20th day of January of the succeeding year and paying said license fee hereinbefore provided; Provided, that the City Clerk shall not issue such renewal license ifhe or she shall have been notified not to do so prior to the application of such renewal, by the Licensing Board.
Any license issued under the terms of this Article may be suspended by the Licensing Board ifinthe opinion of such Board there is credible evidence that the holder of such license has failed to perform his or her work under such license in accordance with the provisions of the City ordinances and laws of the State of Nebraska and in manner consistent with public health, safety and welfare. Written notice of such suspension shall be served personally by said Board on the license holder, if found in the City, or at his or her usual place of residence or business if not personally found or, in the case of a nonresident, by mailing such notice of suspension by certified mail to the business or residence address of the license holder as shown by his or her application for license. A hearing on such suspension shall be held at the time and place stated in the notice of suspension, which shall be held within ten 910) days and not less than three (3) days of the date of service of the notice or, in the case of a nonresident, from the date of
 
mailing same, unless the licensee and the Licensing Board shall both agree to a subsequent time of hearing. Ifthe Licensing Board at such hearing shall determine that the suspended license should be revoked, it shall enter a written order revoking the license and no further license under the provisions of the Article shall be issued to the holder of such revoked license unless so ordered by the City Council.

Sec. 10-2105 TREE TRIMMERS; RIGHT OF ENTRY. Any member of the Licensing Board referred to herein shall have the right, at any reasonable time, to enter upon any premise or property for the purpose of examining, inspecting or testing any work performed by any license holder under the provisions of this Article.

Sec.10-2106 TREE TRIMMERS; RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.  Nothing inthe Article
shall be construed to lessen the responsibility or liability of any person doing any work as referred to in this Article shall not place any responsibility or liability upon the City thereafter by reason of such requirements for inspection and licensing.





































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 22.  Penal Provision

Sec. 10-2201 VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. Is shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the provisions herein, and every person failing to comply with, or violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a Class III misdemeanor, as defined by the statutes of the State ofNebraska,  Section 28-106, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined accordingly.



















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter 13 MUNICIPAL PLANNING
Article 1. Flood Plain District

(This entire Article was repealed by Ordinance No. 1895 dated December 15, 1999. See Section 1002 SFP Flood Plain District of the Zoning Regulations of the City of Blair, Nebraska)

















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter 14
TAXES AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Article 1. Sales and Use Tax

Sec. 14-101     SALES AND USE TAX; ADOPTED.   That pursuant to the approval of the electorate of the City of Blair, Nebraska, at the election held on November 6, 2012, the City of Blair shall continue to impose, pursuantto Section 77-2701, et seq. R.R. S. Neb., known as the Nebraska Revenue Act ofl967, as amended, and Section 77-27,142 et seq R.R.S Neb., known as the local Option Revenue Act, as amended, a sales and use tax of one and one-half percent (1.5%) upon the same transactions within the corporate limits of the City of Blair, Washington County, Nebraska, as the same may from time to time be extended, on which the State ofNebraska is authorized to impose a tax pursuant to the provisions of the aforementioned statutes of the State ofNebraska as the same may be from time to time amended (Adopted by Ordinance  2085 08/22/2006; Amended by Ordinance  2236  1/8/2013)

Sec. 14-102	SALES AND USE TAX; TERMINATION. That said sales and use tax adopted and imposed herein shall continue until such may be terminated by the City Council. (Adopted by Ordinance 2085 08/22/2006; Amended by Ordinance 2236 1/8/2013)

Sec. 14-103	SALES AND USE TAX; ADMINISTRATION. The administration of the sales and use tax imposed by this Ordinance, the making of returns for the ascertainment and assessment thereof, the provisions for tax claims and remedies, the laws governing consummation of sales, penalties, and collection, and for the disposition and distribution of the taxes so imposed and collected shall be as provided by Section 77-27,143 RS Neb., as amended, as approved by the electors of the City of Blair at the election held on November 6, 2012. (Adopted by Ordinance 2085 08/22/2006; Amended by Ordinance 2236 1/8/2013)

Sec. 14-104	SALES AND USE TAX; REVENUE COLLECTION AND USE.  All revenue
collections for the imposition of the sales and use tax adopted herein on the affected transactions within the corporate limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska, and any interest accruing on same shall be used only for the purpose of funding the construction and repair of streets, street maintenance including equipment, public safety equipment, including but not limited to fire safety equipment, storm sewers and utility infrastructure, construction of sidewalks, repair of sidewalks including maintenance, public facilities, flood control and prevention, economic development, debt service, property tax relief and the maintenance costs associated therewith, for the benefit of the City of Blair, Nebraska. (Adopted by Ordinance 2085 08/22/2006; Amended by Ordinance 2236 1/8/2013)

Sec.14-105  SMALL PROJECT BONDIN.    Repealed by Ordinance 22361/8/2013

Sec. 14-106 FUNDING PRIORITIES. The priority of the specific projects to be funded and the amount of such funding from the proceeds of the one and one-half percent ( 1.5%) City sales and use tax shall be determined by the Mayor and City Council, after having received input from the public through the public budgeting process pertaining to the priority and funding of such specific projects. (Adopted by Ordinance 2085 08/22/2006; Amended by Ordinance 2236 1/8/2013)



(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2. Economic Development Program

Sec.  14-201  ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT   PROGRAM.	An Economic Development Program for the City of Blair is hereby established to create jobs and generate employment opportunities within the labor market of Blair and Washington County, to attract new retail businesses, to attract new capital investment to the community, to broaden the tax base and provide economic diversification to ensure economic stability and vitality for the community of Blair and the surrounding area. (Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006)

Sec.  14-202  ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM;  QUALIFYING  BUSINESS.  A
qualifying business under the Blair Economic Development Plan shall mean any corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or sole proprietorship which derives its principal source of income from any of the following: retail; the manufacturing of articles of commerce; the conduct of research and development; the processing, storage, transport or sale of goods or commodities which are sold or traded in interstate commerce; the sale of services in interstate commerce; headquarter facilities relating to eligible activities as listed in this section; telecommunications activities; tourism-related activities; housing developers/contractors and nonprofits building workforce housing located within the corporate limits of the City of Blair; any other business deemed as a qualifying business in the Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act or through future action of the Nebraska legislature.

A qualifying business does not have to be located within the territorial boundaries of the city ifthe Blair City Council determines that there is a clear economic benefit to the city, but it must be located in the City's two-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction or on land held in the name of the city. Eligible qualifying businesses may apply more than once and receive program benefits more than once. (Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2371 07/24/2018)

Sec. 14-203 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM; DEFINITIONS. "City" shall mean
the City of Blair, Nebraska. "Financial institution" means a state or federally chartered bank, a capital stock state building and loan association, a capital stock federal savings and loan association, a capital stock federal savings bank, a federally insured capital stock industrial loan and investment company, and a capital stock state savings bank. (Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006)

Sec.  14-204  ECONOMIC   DEVELOPMENT   PROGRAM;   FUNDING.   Funding  for  the
Economic Development Program is hereby limited to revenue from the local option City Sales and Use Tax. Miscellaneous revenues and funds, including but not limited to repayment ofloans, return on investments, fees for activities such as loan guarantees, and sales proceeds from properties, may continue to be used for activities contained within this Economic Development Program during the life of this program.
The City of Blair shall establish an Economic Development Fund and shall contribute an amount not to exceed one-tenth of one percent (0.1%) of the taxable valuation of the city per year for the life of the program, as appropriated annually by the City Council. The annual amount of local option sales tax to be placed into this fund shall be included in the City of Blair's budget each year and approved by the Blair City Council. Any proceeds from the issuance of bonds to provide funds to carry out this Economic Development Program and any proceeds from land or building
 
sales associated with this Economic Development Program shall be deposited in this fund. The City of Blair shall not transfer or remove funds other than for the specific uses outlined in this program during the life of this program.
The Blair  City Council may authorize the issuance of bonds to carry out the Economic
Development Program. Future contributions of the local option City Sales and Use Tax into the Economic Development Fund shall be used to payoff these bonds. (Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006)

Sec.    14-205   ECONOMIC    DEVELOPMENT    PROGRAM,;    AUDIT.    The   Economic
Development  Program  shall be  audited  annually  by  an  outside  independent  qualified  private
auditing business. The auditing business shall not, at the time of the audit or for any period during the term subject to the audit, have any contractual or business relationship with any qualifying business receiving funds or assistant under the Economic Development Program or any financial institution directly involved with a qualifying business receiving funds or assistance under the Economic Development Program. The results of such audit shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be available for public review during normal business hours. (Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006)

Sec. 14-206 ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM;  DURATION.  The City of Blair's
Economic  Development  Program will  exist from June  1, 2006 until  September  30, 2025.
Miscellaneous revenues and funds, including but not limited to repayment of loans, return on investments, fees for activities such as loan guarantees, and sales proceeds from properties, may continue to be used for activities contained within this Economic Development Program during the life of this program. (Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2166 5/26/2009)

Sec.  14-207  ECONOMIC  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM;  EXPENDITURE  OF  FUNDS.
The priority expenditure  of funds under the Economic Development Program may include, but shall not be limited to the following.

1)	The purchase  of real estate, options for such purchases  and the renewal  or extension of such options.
2)	Expenses for business recruitment activities.
3)	Expenses for attracting and locating a qualifying business into the area.
4)	Equity investment or loan guarantees in a qualifying business.
5)	The authority to issue bonds pursuant to the act.
6)	Grants or agreements for job training.
7)	Small business development, including expansion of existing businesses.
8)	Loans for the construction of spec housing for sale or lease as part of a workforce housing plan as defined by the Nebraska Legislature under  18-2709.01 of the Nebraska statutes.
a)	Assistance  may  be  in the  form  of  grants  and  may  be  used  in  any  manner  as determined by the LB 840 Advisory Committee and City Council that will meet the
City's  ability  to  provide  adequate  housing  to  help  attract  and  retain  a  qualified workforce for Blair businesses, schools, hospital and industry.
9)	The eligible activities described above are considered priority activities for the use of funds
generated under the Local Option Municipal  Economic Development  Act.  The City of
 
Blair recognizes that the attraction of new businesses to a community or the expansion of existing businesses takes place in a very competitive market place. In order to keep Blair as competitive as possible in that market place, and in the creation of new jobs in the area, the City retains the right to include as eligible activities those additional activities allowable by law under the Local Option Municipal Economic Development Act.
10)	The Local  Option Municipal  Economic  Development  Act has been  changed  in several
Legislative sessions since it was signed into law on June 3, 1991. It is reasonable to assume the law will change during the course of Blair's Economic Development Program. This program is written with the intent that future changes to the Act which are beneficial to the City and citizens of Blair are expressly included in this program. Funds may also be used for eligible projects or programs for businesses which are expanding or which are locating in Blair directly or indirectly. Funds may also be used to provide infrastructure to sites for new or expanding businesses and may include, but shall not be limited to streets, storm drainage, water mains and lines, sewer mains, gas lines, electric facilities or railroad extensions. Such infrastructure improvements and costs may extend beyond the corporate limits of Blair. Funds may also be used to construct facilities, structures, and/or appurtenance for new or proposed development or on a speculative basis to attract new business or industry and such facilities and structures shall not be required to be within the corporate limits of Blair.
(Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2371 07/24/2018)

Sec. 14-208 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM; ADMINISTRATION.  It is the
intent of the program that the majority of the funds are used to support eligible activities and that only a minimal amount is spent on administrative costs. The administration of this program will be shared by four separate entities.  The entities are as follows:

Program Administrator-Gateway Development Corporation's Executive Director
1.	Will be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the program.
2.	Will assist applicants and recruit potential applicants.
3.	Will serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member of the Advisory Committee and will
provide the Advisory Committee with all necessary advice and information.

Advisory Committee
1.	The Advisory  Committee will be comprised of seven (7) residents from the City of Blair.  The  Mayor  of  Blair  will  appoint  the  committee  members  after  receiving
approval  from the Blair  City Council.  Advisory  Committee  members  may  not be
elected or appointed officials, employees of the City of Blair, an official or employee of  any  qualifying  business  receiving   financial  assistance  under  this  Economic
Development Program or an official or employee of any financial institution participating directly in the Economic Development Program. The committee  will have at least one individual with expertise or experience in the field of business finance or accounting.  The Advisory  Committee will also have a Blair  City Official and a
representative from Gateway Development Corporation serving as ex-officio members.
2.	The Advisory  Committee will meet as needed to review applications  and provide  a project qualification recommendation to the Blair City Council's Finance Committee.
 
The Advisory Committee will also meet on a quarterly basis to review the progress of the Economic Development Program. The committee will present findings and suggestions to the Blair City Council on a semi-annual basis.

Blair City Council's Finance Committee:
1.	The Blair City Council's Finance Committee will review applications and project qualification recommendations received from the Advisory Committee on an as needed basis.
2.	The   Blair   City   Council's   Finance	Committee   will   provide   project   funding
recommendations to the Blair City Council.

Blair City Council
1.   The Blair City Council has final authority on expenditure of funds in support of the economic development program.
2.	The Blair City Council will contract with Gateway Development Corporation to act as
Program Administrator and will approve the membership of the Advisory Committee.
3.	The Blair  City  Council  has ultimate  responsibility  for the  Economic  Development Program.
(Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2094 12/12/2006)
(Amended by Ordinance 2166 5/26/2009)

Sec. 14-209 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM; APPLICATION  PROCESS. To
be considered for financial assistance through Blair's Economic Development Program, applicants
must provide the following information.
1.	A detailed description of the proposed project.
2.	A business plan that includes employment and financial projections, current financial
statements, financing requirements for the project and total projected costs.
3.	A complete City of Blair Local Option Municipal Economic Development Program application.
In determining eligibility, additional information may be requested by Gateway Development Corporation,  the  Blair  City  Council's  Finance  Committee  and  the  Blair  City  Council.  The
Advisory Committee will review applications in the order they are received. Using program guidelines, the Advisory Committee will determine the applicant's eligibility and will provide a project qualification recommendation to the Blair City Council's Finance Committee. The Blair City Council's Finance Committee will review the Advisory Committee's project qualification recommendation, review all applicable documents and make a project funding recommendation to the Blair City Council for consideration. The Blair City Council has final approval on the amount of funds that are allocated to the applicant. All applications are subject to a financial verification process that will be completed by Gateway Development Corporation. The financial verification process will be completed prior to the application being presented to the Advisory Committee, the Blair City Council's Finance Committee and the Blair City Council.

Once an application is approved, Gateway Development Corporation will be responsible  to execute the legal agreements made between the applicant and the City of Blair. Gateway Development Corporation will also be responsible to report to applicants whose applications have been disapproved.
 

To ensure applicant confidentiality, the following measures will be instituted and enforced.
1.	Each member of the Advisory Committee (including ex-officio members) will sign a "Statement of Confidentiality".
2.	Applicant's business and financial information will be available to the Advisory Committee	during the approval/disapproval process only. After the approval/disapproval process,  Gateway Development Corporation will keep all permanent files and records. Access to these files and records will be limited and on a need to know basis only.

Gateway Development Corporation, in conjunction with the Advisory Committee, will establish procedures to ensure that the municipality and the qualifying business are meeting all applicable laws, regulations and requirements. These procedures are subject to review and approval by the Blair City Council.

Gateway Development Corporation, the Blair City Council's Finance Committee and the Advisory Committee may utilize the services of the City Attorney to review contracts, official documents, land transaction procedures or any other official actions as deemed necessary. Separate counsel may also be retained with the permission of the Blair City Council.
(Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2166 5/26/2009)

Sec. 14-210 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM; REAL ESTATE CRITERIA. The
following criteria shall be applied for the purchase of or option to purchase real estate:
1.	The property shall be properly zoned without any excessive easements, covenants or other encumbrances.
2.	The property shall conform to the City or County's Comprehensive Plan.
3.	Selection of sites shall be based upon sound economic development location criteria or specifications for special projects.
4.	All  purchases   and  options  for  purchase   shall  be  approved  by  the  Economic
Development   Program   Advisory   Committee,  the  Blair   City  Council's  Finance Committee and the Blair City Council.
Proceeds from the sale of real property purchased pursuant to the Economic Development Program shall be returned to the City of Blair's Economic Development Fund for future use.
(Adopted by Ordinance 2084 08/22/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2166 5/26/2009)
 
(END OF SECTION)
 
Chapter 15

REGULATIONS OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES

Sec. 15-101 PURPOSE AND INTENT. It is the purpose of this Chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses so as to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Blair, Nebraska, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the City of Blair and thereby minimize and control the negative secondary effects and thus promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Blair. The provisions of this Chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this Chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.

Sec.   15-102       FINDINGS  - NEGATIVE  SECONDARY  IMPACT. Based on the
documented evidence, studies, findings and reports concerning the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and the nexus between sexually oriented businesses and alcohol consumption, including findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), FWIPBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990),Barnes v. Glen Theater, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 120 S. Ct. 1382 (2000), and findings in the case of Major Liquors, Inc. v. City of Omaha, 188 Neb. 628 198 N.W.2nd. 483 (1972), and studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; St. Paul, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; Beaumont, Texas; Dallas, Texas; Newport News, Virginia; Bellevue, Washington; New York, New York; Tucson, Arizona; New Hanover, Florida; Ellicottville, New York; Islip, New York; Des Moines, Washington; El Paso, Texas; Cleburne, Texas; Las Vegas, Nevada; Manattee County, Florida; Adams County, Colorado; and St. Croix County, Wisconsin; and findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), which were discussed during City Council meetings and made available to the City Council, the City Council finds:

(1)	Sexually oriented businesses have negative secondary effects on the existing businesses around them and the surrounding residential areas adjacent to them, causing increased crime, the downgrading of property values, the downgrading of adjacent neighborhoods, and the downgrading of the quality oflife in the adjacent areas.

(2)	The negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses are increased when they are located in close proximity to each other and when the service or consumption of alcohol is involved.
 
(3)	Improper conduct involving sexual acts occurs at sexually oriented  businesses which provide private or semi-private booths or viewing rooms for the viewing of films, videos or live performances.

(4)	The findings noted above raise substantial governmental concerns for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Blair and it is appropriate for the purpose of promoting and protecting the health , safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Blair that reasonable regulations be enacted so as to address the substantial governmental concerns and minimize and control the negative secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses and thereby promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Blair, protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve the quality of life, preserve the value of property, and preserve the quality of life and the quality and character of surrounding neighborhoods.

(5)	The enactment of reasonable regulations which involve locational criteria, licensing criteria, operational criteria, and the prohibition of alcohol are appropriate to address the substantial governmental concerns and promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Blair.

(6)	A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of reasonable regulations on the owners of sexually oriented businesses and such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the owners to see that the sexually oriented business is operated in a manner which is consistent with the health, safety and welfare of patrons, employees and citizens of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

(7)	The prohibition of doors on viewing booths and rooms and the requirement of sufficient lighting and line-of-sight requirements and structural requirements advance the substantial government interest in preventing improper conduct and sexual acts from occurring in such viewing booths and rooms.

(8)	The fact that an applicant for sexually oriented business license has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this Ordinance and the barring of such individuals from receiving a sexually oriented business license for a period of years serves as deterrent to and prevents conduct in contravention of this Ordinance.

(9)	The health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Blair will be promoted and protected by the enactment of this Ordinance.



Sec. 15-103 DEFINITIONS. Words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary meaning in relation to the context. For purposes of this Chapter, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined as follows:

(I)	ADULT ARCADE: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, videos, laser or compact disc players, or other
 
image producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matters exhibiting specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(2)	ADULT  BOOKSTORE,  ADULT  NOVELTY  STORE OR ADULT  VIDEO
STORE: A commercial establishment which has a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:

(a)	books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides, laser or compact discs, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

(b)	instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation ofhuman genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of the user or others.

(3)	ADULT CABARET: A night club, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features:

(a)	persons who appear semi-nude; or

(b)	live performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities; or

(c)	films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, laser or compact discs, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



(4)	ADULT MOTEL:	A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:

(a)	offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, laser or compact discs, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability ofthis adult type of photographic reproductions; and either:

(1)	offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less that ten
(10) hours; or
 

(2)	allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours.

(5)	ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where, for any  form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, laser or compact  discs, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by  their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(6)	ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude, or live performances which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified sexual activities.

(7)	CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the City of Blair, Nebraska or his/her designated agent.

(8)	DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY AN EMPHASIS UPON:	The
dominant or principal theme of the object referenced. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or display of specified activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.

(9)	EMPLOYEE, EMPLOY, AND EMPLOYMENT: Describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent, or by another status. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.

(10)	ESCORT: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.

(11)	ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association that for any form of consideration furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish, escorts as one of its primary business purposes.

(12)	ESTABLISH OR ESTABLISHMENT: The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; or the conversion of any existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or the addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or the relocation of any sexually oriented business.
 
(13)	LICENSEE: A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license.

(14)	NUDE, NUDITY OR A STATE OF NUDITY: The showing of the human, post­ pubertal male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, or the showing of the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple.

(15)	OPERATE OR CAUSES TO BE OPERATED: To causetofunctionortoputor keep in a state of doing business. Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who is authorized to exercise operational control of the business, or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation, the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.

(16)	PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation association or other legal entity.

(17)	REGULARLY  FEATURES  OR REGULARLY  SHOWN:	A  consistent  or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business of the sexually oriented business.

(18)	RESIDENTIAL: A single family, two family, or multiple family dwelling as defined in section 303 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

(19)	RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT: A single family, two family, or multiple family zoning district as defined in Article 7 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Blair,  Nebraska.

(20)	SEMI-NUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic area, and the female breast below the top of the nipple, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition shall include the entire portion of the human female breast below the top of the nipple, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, or bathing suit.

(21)	SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO: A commercial establishment which regularly features a person who appears semi-nude and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, or photographed by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Semi-Nude Model Studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Nebraska; or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; or a private college or university which maintains
 
and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.

(22)	SEXUAL ENCOUNTER  CENTER:  A business or commercial enterprise, that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose  of specified sexual activities. The definition of sexual encounter center or any sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically  approved and recognized  sexual therapy.

(23)	SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult novelty store or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, semi-nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.

(24)	SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human, post-pubertal male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, the male genitals in a discernibly turgid state even if completely and opaquely covered, or the female breast with less than a full opaque covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple.

(25)	SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:

(a)	The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic area, buttocks or female breasts; or

(b)	acts  whether   actual  or  simulated,  of  human   sexual  intercourse,   oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy, or

(c)	excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (a) through (c) above.

(26)	SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT: The increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than twenty-five percent (25%), as the floor area exists on the date this Ordinance takes effect or on the date of the issuance of a sexually oriented business license.

(27)	TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL:

(a)	The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; or

(b)	the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or

(c)	the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other
 
operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.

Sec. 15-104	CLASSIFICATIONS.Sexually oriented businesses and the licenses to establish and operate a sexually oriented business are classified as follows and a sexually oriented business license shall be issued for only one such classification:

(1)	adult arcades
(2)	bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
(3)	adult cabarets;
(4)	adult motels;
(5)	adult motion picture theaters;
(6)	adult theaters;
(7)	escort agencies;
(8)	semi-nude model studios; and
(9)	sexual encounter centers.

Sec.  15-105 LICENSE REQUIRED; APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.

(1)	It is unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to operate, a sexually oriented business within the boundary of the City of Blair, Nebraska or within the two mile extraterritorial boundary of the City of Blair, Nebraska, without a valid license issued by the City for the particular type of business.

(2)	An application for a license must be made to the chief of police on a form provided by the chief of police.

(3)	The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this Chapter. The application shall require and the applicant shall provide such information and documentation as is specified hereinafter in Section 15-105 (5) of this Chapter.

(4)	Ifa person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must sign the application for a license as applicant. Ifa person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each officer, director general partner, or other persons who will participate directly in decisions relating to management of the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under Section 15-107(3) of this Chapter and each applicant shall be considered as a licensee if a license is granted.

(5)	The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:

(a)	Ifthe applicant is:

(1)	An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is nineteen (19) years of age;
 
(2)	A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any;

(3)	A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the name and capacity of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process.

(b)	Ifthe applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, he/she must state the sexually oriented business's name and submit the required registration documents.

(c)	Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime as specified in Sec.15-107 (3)(g)-(k) of this Chapter, and if so, the crime, date, place, and jurisdiction involved.

(d)	Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and the location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this Chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.

(e)	Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance form another city or county and if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.

(f)	The classification oflicense for which the applicant is filing.

(g)	The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number( s), if any.

(h)	The applicant's mailing address and residential address.

(i)	The applicant's driver's license number, social security number, and state or federally issued tax identification number.

(j) The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.   The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
 
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6"). Applicants who must comply with Sec.15-118 of this Chapter shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of Sec.15-118.

(k)	A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within five hundred feet (500') of the proposed location of the licensed premises, and further depicting the property lines and structures of any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities; or any public or private educational facilities including, but not limited to child care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, YMCA, Senior Citizen Center, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, community colleges, and universities; or any park; or any residential district as defined in this Chapter; or any hospital; within five hundred feet (500') of the proposed location of the license premises.

(1)	Ifan applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other that an adult motel which hall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty square feet (150') of floor space, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, video reproductions, slides, laser or compact discs, other visual reproductions, or live entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth in Sec. 15-118 of this Chapter.

Sec.  15-106   INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.

(1)	Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business license, the chief of police or designee shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and application and shall issue an investigation report.

(2)	Upon receipt of an application for a sexually oriented business license, the chief of police or designee shall forward a copy of the application to the building inspector, and the building inspector shall conduct a survey of the location and other requirements provided in Sec.15-114 of this Chapter and shall issue a survey report.

(3)	The investigation report by the chief of police or designee, and the survey report by the building inspector, shall be forwarded to the City Council, along with the application, within thirty (30) days ofreceipt by the chief of police of the application.

Sec. 15-107	COUNCIL HEARING; ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.

(1)	Within thirty (30) days ofreceipt of the forwarded application and reports from the chief of police and building inspector, the City Council shall, in any regular or special
 
meeting, consider the application for a sexually oriented business license, after having given the applicant ten (10) days advance written notice of such consideration and hearing.

(2)	The applicant, or its representative, shall appear before the City Council at the time scheduled for the City Council's consideration and hearing on the application. At such hearing the applicant, or its representatives, may present oral or written information in support of the issuance of a license and may confront and question any witnesses or information in opposition to the issuance of a license.

(3)	After such hearing and consideration, the City Council shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless the City Council determines one or more of the following to be true:

(a)	An applicant is under nineteen (19) years of age.
(b)	An applicant is overdue in payment to the City of Blair of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant in relation to a sexually oriented business.

(c)	An applicant has failed to provide information or documentation reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information or documentation on the application form.

(d)	An applicant has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this Chapter, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two (2) years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect.

(e)	The investigation fee required by this Chapter has not been paid.

(f) An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or  is not  in compliance with any provision  of this Chapter.

(g)	An applicant has been convicted of a crime involving any of the following offenses as described in Nebraska State Statutes:

(1)	prostitution;
(2)	promotion of prostitution;
(3)	aggravated promotion of prostitution;
(4)	compelling  prostitution;
(5)	obscenity;
(6)	sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minors;
(7)	sexual performance by a child;
(8)	possession of child pornography;

(h)	An applicant has been convicted of a crime involving any of the following offenses as described in Nebraska State Statutes:
 

(1)	public lewdness;
(2)	indecent  exposure;
(3)	indecency with a child

(i)      An applicant has been convicted of sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Nebraska State Statutes;

(j) An applicant has been convicted of incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Nebraska State Statutes; orAn applicant has been convicted of criminal attempt, conspiracy, or
solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses.

(k)	An applicant has been convicted of a crime for which any of the following apply:

(1)	less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;

(2)	less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or

(3)	less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, ifthe convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses  or a combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four (24) month period.
(1)     The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the disqualification of the applicant under Subsection (3) immediately hereinabove.

(m)	An applicant who has been convicted of an offense listed in Sec. 15-107 (3)(g)­
(k) may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by Sec. 15-107(4) has elapsed.

(n)	The City Council, upon approving the issuance of a sexually oriented business license, shall cause to be sent to the applicant, by certified mail return receipt requested, written notice of that action and that the applicant must pay the license fee and obtain the license. The Council's approval ofthe issuance ofa license does not authorize the applicant to operate a sexually oriented business until the applicant has paid all fees required by this Chapter and obtained possession of the license. The City Council, upon denial of the issuance of a sexually oriented business license, shall cause to be sent to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of that action.
 
(o)	The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business, and the classification for which the license is issued pursuant to Sec. 15-104. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may easily read at any time.

(p)	A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as provided in Sec.15-104.

Sec. 15-108 FEES.

(1)	The annual license fee for a sexually oriented business license is $600.00.

(2) In addition to the annual license fee required by Subsection (a), an applicant for an initial sexually oriented business license shall, at the time of making application, pay a nonrefundable investigation fee of $600.00 for the City to conduct an investigation of the application and for the City to also conduct a survey to ensure that the proposed sexually oriented business is in compliance with the locational restrictions set forth in Sec.15-114.

Sec. 15-109  INSPECTION.

(1) An applicant, licensee or operator shall permit representatives of the City of Blair police department, fire department, building inspector, and any other federal, state, county or City of Blair agency in the performance of any function connected with the enforcement of this Chapter or other applicable laws, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business.

(2)	An applicant, licensee or operator of a sexually oriented business or his/her agent or employee commits an offense if he/she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative designated in Subsection (a) at any time it is occupied or open for business.

(3)	The provisions of this Section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation.

Sec.15-110 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; RENEWAL OF LICENSE.

(1) Each sexually oriented business license shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance.

(2) A sexually oriented business license may be renewed only by making application as provided in Sec.15-105. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected by the pendency of the application.
 

Sec. 15-111  SUSPENSION.

(1)	The City Council shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days ifit determines that a licensee or employee of the licensee has:

(a)	violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this Chapter; or

(b)	refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this Chapter.

(2)	The determination by the City Council as to the existence or non-compliance with the above matters shall be made in an open City Council session after having given the applicant or license holder or its representatives fifteen (15) days advance written notice of said hearing, of the intent to suspend, and the grounds therefor. At said hearing the license holder or its representatives may present oral or written evidence in support of the continuance of its license and may confront and question any witnesses or evidence in opposition to the continuation of its license.

Sec. 15-112   REVOCATION.

(a)	The City Council shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Sec.15-111 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months

(b)	The City Council shall revoke a license if the City Council determines that:

(1)	a licensee gave false or misleading information in the materials submitted during the application process;

(2)	a licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed the possession, use or   sale of a controlled substance on the premises;

(3)	a licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;

(4)	a licensee or an employee knowingly operates a sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;

(5)	a licensee has been convicted or an offense listed in Sec.15-107(3)(g)-(k) for which the time period required in Sec.15-107(4) has not lapsed;

(6)	on two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in Sec.15-107(3)(g)-(k) for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; or
 
(7)	a licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises. This subsection shall not apply to an adult motel unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed any such sexual acts to occur either in exchange for money or in a public place or within public view.

(c)	After revocation, the licensee shall not be issued a sexual oriented business license for one ( 1)year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City Council finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date ofrevocation became effective. Ifthe license was revoked under Subsection(b)(5), immediately above, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number  of years required under  Sec.15-107(4) has elapsed.

(d)	The determination by the City Council as to the existence or non-compliance with the above matters shall be made in an open City Council session after having given the applicant or license holder or its representatives fifteen (15) days advance written notice of said hearing, of the intent to revoke, and the grounds therefor. At said hearing the license holder or its representatives may present oral or written evidence in support of the continuance of its license and may confront and question any witnesses or evidence in opposition to the continuance of its license.

Sec. 15-113 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the license.

Sec.15-114   LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.

(a)	No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated, or caused to operated, in any zoning district other than the Agricultural Highway Commercial (ACH) zoning district as defined in Section 801 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

(b)	No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated, or caused to be operated, within five hundred feet (500') of:



(1)	a church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities;

(2)	a public or private educational facility including but not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, community colleges, and universities; school includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
 

(3)	a park, children's playground, or youth sports complex;

(4)	a boundary of a residential district as defined in this Chapter;

(5)	a property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this Chapter;

(6)	a hospital; or

(7)	a Senior Citizen Center or YMCA building.

(c)	No sexually oriented business shall be established, operated, caused to be operated, or substantially enlarged, within five hundred feet (500') of another sexually oriented business.

(d)	For the purposes of Subsection (b) above, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of any of the items listed in Sec. 15-114 (b)(1-7). The presence of any political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this Section.

(e)	For purposes of Subsection (c) above, the distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.

(f)       Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this Chapter that is in violation of Subsections (a), (b), or (c) above,  shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three (3) years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. Iftwo (2) or more sexually oriented businesses are within five hundred feet (500') of one another and otherwise are in a permissible location, then the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established  business in nonconforming.

(g)	A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by location, subsequent to grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of any of the items listed in Sec. 15-114 (b)(1-7) within five hundred feet (500') of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked.

Sec. 15-115 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ESCORT AGENCIES.
 
(1)	An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of nineteen (19) years.
(2)	A person commits an offense if he/she acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of nineteen (19) years.

Sec. 15-116 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIOS.

(1)	A semi-nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of nineteen (19) years.

(2)	A person under the age of nineteen (19) years commits an offense if he/she appears semi-nude in or on the premises of a semi-nude studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this Subsection if the person under nineteen (19) years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person.
(3)	A person commits an offense if he/she appears semi-nude or knowingly allows another to appear semi-nude in an area of a semi-nude model studio which can be viewed from the public right-of-way.

(4)	A semi-nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.

Sec.15-117   ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT MOTELS.

(1)	Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two (2) or more times in a period of time that is less than ten ( 10) hours created a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this Chapter.

(2)	A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he/she rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten
(10) hours from the time the room is rented, he/she rents or subrents the same sleeping roomagam.

(3)	For the purposes of Subsection (2) of this Section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration.

Sec. 15-118  REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS, VIDEOS OR LIVE ENTERTAINMENT VIEWING ROOMS.

(1)	A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty square feet (150') of floor space, a film, motion picture, video cassette, video reproduction, slide, laser or compact disc, other visual reproduction, or live entertainment which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
 
(a)	Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two square feet (32') of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (6"). The foregoing diagram for renewal applications may be waived if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.

(b)	The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.

(c)	No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the City building inspector.

(d)	It is the duty of the licensee and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.

(e)	The interior of the premises shall be configure in such a mannerthatthere is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises, including the inside of viewing rooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purposes excluding the insides of restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. Ifthe premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises, including the inside of viewing rooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding the insides of restrooms, form at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this Subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. The entrances to viewing rooms shall be open and shall not have a door, curtain, or other closure device, and the insides of all viewings shall have an unobstructed, direct line of sight from the manager's station.

(f)   It shall be the duty of the licensee and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in Subsection (5) above, remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, curtains, partitions, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to Subsection ( 1) of this Section.
 

(g)	The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5) foot-candles as measured at the floor level.
(h)	It shall be the duty of the licensee and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.

(i)	No viewing room may be occupied by more that one (1) person at any time.

(j) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewmg rooms.

(k)     It shall be the duty of the licensee and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents or employees present in the premises to ensure that no openings of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms and that all viewing rooms shall be regularly inspected during each business day so as to determine if any openings or holes exist.

(2)	A person having a duty under Sec. 15-118 (1)(a-k) above commits an offense ifhe/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.

Sec. 15-119 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING PUBLIC NUDITY AND SEMI­ NUDITY.

(1) No person shall appear, in a sexually oriented business, in a state of nudity or depict specified sexual activities.

(2)	No person shall appear in a sexually oriented business, in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be at least six feet (6') from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet (2') from the floor.

(3)	No employee shall, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer, and no patron or customer shall pay or give any gratuity to any employee while said employee is semi-nude in a sexually oriented business.

(4)	No employee shall, while semi-nude in a sexually oriented business, touch a patron or customer or the clothing of a patron or customer.

Sec.15-120 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS CONCERNING ALCOHOL.No sexually oriented business shall sell or serve alcohol, and except for personal consumption by occupants ofrentedrooms at adult motels, no sexually oriented business shall permit the consumption of alcohol on the premises of the sexually oriented business.

Sec.  15-121  PROHIBITION   AGAINST   CHILDREN   IN  A  SEXUALLY   ORIENTED
 
BUSINESS.No person under the age of nineteen (19) years shall be allowed on the premises of a sexually oriented business.

Sec. 15-122 HOURS OF OPERATION.No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) a.m. and eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and one o'clock (1:00) a.m. and noon (12:00) p.m. on Sundays.

Sec.15-123 DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALS TO MINORS.

(1)	A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of nineteen (19) years, he/she displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, video cassette, or laser or compact disc, the cover of which depicts any of the following:

(a)	human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy;

(b)	fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts;

(c)	less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the nipple; or

(d)	human  male  genitals  in  a  discernibly  turgid  state,  whether  covered  or uncovered.

(2)	In this Section "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment:

(a)	it is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or

(b)	the cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public.

Sec. 15-124 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.Any person who violates any of the prohibitions or provisions of any article or Section of this Chapter and Ordinance within the boundary of the City of Blair, Nebraska, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Unless otherwise specified inthe particular article or Section for which the person stands convicted of violating, the penalty for such violation shall be a fine an any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not to exceed six (6) months or both said fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the sentencing court.

Sec. 15-125 INJUNCTION.A person who operates or causes to be operated sexually oriented business without a valid license or otherwise in violation of this Chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations and/or suspension or revocation  of the license."
 















































(END OF SECTION)
 
Article 2. Sex Offender Residency Sec. 15-201 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
A.	The Nebraska Legislature has found that certain sex offenders present a high risk to conunit repeat offenses and has enabled cities to restrict such persons place of residency as provided in the Sexual Predator Residency Restriction Act.

B.	Repeat sex offenders who use physical violence and prey on children are sexual perpetrators who present an extreme threat to public safety. Where there is a high risk to repeat such acts, such persons are extremely likely to pose a great threat to children. These offenders conunit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their crimes. This makes the cost of sex offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, extremely exorbitant.

C. It is the intent of this Ordinance to serve the City's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City by creating certain areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers where certain sexual predators cannot reside. (Amended by Ordinance 2064 06/13/2006)

Sec. 15-202 DEFINITIONS. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this ordinance, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning.

A.	Sex offender shall be anyone defined in the Sex Offender Registration Act (Sections 29- 4001to29-4013, inclusive, Neb. Rev. Stat.) or any amendments thereto, as of the effective date of this Ordinance, or any person convicted under the law of another state, if at the time of the conviction under the law of such other state, the offense for which the person was convicted would have required registration under the Nebraska Sex Offender Registration Act, if the conviction occurred in Nebraska.

B.	Residence means a place where the person regularly sleeps, where the person has established his home, where he is habitually present, and to which when he departs he intends to return. A residence may include more than one location and may be mobile or transitory. Residency may be shown by, among other evidence, receipt of mail at the premises or identification of the premises as a residence on a driver's license, vehicle registration, or other document.

C. Child Care Facility means a place with a license issued under the Nebraska Child Care Licensing Act, sections 71-1908 to 71-1923, as currently existing or hereafter amended. Itshall include licensed places both inside and outside of the corporate limits of the city.








Sec.   15-203	SEX   OFFENDER   RESIDENCE   PROHIBITIONS;   PENALTIES;   AND
 
EXCEPTIONS.

A. Prohibited location of residence. It is unlawful for any person who is subject to the Nebraska Sex Offender Registration Act, convicted of any offense subject to the Nebraska Sex Offender Registration Act in which the offender is a Registered Sex Offender who must register for life under the Nebraska Sex Offender Registration Act or similar requirement of any other state, to reside within 500 feet of the real property  comprising of a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school, preschool or licensed child care facility.

B. Measurement of Distance. For purposes of determining the mm1mum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence to the nearest outer boundary line of a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school, preschool or licensed child care facility.

C.	Penalties.   A person who violates this section shall be punished as provided generally in
this code.

D.	Exceptions. A person residing within 500 feet of any real property comprising of a public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school, preschool or licensed child care facility does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:
(1)	The person's residence results from a requirement to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or resides in any other correctional institution or facility including a correctional or treatment facility operated by the state or any political subdivision.

(2)	The person is a minor or ward under a guardianship and resides with the guardian.

(3)	The person established such residence prior to the effective date of this ordinance.

(4)	The person's place of residence becomes a violation of this ordinance solely because of annexation into the City.

(5)	The public or nonpublic elementary or secondary school, preschool or child care facility within 500 feet of the person's permanent residence was established after the person's initial date ofresidence at that location.
(Amended by Ordinance 2064 06/13/2006) (Amended by Ordinance 2187 06/08/2010)

Sec. 15-204 SEVERABILITY. Ifany provision of this ordinance or its application to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance, or the application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected. (Amended by Ordinance 2064 06/13/2006)

(END OF SECTION)
 
APPENDIX - PERMIT, LICENSE AND APPLICATION  FEES AS SET BY MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Application Permit and License Fees - Effective 11112014




 
Dog and Cat License (includes State Fee of $1.00)
Spayed female dog/cat or neutered male dog/cat (includes State Fee of $1.00) Tag replacement
Dog Impoundment Cat Impoundment Dog Boarding Fee Cat Boarding Fee Dog Adoption
Cat Adoption Drop Off Fee
Pawnbrokers, Junk & Secondhand Dealers - Annual Hawkers, Peddlers or sellers of goods (30 days)
(1 year)
 
$16.00
$11.00
$ 5.00
$15.00
$ 8.00
$ 8.00
$ 6.00
$20.00
$10.00
$20.00

$50.00

$10.00
$75.00
 



License Fee - General Contractor	$60.00
(Certificate of Insurance  with minimum limits of 1.000.000 Aggregate/  $300.000 Each Occurrence)

 
Permit Issuance Fee (All Permits)


Building Permit Deposit Fee
Residential additions/remodels/accessory buildings valued under $10,000 Commercial, new homes and residential additions/remodels/accessory buildings
valued $10,000 or greater Misc. permits
 
$25.00



$200.00


$500.00
$50.00
 

Building Permit Fees (PERMIT ISSUANCE FEE will be added)
The Permit Fees for the following building permit types are determined using the following formulas and charts:

RESIDENTIAL - NEW CONSTRUCTION:
Permit fee is:
Finished sq/ft area (not including finished basement area) X $92 plus Finished basement sq/ft area X $56 plus
Unfinished basement sq/ft area X $29 plus Garage sq/ft area X $25
Multiplied by 0.006
 
RESIDENTIAL -ADDITIONS I REMODELS and COMMERCIAL - NEW CONSTRUCTION I
ADDITIONS I REMODELS:
Business/Industrial/Educational/    Assembly/Factory/Storage/Utility
*Porches with roofs/screened patios  are considered additions
Construction  valuation  computation:    Sq/ft area X  $63 Except for the following:
Accessory Buildings & Interior Remodeling Projects sq/ft area X $43 Pole barns with no hard surface floor sq/ft area X $25
Sign Erecting/Awnings and Decks/Handicap Ramps sq/ft area X $25 (Minimum $2000)

Construction valuation is ...................................Pennit fee is:
$0   TO	$50 ........................................................... $0
$51   TO	$500 ......................................................... $25
$501   TO	$2,000 ......................................................... $25  +	$3   per additional	$100
$2,001    TO	$25,000 .........................................................  $70   +  $13   per additional $1,000
$25,001    TO	$50,000 .......................................................  $370   +  $10   per additional $1,000
$50,001    TO	$100,000 ....................................................... $620  +	$7   per additional $1,000
$100,001    TO	$500,000 ....................................................... $970  +	$5   per additional $1,000
$500,001   TO   $1,000,000 .................................................... $2,970   +	$4   per additional $1,000
$1,000,001	AND OVER .................................................... $4,970   +	$3   per additional $1,000

 
Misc. Pennit Fees (INCLUDES PERMIT ISSUANCE FEE)
Egress Window Fences
Gazebos
Patios  I  Driveways  I  Sidewalks  (new or  replacement) Roofing/Siding/Soffits    and/or   Eave   Repair/Gutters Swimming  Pools  with  Fence
Window/Door Replacement (size change only)
Miscellaneous Building Permits (items not covered by one of the above)
 
$65.00
 

Utility Excavation and Curb Grinding*	$75.00
*Bond Checks are required on Utility Excavation and Curb Grinding Permits-See Permit Application

PERMIT RENEW AL FEE:
This fee is based on the amount of the original permit valuation and is charged when work is not completed within two years and the permit expires. Renewals will only be allowed with the stipulation that all exterior site work and outside finish work is completed and interior life-safety issues have been properly address. Permit renewals are for one (1) year. with a maximum of two (2) renewals for  a maximum permit span offour  (4) years.

 
Original permit valuation up to $50,000
Original permit valuation of$50,000 - $100,000 Original permit valuation of$100,000 - $500,000 Original permit valuation of $500,000 or more
 
$150.00
$200.00
$300.00
$400.00
 
SUBCONTRACTOR PERMIT FEES are based upon actual items that require an inspection or review. When applicable, all items of the same sub-permit type (mechanical, plumbing or electrical) should be combined on a single permit with one (1) permit issuance fee. (Example: A 20 unit apartment complex should be charged one (1) permit issuance fee and 20 sets of specific items on the mechanical, plumbing and/or electrical permits.)




PLUMBING PERMIT FEES

 
License Fee:   Master Plumber (plus $5000 bond) Journeyman Plumber (No Bond Required Water Service Line Installer (plus $5000 bond) Drain Layer (plus $5000 bond)
 
$60,00
$25,00
$60,00
$60,00
 

Pennit Issuance Fee	$25,00

Plumbing:
Modular Home ............................................................................................................................ $50.00
Kitchen (Per Unit) ....................................................................................................................... $12.00
Bath-Single Stall (Per Unit) .....................................................................................................  $12.00
Bath- Multi-Stall (Per Unit) ......................................................................................................  $25.00
Rough-In Bath (Per Unit) ............................................................................................................. $8.00
Slop Sink/Laundry Tray/Drain (Per Unit) ................................................................................... $6.00
Additional Sinks (Per Unit) .......................................................................................................... $6.00
Outside Water Faucet (Per Unit) .................................................................................................. $6.00
Water Heater (New and Replacement) (Per Unit) ..................................................................... $10.00
Backflow/Grease Trap (Per Unit) .............................................................................................. $15.00
Drinking Fountain (Per Unit) ....................................................................................................... $6.00
Water Service (Per Connection) ................................................................................................ $15.00
Sewer (Per Connection) ............................................................................................................. $15.00
Groundwork ................................................................................................................................ $15.00
Septic Tank & Laterals ...............................................................................................................  $15.00
Lawn Sprinkler System (Per backflow preventer) ..................................................................... $10.00
Sprinkler System (Commercial) ................................................................................................. $30.00
Gas/Water Piping System (Commercial) ................................................................................... $50.00
Water Tap:
3/4"...................................................................................................................................... $150.00
l" ......................................................................................................................................... $200.00
l Yz" .....................................................................................................................................  $250.00
2'' .........................................................................................................................................	00.00
Anything larger requires approval from our Director of Public Works








MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES
 
License Fee:   Master Heater (plus $5,000 bond) Journeyman Heater (No Bond Required) Gas Line Installer (plus $5,000 bond)
 
$60,00
$25,00
$25,00
 

Pennit Issuance Fee	$25,00

Heating Pennit Fees
Modular Home ............................................................................................................................ $50.00
Furnace/Heat Pump/Air Conditioner (Per Unit)
Up to and including 100,000 BTU I 3 Ton .......................................................................... $15.00
Over 100,000 BTU I 3 Ton .................................................................................................. $25.00
Refrigeration Units/Coolers/Lines/Compressor  (Commercial- New or Replacement) ............ $15.00 Appliance Vents/Fans .................................................................................................................. $10.00
Duct System. ................................................................................................................................ $15.00
Gas/Air Outlets (Per Outlet)
First 5....................................................................................................................................... $6.00
Additional  ................................................................................................................................       $1.00
Radiant Heat Systems/Gas/Water Piping Systems ..................................................................... $50.00 Boiler (BTUs)
Up to 100,000 ....................................................................................................................... $15.00
100,000 - 500,000 ...............................................................................................................  $30.00
500,000 - 1,000,000 ............................................................................................................  $40.00
1,000,000 - 1,750,000 .........................................................................................................  $60.00
Over 1,750,000 ................................................................................................................... $100.00



ELECTRICAL PERMIT FEES

 
License Fee:  Electrician (plus $5,000 bond)
Journeyman Electrician (No Bond Required)
Fire/Security System Installer (No Bond Required)
*Copy of current state electrical card required for  all of the above
 
$60.00
$25.00
$25.00
 

Pennit Issuance Fee	$25.00

Electrical Pennit Fees
Existing Service (Upgrade) ........................................................................................................ $25.00
Temporary Service ...................................................................................................................... $15.00
Fire Alarm System ....................................................................................................................... $15.00
Modular Home ............................................................................................................................ $50.00
Sign ..............................................................................................................................................        $25.00
Smoke Detectors ............................................................................................................................ $3.00
Miscellaneous Apparatus, Conduits and Conductors ................................................................. $15.00
(Misc. itemsfor  which a permit is required butfor  which nofee  is herein set forth.)



COMMERCIAL/MULTI-FAMILY AND ALL UPGRADES:
New Service Fee= (Amp Fee+ $5.00 per branch circuit)
 



















fee)
 
1-100 Amp Fee...................................................................................................................... $25.00
101-200 Amp Fee ................................................................................................................. $35.00
201-300 Amp Fee ................................................................................................................. $55.00
301-400 Amp Fee ................................................................................................................. $75.00
401-500 Amp Fee ................................................................................................................. $95.00
501-600 Amp Fee ............................................................................................................... $115.00
601-700 Amp Fee ............................................................................................................... $135.00
701-800 Amp Fee ............................................................................................................... $155.00
801-900 Amp Fee ............................................................................................................... $175.00
901-1000 Amp Fee ............................................................................................................. $195.00 OVER 1000 Amp
1st 1000 Amps .............................................................................................................. $195.00
Each additional 100 Amps .............................................................................................. $20.00
(Example:   200 ampere service  with 40 branch circuits	$35.00 + (40 X  5.00)	$235.00 permit
 

NEW RESIDENTIAL:
New Single Family/Two Family Dwelling Fee Finished sq/ft area X .063


OTHER TYPES of residential occupancies and alterations, additions and modifications to existing residential and commercial buildings:
Receptacle, Switch and Lighting Outlets (Per Unit - 110 volts only)  .................................. $1.00
Power Apparatus (Per Unit- 220 volts) ................................................................................ $8.00






TREE TRIMMERS

 
License Fee:   Tree Trinnner (plus $5,000 bond)
*Nopermit fee is required
 
$ 60.00
 



After Hour Fees	$80.00/hour
Inspections that require the inspector to remain on the job site past 4:30 p.m. for an extended period due to contractor failure  or for Saturday inspections.


Reinspection Fee	$50.00
Fee for each inspection or re-inspection when such portion of the work for which inspection was requested is not complete or when corrections have not been made, and fee shall apply for additional inspections required byfailure  to call.

Work Without a Permit:	Double the Permit Fee
One written warning per general contractor or homeowner will be issued at no cost. Following the written warning, whenever any work for  which a permit is required is started without first  obtaining a permit,  afine equal to the actual cost of the permit  shall be issued. (Examples: $50 permit fee gets a $50fine,  $1,200 permit fee  gets a $1,200fine)
 
MISCELLANEOUS  FEES & ZONING PERMIT FEES

Demolish/Move Building .................................................................................................................. $50.00

Tree Planting (in the city right ofway) ............................................................................................. $15.00

Conditional Use Permit (new and renewal) ...................................................................................  $230.00

Variance Application ....................................................................................................................... $230.00

Nonconforming Use Limited Extension .......................................................................................... $230.00 Rezoning ......................................................................................................................................... $300.00 Zoning Ordinance Amendments (change to text) ........................................................................... $550.00
Lot Split Application; Administrative Lot Line Adjustment .......................................................... $230.00

Preliminary Plat
1to10 Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) ..........................................................................................  $300.00
11 to 50 Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) .......................................................................................... $600.00
51 +Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) ................................................................................................  $900.00

Final Plat
1to10 Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) ............................................................................................  $250.00
11 to 50 Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) .......................................................................................... $400.00
51 +Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) ................................................................................................  $600.00

Replat
1to10 Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) ............................................................................................  $250.00
11 to 50 Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) .......................................................................................... $400.00
51 +Lots (Plus $10.00 per lot) ................................................................................................  $600.00



*Amended by Resolution No. 2006-52 -November 14, 2006
*Amended by Resolution No. 2007-53 -August 14, 2007
*Amended by Resolution No. 2008-14 -April 8, 2008
*Amended by Resolution No. 2008-29-August 12, 2008
*Amended by Resolution No. 2008-37 - October 14, 2008
*Amended by Resolution No. 2010-51 -November 23, 2010
*Amended by Resolution No. 2013-46 -December 10, 2013
 
ADDENDUM OF CODE VIOLATIONS BUREAU FEE SCHEDULE

4-302	Garbage & Refuse, Burning	1st Offense	$100.00
	Prohibited; Exceptions	2nd Offense	$150.00
		3rd Offense	$200.00

4-501	
Nuisances; Generally Defined	
1st Offense	
$100.00
	Class III Misdemeanor	2nd Offense	$150.00
		3rd  Offense	$200.00

4-501.01	
Streams, Litter; Specifically Defined	
1st Offense	
$100.00
		2nd Offense	$150.00
		3rd  Offense	$200.00

4-501.02	
Littering on City Property	
1st Offense	
$100.00
		2nd Offense	$150.00
		3rd Offense	$200.00

4-502	
Nuisances; Specifically Defined	
1st Offense	
$100.00
		2nd Offense	$150.00
		3rd Offense	$200.00

4-502.01	
Nuisances; Litter within streams	
1st Offense	
$100.00
		2nd Offense	$150.00
		3rd  Offense	$200.00

4-506	
Nuisances; Weeds, Grasses	
Class III Misd.	
	Worthless Vegetation; Litter	1st Offense	$100.00
		2nd  Offense	$150.00
		3rd Offense	$200.00

5-226	
Jake Brake	
Class III Misd.	
$25.00

5-402	
Parking, Generally		
$25.00

5-403               Illegal Parking in City Parking Lots/Parking Facilities          $25.00
2nd Offense	$50.00
3rd Offense	$100.00

5-404               Street Parking                         Class III Misd.            $25.00 5-404.01          Street Parking: Fire Hydrant; Private Driveways            $25.00 5-405               Parking; Alley                                                                           $25.00
5-406.01          Recreational Vehicle Parking                                                   $25.00
5-407               One Way Street and Alley                                                        $25.00
5-408               Parking Time                                                                            $25.00
5-410.01          Illegal or Improper Parking                                              $25.00 5-411          Abandoned Vehicle (48 hrs +)           Class III Misd.           $25.00 5-501               Bicycle Operation                                                                     $25.00
5-501.01	Roller Skates, In-Line Skates, Roller Blades	$25.00 Skateboard Operation
 

5-513	Definition: Utility-type Vehicle	Class III Misd.	$50.00

5-514	
Utility-type Vehicle; License and	
Class III Misd.	
$50.00
	Permit Required		

5-515	
Utility-type Vehicle; Operation;	
Class III Misd.	
$50.00
	Restrictions		

5-615	
Negligent Driving	
Class III Misd.	
$50.00

6-102	
Maximum Number Allowed	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-103	
Licenses	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-106	
Wrongful Licensing	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd  Offense	$150.00

6-107	
Removal of Tags	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd  Offense	$150.00
6-108	Dogs and Cats	1st Offense	$50.00
	Running At Large	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-111	
Barking and Offensive Dogs	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-112	
Offensive Cats	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-113	
Confinement of Female Dogs	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	During Period of Fertility	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-117	
Rabies Control; Vaccination	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	Required	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-118	
Rabies Control; Revaccination	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-129	
Dangerous and Potentially	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	Dangerous Dogs, Restrained	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00
 

6-139	
Pit Bulls; Leash and Muzzle,	1st Offense	$50.00
	Required	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-201	
Animals; Running at Large	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00


6-202	
Animals; banned by Municipality	1st Offense	$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-203	
Animals; Wild	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-207	
Fowls; Cock Fighting	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-304	
Misdemeanor; Criminal Trespass	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-310	
Misdemeanor; Appliances in Yard	
1st Offense	
$100.00
		2nd Offense	$150.00
		3rd Offense	$200.00

6-314	
Discharging of illegal Firearm	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	in City Limits; B.B. Gun	2nd Offense	$100.00
	(Explosive Discharge)	3rd Offense	$150.00

6-318	
Misdemeanor; Slingshots	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	(Rock Discharge), Bow and Arrow	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-319.01	
Misdemeanor; Planting Trees	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-319.02	
Misdemeanor; Spacing of Street	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	Trees	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-319.03	
Misdemeanor; Planting Distance	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	From Curb & Sidewalk of Park	2nd Offense	$100.00
	and Street Trees	3rd Offense	$150.00

6-319.04	
Misdemeanor; Planting Distance	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	From Curb & Sidewalk & Fire	2nd Offense	$100.00
	Plugs of Street and Park Trees	3rd Offense	$150.00
 

6-319.05	
Misdemeanor; Tree Topping	1st Offense	$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-319.09	
Misdemeanor; Injury of Trees	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00



6-320	
Misdemeanors; Littering	1st Offense	$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-320.01	
Misdemeanors: Litter; Solicitation	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	On Private Premises	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-321	
Misdemeanors; Posting	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	(Handbills, Etc)	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-322	
Misdemeanor; Notices Official	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	Unlawful Acts	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-325	
Misdemeanor; Window Peeping	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-326	
Misdemeanor; Obstruction of	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	Public Right of Ways	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-326.02	
Parking During Snow	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	Emergency	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-326.04	
Snow Removal from Private	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	Property	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-326.05	
Cleaning of Sidewalks	
1st Offense	
$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-328	
Misdemeanor; Loitering and	
1st Offense	
$50.00
	Vagrants	2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00

6-333	
Misdemeanor; Junk Accumulations	
1st Offense	
$100.00
		2nd Offense	$150.00
		3rd Offense	$200.00
 


6-334	
Misdemeanor; Meter Tampering	1st Offense	$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00


6-338	
Noise, Motor Vehicle Limits	1st Offense	$50.00
		2nd Offense	$100.00
		3rd Offense	$150.00




7-402	
Days and Hours of Sale, Discharge	1st Offense	$25.00
	And Possession of fireworks	2nd Offense	$50.00
		3rd Offense	$100.00


7-403	
Fireworks; Throwing; Firecrackers	1st Offense	$25.00
		2nd Offense	$50.00
		3rd Offense	$100.00


8-106.01	
Closing Hours of City Parks	1st Offense	$25.00
		2nd Offense	$50.00
		3rd Offense	$100.00


8-417	
Obstructions	1st Offense	$25.00
		2nd Offense	$50.00
		3rd Offense	$100.00


8-509	
Sidewalk Openings	1st Offense	$25.00
		2nd Offense	$50.00
		3rd Offense	$100.00
 

ORDINANCE  NO . 2022



AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING COMPREHENSIVE ZONING REGULATIONS , AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION , ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENT THEREOF , FOR THE REPEAL OF ALL ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HEREWITH FOR THE CITY OF BLAIR, NEBRASKA.

WHEREAS , Sections 19-901, Reissue Revised Statutes ofl943 (in full) empowers the City to enact a zoning ordinance and to provide for its administration , enforcement and amendment , and

WHEREAS , the City Council deems it necessary for the purpose of promoting the health , safety, morals, and the general welfare of the City to enact such an Ordinance , and

WHEREAS , the City Council of Blair established a City Planning Commission pursuant to Sections 18-1307 and 19-901through19-914, Reissue Revised  Statutes of 1943 (in full), and

WHEREAS , the Planning Commission has recommended the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein, and

WHEREAS , the Planning Commission has divided the City into districts and has prepared regulations pertaining to such districts in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan, based on a Land Use Plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers, to promote health and the general welfare, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent the overcrowding ofland , to avoid undue concentration of population , to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation , water , sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements , and

WHEREAS , the Planning Commission has given reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City and ,

WHEREAS , the Planning Commission has made a preliminary report and held public  hearings thereon, and  submitted  its final report to the City Council, and

WHEREAS , the City Council has given due public notice of hearings relating to zoning districts, regulations , and restrictions , and has held such public hearings, and

WHEREAS , the City Council deems it necessary for the purpose of promoting the health , safety, morals of the general welfare of the City; of providing for the harmonious development and coordinated layout for the subdivided area; for the proper arrangements of streets; for adequate sanitary facilities; and for reducing flood damage potentials to the greatest extent possible ; and
 

WHEREAS , all requirements of Sections 18-1306, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full), with regard to the preparation of the report of the Planning Commission and subsequent action of the City Council have been met :

NOW THEREFORE , BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF BLAIR, NEBRASKA:





















































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS


SECTION 101  TITLE
This ordinance may be known and may be cited and referred to as "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Blair, Nebraska " to the same effect as if the full title were stated .

SECTION 102  JURISDICTION
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply within the area of planning jurisdiction as defined on the Official Zoning Map of Blair, Nebraska , as the same may be amended by subsequent annexation .

SECTION 103  PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES OF THE ORDINANCE
The Zoning Ordinance is adopted to preserve , protect and promote the public health , safety, peace, comfort , convenience , prosperity and general welfare . More specifically,  the  Zoning Ordinance is adopted  in order to achieve the following  objectives :

1.	To provide a precise plan for the physical development municipality in such a manner as to achieve progressively general arrangement of land uses depicted in the Comprehensive Plan .

2.	.   To foster a harmonious , convenient , workable  relationship  among local uses and  a wholesome , serviceable and attractive living environment.

3.	To promote the stability of existing land uses which conform with objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan and to protect them from inharmonious influences and harmful intrusions .

4.	To ensure that public and private lands ultimately are used for the purposes which  are most  appropriate and most  beneficial  from the standpoint  of the municipality .

5.	To promote the beneficial development of those areas which exhibit conflicting patterns of use .

6.	To prevent excessive population densities and overcrowding of the land with structures .


7.	To promote a safe, effective traffic circulation  system .


8.	To foster the provision of adequate off-street parking and truck loading facilities .


9.	To facilitate the appropriate location of public facilities and institutions .


10.	To protect and promote appropriately located agricultural , commercial , and industrial pursuits in order to preserve and strengthen its economic base .

11.	To protect and enhance real property values .
 
12.	To conserve the municipality's natural assets and to capitalize on the opportunities offered by its terrain, soils, vegetation  and waterways .

13.	To coordinate policies and regulations relating to the use of land with such policies and regulations of incorporated municipalities of the county in order to : facilitate transition from county to municipal jurisdiction that land which is first developed in an unincorporated area and is subsequently annexed to a municipality ; foster the protection of farming operations in areas of planned urban expansion, and ensure unimpeded development of such new urban expansion that is logical, desirable and in accordance with objectives and policies of the Comprehensive Plan .















































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 2. APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS


SECTION 201 GENERAL
The zoning regulations set forth by this Ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land , except as hereinafter provided .

SECTION 202 ZONING AFFECTS EVERY BUILDING AND USE
No building , structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied , and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected , constructed , reconstructed , moved or structurally altered except in conformity with all of the zoning regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located .

SECTION 203 PERFORMANCE  STANDARDS
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered ;


1.	To exceed the height or bulk ;


2.	.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families ;


3.	To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;


4.	To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required ; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance .

SECTION 204 OPEN SPACE, OR OFF-STREET PARKING OR LOADING SPACE
No part of a yard , or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard , open space or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building .

Off-street parking spaces in any zoning district located within the corporate limits of the City of Blair shall be hard surfaced with either portland cement , concrete or asphalt and shall also comply with all other requirements for off-street parking space, including the provisions set forth in Section 303 .01 and Section 1111.03 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Blair, Nebraska .

Off-street parking spaces in any Agricultural Zoning District or the Rural Residential Estate Zoning District located outside the corporate limits of the City of Blair may be required by the City Council to be hard surfaced with either portland cement , concrete, or asphalt as a requirement of a conditional use permit.

SECTION 205 YARD AND LOT REDUCTION PROHIBITED
No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein . Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance .
 

SECTION 206 PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be
minimum requirements , adopted for the promotion of the public health , safety, morals, or general welfare . Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance require a greater width or size of yards, courts or other spaces, or require a lower height of building or less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied , or impose other higher standards than are required in any other Ordinance , the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern . Wherever the provisions of any other Ordinance require a greater width or size of yards, court or other open spaces, or require a lower height of building or a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied , or impose other higher standards than are required by the provisions of this Ordinance , the provisions of such Ordinance shall govern .









































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 3.  CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS SECTION 301  CONSTRUCTION
The following mles of constmction shall apply unless inconsistent with the plain meaning of the context of this Ordinance .

301.1	TENSE :  Words used in the present tense include the future tense .


301.2	NUMBER : Words used in the singular include the plural , and words used in the plural include the singular.

301.3	SHALL AND MAY: The word "shall" is mandatory ; the word "may" is permissive .


301.4	GENDER :  The masculine  shall include the feminine and the  neuter.


301.5	HEADINGS : In the event that there is any conflict or inconsistency between the heading of an article, section or paragraph of this Ordinance and the context thereof, the said heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning or intent of such context.



SECTION 302  GENERAL TERMINOLOGY

The word "city" shall mean the City of Blair, Nebraska . The word "city council" shall mean the City Council of Blair, Nebraska . The words "planning commission" shall mean the Planning Commission duly appointed by the municipality . The words "board  of zoning  adjustment"  and "board" shall mean the Board of Zoning Adjustment duly constituted in accordance with these regulations .

SECTION 303  DEFINITIONS

303 .01 TEXT OF DEFINITIONS : Words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinance meaning in relation to the context. For the purposes of this Ordinance certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows :

(1) ACCESS OR ACCESS WAY shall mean the place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this regulation .

(2)	ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING : A subordinate building or use which is incidental to that of the main or principal building or use of a Single Family, Single Family Attached or Two Family Dwelling . Customary accessory uses and buildings include but are not limited to detached garages, garden houses, and residential storage sheds. Garages or other accessory uses attached to the principal stmcture shall be considered a part thereof and meeting the requirements of the principal stmcture .  The accessory use or building must be on the same lot as the principal building .
 

(3)	AGRICULTURE shall mean the use ofland for agricultural purposes including farming, dairying,
pasturage , apiculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture , and animal poultry husbandry .


(4)	AIRPORT (AIRFIELD) : Any area which is used or is intended to be used for the taking off and landing of aircraft including helicopters, and any appurtenant areas which are used or are intended to be used for airport building or facilities, including open spaces, taxiways and tie down areas.

(5)	ALLEY shall mean a minor public service street or public thoroughfare 20' or less in width, through a block of lots primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on another street.

(6)	ALTERATION : Alteration , as applied to a building or strncture, is a change or rearrangementin the strnctural parts of an existing building or strncture, specifically, but not limited to, enlargement , whether by extending a side, increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to another, shall be considered as an alteration .

(7)	ANIMAL HO SPITAL shall mean a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.

(8)	ANIMAL UNIT : One animal unit shall equal one (1) head of slaughter or feeder cattle or exotic animals such as a llama, ostrich, emu or the like, seven-tenths (0.7) head of mature dairy cattle (whether milked or dry cows), two and five-tenths (2.5) hogs each weighing over 55 pounds, one (1) head of horses and/or donkeys, ten (10) sheep or lambs, fifty-five (55) turkeys , one hundred (100) laying hens or broilers if the facility has continuous overflow watering , thirty (30) laying hens or broilers if the facility has a liquid manure system, and/or five (5) domesticated ducks and or geese . (Rounded up to the next whole number.)

(9)	APARTMENT : (See Dwelling , Multiple) .


(10)	AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION : Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease, batteries , tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where, in addition, the following services may be rendered and sales made, and no other :

a.	Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries , and distributors and distributor parts;


b.	.  Tire servicing and repair , but not recapping or regrooving ;


c.	Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid , light	bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease	retainers, wheel bearings , mirrors and the like;

d .   Radiator cleaning and flushing;
 
e.  Washing and polishing , and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials ;


f.  Greasing and lubrication ;


g. Providing and repairing fuel pumps , oil pumps , and lines; h. Minor servicing and repair of carburetors ;
1.  Wiring repairs ;


J .   Adjusting  and  repairing  brakes ;

k.  Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crankcase .

1.	Sales  of  cold   drinks,  packaged   foods,  tobacco,   and   similar  convenience  goods  for automobile  service  station  customers .

m .	Provision  of road  maps  and  other information  material to customers ; provision  of restroom facilities .

Uses permissible at an automobile service station do not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting , welding , storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to an extent greater than normally found in automobile service stations. An automobile service station is not a repair garage nor a body shop.

(11)	AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD : Any lot, or the use of any portion of a lot, for the dismantling , storage, or wrecking of automobiles, tractors, farm machinery , or other motor vehicles, or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking .

(12)	BASEMENT : A space wholly or partially underground, and having more than one-half (Yl) of its height , measured from its floor to its ceiling, below the mean finished grade measured at a point five (5) feet from the foundation .

(13)	BLOCK shall mean a parcel of land platted into lots and bounded by public streets or by waterways , right-of-ways , unplatted land , City-County boundaries , or adjoining property lines.

(14)	BLOCK FRONTAGE shall mean all property fronting on one (1) side of a street between a street and right-of-way , waterway or between intersecting or intercepting streets, the end of a dead-end street, or city or county boundary measured along a street line.

(15)	BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE shall mean a building containing a single dwelling unit and provisions for not more than five (5) guests, where lodging is provided with or without meals for compensation .
 

(16)	BODY SHOP: (See Garage, Repair) .


(17)	BORROW AREA shall mean any place or premises with dirt, soil, sand, gravel, or other material is removed changing the existing topography of the particular property .

(18)	BORROW PIT shall mean any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand , gravel, or other material is removed by excavation or otherwise below the grade of surrounding land for any purpose other than that necessary and incidental to grading or to building constrnction or operation on the premises .

(19)	BREEZEWAY shall mean a roofed passageway , open on at least two (2) sides, where the roof is strncturally integrated with the strncture of the main building .

(20)	BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards, open spaces and set backs have been provided .

(21)	BUILDING shall mean any strncture built and maintained for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind , but shall not include temporary buildings as defined in "strncture, temporary" . Trailers with or without  wheels, shall not be considered as buildings . A building shall also include covered porches and patios attached hereto .

(22)	BUILDING , AREA OF shall mean the sum in square feet of the ground areas occupied by all buildings and strncture on a lot.

(23)	BUILDING , HEIGHT OF shall mean the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the strncture, exclusive of chimneys and ventilators . The finished front grade used for measuring the average elevation shall be at a point five (5) feet from the foundation of the building .

(24)	BUILDING SETBACK LINE shall mean the minimum distances prescribed by these regulations between any property line and the foundation of any building or strncture except that in the instance of cantilever wall constrnction , the measurement shall be from the property line and the face of the cantilever wall. For the purposes of minimum set back requirements , the following shall not be considered a strncture for the purpose of measurement of setback requirements and the same shall be exempt from such setback requirements :
a.	An uncovered strncture not more than thirty (30) square feet in area with the base or floor of the uncovered  strncture thirty (30) inches above the adjacent grade;

b.	.  An uncovered  stair or landing not extending more than forty-eight (48) inches from a building ; or,

c.	A ramp or other improvement required under the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) .


(25)	CAMP, PUBLIC shall mean any area or tract ofland used or designed to accommodate two (2)
 
or more camping parties including tents or other camping outfits but not including trailer parks . Such camp may be publicly or privately owned  and operated .

(26)	CAMPING UNIT : Any vehicle, tent, trailer, or other movable shelter used  for  camping purposes .

(27)	CARPORT shall mean a permanent roofed stmcture with not more than two (2) enclosed sides used or intended to be used for automobile shelter and storage.

(28)	CEMETERY shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead and dedicated for such purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, and mausoleums .

(29)	CHANNEL shall mean the geographical area within either the natural or artificial banks of a watercourse or drainway .

(30)	CLINIC : (See Medical, Dental or Health Clinic) .


(31)	CLUB shall mean an association of persons (whether or not incorporated) , religious or otherwise, for a common purpose, but not including groups which are organized primarily to render a service carried on as a business for profit.

(32)	COLLECTOR STREET : (See Street Network,  Collector) .


(33)	COLLEGE shall mean an educational institution offering advanced instmction in any academic field , beyond the secondary level, not including trade schools or business colleges .

(34)	COMMERCIAL CENTERS shall mean business offices which may have a limited area for display of merchandise or equipment sold or serviced by the business and a limited area for inventory storage. Not more than 200 square feet shall be utilized for either display or inventory storage purposes . In addition, no service vehicles other than normal passenger vehicles without commercial business markings shall be stored at the commercial center location .

(35)	COMMERCIAL FEEDLOT : A commercial feedlot shall mean a lot, portion of a lot or building enclosing or confining animal units exceeding the maximum allowed . In no case shall the animal units exceed 25 animal units per acre.

(36)	COMMON OPEN SPACE : An area of land or water or combination thereof planned for passive or active recreation, but does not include area utilized for streets, alleys, driveways or private roads, off-street parking or loading areas. However , the area of recreational activities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, etc., may be included as common open space.

(37)	COMMON SEWER SYSTEM : A sanitary sewage system in public ownership which provides for the collection and treatment of domestic effluent in a central sewage treatment plant which meets the minimum requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Control for primary and secondary sewage treatment and which does not include septic tanks or portable sewage treatment
 
facilities .


(38)	COMMON WATER SYSTEM : A water system which provides for the supply, storage and distribution of potable water which is in public ownership .

(39)	COMPREHENSIVE PLAN : Is the plan or series of plans for the future development of the City recommended by the Planning Commission and adopted by the City Council.

(40)	CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT : A conditional use permit is a written permit issued by the City Council after presentation to and recommendation by the City Planning Commission . This conditional use permit provides permission under specific conditions to make certain uses of land in certain zoning districts as stipulated under exceptions in each of the district zoning regulations . (See Exceptions) .

(41)	CONDOMINIUM shall mean real estate, portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions . Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interest in the common elements are vested in the unit owners . Any use permissible in any commercial or manufacturing district shall be permissible as provided in the regulations of the district regardless of condominium ownership of any real estate within said districts .

(42)	CONDOMINIUM RESIDENTIAL shall mean real estate utilized for residential purposes , portions of which are designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common ownership solely by the owners of those portions . Real estate is not a condominium unless the undivided interest in the common elements is vested in the unit owners .

(43)	CONTRACTOR YARD : Buildings and premises where contractor firm stores its equipment , vehicles, tools and inventory . In addition, a business office for the firm and repairs and maintenance of the firm's equipment and vehicles may occur on site if conducted entirely within an enclosed structure.

(44)	COVERED BRIDGE , PRIVATE shall mean a roofed bridge located on private property , open on both ends for vehicular access, where the roof is structurally integrated with the structure of the bridge .

(45)	COVERED BRIDGE , PUBLIC shall mean a roofed bridge located on a public road , open on both ends for vehicular access, where the roof is structurally integrated with the structure of the bridge .

(46)	CUL-DE-SAC is a local street of relatively short length with one end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turn around . No cul-de-sac shall be allowed which has a vehicle turn around less than fifty (50) feet in radius and any cul-de-sac shall also provide for not less than a dedicated right of way of 12.5 feet surrounding the turn around .

(47)	DAY CARE CENTER : A facility, other than a public or parochial school which provides care
 
to four or more children from more than one family, and is required to be licensed as a Day Care Center by the State of Nebraska Department of Social Services, under the authority of Sections 71- 1908 through , Revised Statutes of Nebraska , as provided and defined under the Title 474 of the Nebraska Administrative Code, Chapter 6, Section 002 .

(48)	DISTRICT shall be defined as meaning a zoning district established by these regulations .


(49)	DORMITORY shall mean a building intended or used primarily for sleeping accommodations , where such building is related to an educational or public institution, including religious institutions and fraternities and sororities .

(50)	DRIVE-IN MOVIE shall mean any area used for the parking of vehicles for the purpose of the occupants viewing from the vehicle a motion picture or other entertainment.

(51)	DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT shall mean any building or stmcture in which food or drink are prepared for service to customers within such stmcture, occupying vehicles outside of such stmcture, including drive in windows and self-service restaurants for take-out food .

(51.5) DRIVEWAY: That portion of property mnning from the public street, highway , or road from the curb drop or cut to any parking area, garage, carport , facility or other stmcture capable of storing vehicles . The portions of the driveway that shall be paved are the portion in the public right-of-way as well as the portion which has positive drainage to the public right-of-way . If the driveway is connecting to an unimproved public street, road , or highway , or ifthe property is located outside of the city limits of Blair, the property owner may request a waiver of the driveway paving by filing a Driveway Waiver Application and signing a recordable Driveway Waiver Agreement which will state that ifthe public street, road , or highway is surfaced with asphalt or concrete and the property is then located in the city limits of Blair or is annexed by the City of Blair, the applicant and his/her heirs and assigns agree to pave the driveway within 90 days of being notified to do so. In all situations, ifthe public street, road , or highway is hard surfaced , the portion of the driveway in the public right-of-way must be paved . The driveway shall be paved with not less than 4 inches of asphalt or concrete . Required driveway paving will not substitute for required off street parking , unless it abuts and is contiguous to the stmcture . Driveways shall have a maximum grade of twenty (20)  percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. Curb cuts for straight curbs and flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

(52)	DUPLEX shall mean the same as "Dwelling, Two (2) Family" .


(53)	DWELLING shall mean a building or portion thereof designed and used exclusively for residential occupancy and permitted home occupations , including single family, two (2) family, and multiple dwelling unit , but not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses, trailers or mobile homes (with or without wheels) .

(54)	DWELLING, MULTIPLE shall mean a building designed and used for occupancy by three (3) or more families, all living independently of each other and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities
 
for each family.


(55)	DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of single family, and having kitchen and toilet facilities for only single family.

(56)	DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED Single family dwelling attached shall mean no more than two (2) single family dwellings which share a common fire wall and which do not extend over the other. Each dwelling may have common or separate ownership . Each separate dwelling shall have its own access to the front and rear and there shall be no common area between each dwelling except the common fire wall dividing the dwellings .

(57)	DWELLING TWO (2) FAMILY shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for the occupancy of two (2) families living independently of each other and having separate kitchen and toilet facilities for each family.

(58)	DWELLING UNIT : One room, or rooms connected together , constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy , or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis, and physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units which may be in the same stmcture, and containing independent cooking and sleeping facilities .

(59)	EASEMENT : is a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation , or persons of the use of a tract of land for a specific purpose or purposes .

(60)	EFFICIENCY UNIT : A dwelling unit having only one room exclusive of bathroom , water closet compartment , kitchen, laundry, pantry , foyer, communicating corridor, closets, or any dining alcove. An efficiency unit shall be permitted only in a multi-family dwelling .

(61)	EXCEPTION : An exception is a use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district, but which , if controlled as to number , area, location or relation to the neighborhood , would promote the public health , safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort , convenience , appearance, prosperity , or general welfare . Such uses may be permitted in such zoning districts as exceptions , if specific provision for such exceptions is made in this Ordinance (See Conditional Use Permit) .

(62)	FAMILY : One or more persons related by blood , marriage , or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit , or a group of not more than four (4) unrelated persons living together as a single housekeeping unit ; plus in either case, usual domestic servants . A family shall under no circumstances be constmed as a boarding house, fraternity, or sorority house, club, lodging house, hotel or motel.

(63)	FAMILY DAY CARE HOME : A facility or private home providing care to four or more children from different families and is required to be licensed as a Family Day Care Home by the State of Nebraska Department of  Social Services, under the authority of Sections 71-1908 through , Revised Statutes of Nebraska , as provided and defined under the Title 474 of the Nebraska Administrative Code, Chapter 6, Section 002 .
 
(64)	FARMHAND : Any person who is employed full-time as an agricultural worker. Required documentation for proof of full-time employment as a farmhand shall be a notarized letter from a Certificated Public Accountant or a licensed attorney indicating the farmhand 's annual income from the farm ofresidence to be at least 80% of the farmhand's total gross annual earnings .

(65)	FARMSTEAD : An area of twenty (20) acres or more, on which is located at least one farm residence , and which is used for raising agricultural crops, livestock, poultry , or dairy products .

(66)	FARM RESIDENCE : Residential dwellings located on a farmstead including mobile homes as living quarters for persons employed on the premises .

(67)	FENCE shall mean any stmctural device forming a physical barrier which is so constmcted that not less than fifty (50) percent of the vertical surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane . Gates and posts are considered parts of the fence stmcture . (For board or other solid barriers, see "Wall").

(68)	FLOOR AREA:
a.	For computing off-street parking requirements : shall mean the gross floor area of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings and shall include the following areas :
1.	One-half (YS) the basement floor area.
2.	.  The area of each floor of the stmcture .
b.	. Floor area for determining floor area ratio : as used herein shall be computed as the sum of the following areas :
1.	The gross horizontal areas of the several buildings measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the centering of walls separating two buildings which shall include floor area utilized for stairwells or elevator shafts and floor space used for mechanical equipment (except equipment open or enclosed , located on the roof) .
2.	.    Penthouses .
3.	One-half (YS) the basement floor area.
4.	Interior balconies  and mezzanines .
5.	Enclosed  porches .
6.	Floor area devoted to accessory uses .
7.	Interior  walls .
c.	Floor Area Ratio : the maximum percentage of allowable of a building or complex (including both principal and accessory buildings) computed by dividing the floor area of said complex or buildings by the area of the building site.

(69)	FRATERNITY shall mean a building or stmcture housing a group of men associated for their common interest. Such group may eat, sleep and otherwise use such facilities as are provided on the premises .

(70)	FRONTAGE shall mean that portion of a parcel of property which abuts a dedicated public street or highway .
 
(71)	GARAGE , PRIVATE shall mean a detached accessory building or a portion of a main building on the same lot as a dwelling for the housing of vehicles for the occupants of the dwelling, including carports .

(72)	GARAGE , PUBLIC shall be defined as any building or a portion of any building for the housing of vehicles  other than a private garage .

(73)	GARAGE , REPAIR : Buildings and premises where repairs are performed on the mechanical systems and bodies of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or motorized equipment. In addition, all sales and services provided  for in an automobile service station may be provided  in a repair garage .

(74)	GOLF COURSE shall mean a lot or portion of a lot used for the playing of golf, including pitch and putt courses, but shall not include driving ranges, detached from or not a part of a golf course, miniature golf courses or other similar commercial enterprises .

(75)	GREENHOUSES shall mean a building or stmcture constmcted chiefly of glass, glass-like translucent material , plastic, cloth or lath, which is devoted to the protection or cultivation of flowers or other plants .

(76)	GOVERNING BODY: That Body having jurisdiction in the zoning area.


(77)	GROUP DAY CARE HOME : A facility, other than a public or parochial school which is in the business of providing care to four or more children from more than one family, and is required to be licensed as a Group Day Care Home by the State of Nebraska Department of Social Services, under the authority of Sections 71-1908 through , Revised Statutes of Nebraska , as provided and defined under the Title 474 of the Nebraska Administrative Code, Chapter 6, Section 002 .

(78)	GRADE :
a.	For buildings having walls facing one street only, the elevation of the finished surface of the ground at the center of the wall facing the street shall be the grade .
b.	. For buildings having walls facing more than one street, the grade shall be determined  by using the average of the grad es (as defined in a. above) of all walls facing each street.
c.	For buildings having no wall facing a street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the building shall be the grade .
d . Any wall  approximately  parallel to and  not more than 35 feet from a street line is considered as facing the street.

(79)	GUEST ROOM shall mean a room which is designed to be occupied by one (1) or more guests for sleeping purposes , having no kitchen facilities, not including dormitories .

(80)	HOME OCCUPATION shall mean any commercial use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling or a permitted accessory building and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the stmcture and premises for dwelling purposes and which use does not change the character thereof.
 
All of the following criteria shall apply for the evaluation of "Home Occupation" :


a.	There shall be not more than one (1) person or employee other than the members of the resident family.

b.	.  There shall be no use of material or mechanical equipment not recognized as being part of normal household  or hobby uses .

c.	There shall be no sales of products or services not produced on the premises unless such sales are secondary and incidental to a primary service which is the home occupation .

d . The use shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond that normal to the district in which it is located .

e. It shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises , other than a vehicle not to exceed one (1) ton, owned by the operator of such home occupations .

f. No indoor storage of materials or supplies, other than for purposes  other  than  those permitted in the district. No outdoor storage of any materials, supplies, or equipment shall be allowed or permitted . Unless permitted in the district, no non-licensed vehicles or equipment shall be allowed  on the premises

g.	It shall not involve the use of signs or stmctures other than those permitted in the district in which it is a part .

h.	Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the square footage of finished living area in the dwelling, not to exceed 250 square feet, shall be used for the home occupation either in the dwelling, attached or detached garage or accessory building permitted in the district. In the event the building , room, or space utilized for the home occupation exceeds the maximum allowable area which may be utilized for the home occupation , the building, room, or space shall be partitioned to limit the area to the maximum allowed .

i.	All doors, windows , or any other openings in the area utilized for home occupations shall be closed during operation .

j . In no way shall the appearance  of the stmcture be so altered or the conduct of the occupation within the stmcture be such that the stmcture may be reasonably recognized as serving a nonresidential use (either by color, materials or constmction, lighting, signs, sounds or noises, vibrations , etc.)

k.	There shall be no use of utilities or community facilities beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential or agricultural purposes as defined in the district.
 
1.	The use does not infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy peaceful and healthful occupancy of their home .

m.	. No flammable or hazardous materials for the home occupation shall be stored or used on the premises other than materials or supplies and in such quantities as are recognized as being normal materials or supplies present in the district.

n.	No noise, sound, vibrations , fumes, smoke, odors, gasses, air contaminants , heat, glare, or electrical interference from the conduct of the occupation be present or exist outside of the strncture.

o.	The following are deemed not to be home occupations and , therefore, may be conducted without the necessity of obtaining a special use permit for a home occupation :

(1)	Sales persons where there are no on sight transaction .
(2)	Businesses to the extent that book or paper work and telephone transactions occur on the premises , and where there is no fabrication , production of goods or services on the premises , and where storage ofinventory or equipment, excluding one business vehicle, is limited to a maximum of 100 square feet.
(3)	Music,  art,  dance, or educational  instrnction  or tutoring , providing  that no  more than 4 students are present at any one time .
(4)	Seamstresses  and  tailors .
(5)	Home crafts which are of a hobby nature .
(6)	Businesses which activities are limited strictly to telephone transactions .
(7)	Babysitters	or   day   care   providers	providing	care   for   three	or   less individuals from different families .
(8)	Garden   produce .


(81)	HOSPITAL : Any building or portion thereof used for the accommodation and medical care of sick, injured , or infirm persons and including sanitariums, alcoholic sanitariums, institutions for the cure of chronic drng addicts and mental patients .

(82)	HOTEL: A building or portion thereof, or a group of buildings , used as a transient abiding place which may or may not serve meals and whether such establishments are designated as a hotel, inn, automobile court, motel, motor lodge, motor court, tourist cabin, tourist court or other similar designation .

(83)	IMPOUND LOT : Property where damaged, inoperable , or legally confiscated vehicles are stored for less than six months .

(84)	KENNEL: The housing of four (4) or more dogs of four (4) or more months or the business of buying, selling, raising , breeding , boarding , housing , caring for, feeding, or training of dogs, excluding veterinarian clinics, animal shelters, and animal hospitals licensed under the laws of the State of Nebraska .
 
(85)	LANDSCAPING : Shall include the original planting of suitable vegetation in conformity with the requirements of this Regulation and the continued maintenance thereof.

(86)	LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET : Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used , and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled . Required off-street loading space is not to be used as off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space.
(87)	LODGING HOUSE : Shall mean the same as "Boarding House" .


(88)	LOT : For purpose of this Ordinance a lot is a tract of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning and subdivision requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required . Such lot shall have frontage on any public street, or on an approved private street.

(89)	LOT COVERAGE shall mean that portion of a lot which is occupied by any building or structure, excepting paved areas, walks and swimming pools, regardless of whether said building or structure is intended for human occupancy .

(90)	LOT DEPTH : Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the mid-points of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.

(91)	LOT FRONT : The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under "Yards" in this article .

(92)	LOT OF RECORD : A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded  in the office of the Register of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds the description of which has been so recorded .

(93)	LOT WIDTH : Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard , provided , however , that width between side lot lines at their foremost points where they intersect with the street line, shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs , or on loop streets, where the eighty (80) percent requirement shall not apply.

(94)	LOT, CORNER : Indicated as A on Exhibit "A", a corner lot is defined as a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than thirty-five (35) degrees . See lots marked A in the diagram .
 
1  A-D
I	r-----
1       B	1    B   18-0
I----·I--J.--.--
 

A	, B

\
c-o \
 
I	I1	a	iI
 
s 's'
 
- ·-·	\
 
!A(1)
 
I	I	I	\\
 

I  ,'"
<..   B
 
A	''
 
I	'·	I	8
I	' I
I	'-(.	I
I	">,	I	A	A	8
,,' '---:---- - - ..,I_

(95)	LOT, INTERIOR : Indicated as Bon Exhibit "A", an interior lot is defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.

(96)	LOT, NONCONFORMING shall mean a lot having less area or dimension than that required in the district in which it is located and which was lawfully created prior to the zoning thereof whereby the larger area or dimension requirements were established .

(97)	LOT, THROUGH : Indicated as Con Exhibit "A", a through lot is defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as a double frontage lot.

(98)	LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE : Indicated as Don Exhibit "A", a reversed frontage lot is defined as a lot on which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles, interior angle less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot, (A-D on Exhibit "A"), an interior lot (B-D) or a through lot (C-D) .

(99)	MAJOR RECREATION EQUIPMENT : Major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches, designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles, motorized dwellings, tent trailers and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment , whether occupied by such equipment or not , and shall include the term Recreational Vehicle .

(100)	MANUFACTURED HOME : A factory-built  stmcture which is to be used as a place for human habitation , which is not constmcted or equipped with a permanent hitch or other devise allowing it to be moved other than to be permanent site, which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles, and which bears a label certifying that it was built to compliance with National Manufactured Home Constmction and Safety Standards, 24 C.F.R. 3280 et seq., promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development , or a modular housing unit as defined in Section 71-1557 of the Nebraska Revised Statutes bearingthe seal of the Department of Health .

(101)	MEDICAL , DENTAL OR HEAL TH CLINIC : Any building or portion thereofused by one or more persons lawfully engaged in the diagnosis, care and treatment of physical or mental diseases or ailments of human beings ; including but not limited to, doctors of medicine , dentists, chiropractors, osteopaths, optometrists , podiatrists and in which no patients are lodged overnight , but which may include an apothecary .
 

(102)	MOBILE HOME/MOBILE HOME PARK : A year-round , transportable structure which is a single family dwelling unit suitable for permanent , more than thirty (30) days living quarters, more than eight (8) feet wide and forty (40) feet in length designed and built to be towed on its own chassis and designed to be used as a single family dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities .

(103)	MOBILE HOME PARK :  Any area ofland which one (1) or more mobile homes are parked , connected to utilities and used by one (1) or more persons for living or sleeping purposes . A mobile home park includes any premises set apart for supplying to the public parking space, either free of charge or for revenue purposes for one (1) or more mobile homes, connected to utilities and used by one (1) or more persons for living, or sleeping purposes and shall include any building , structure, tent, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such mobile home park.

(104)	MODULAR HOME : Any dwelling whose construction consists entirely of or the major portions of its construction consist of a unit or units not fabricated on the final site for the dwelling units, which units are movable or portable until placed on a permanent foundation and connected to utilities . All modular homes shall bear a label certifying that it was built to compliance with the Nebraska Department of Health Standards as established in Section 71-1557 of the Nebraska revised Statutes.

(105)	MOTEL shall mean a building or group of buildings used for transient residential purposes containing guest rooms or dwelling units with or without automobile storage space provided in connection therewith , which building or group is designed , intended or used primarily for the accommodation of transient automobile travelers, including groups designated as auto cabins, motor courts, motor hotels and similar designation .

(106)	NONCONFORMING USE : An existing use of a structure or land which does not conform with the regulations of the district in which it is situated as established by this regulation or any amendments thereto .

(107)	NURSING HOME OR CONYALE SCENT HOMES : An institution or agency licensed by the State for the reception , board , care or treatment of three or more unrelated individuals , but not including facilities for the care and treatment of mental illness, alcoholism, or narcotics addiction .

(108)	OFFICE : The use of a building for administrative , business , or professional operations . See also :  Professional Office .

(109)	PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET :  For the purpose of this Ordinance an off-street parking space shall consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room . All off-street parking spaces in any zoning district located within the corporate limits of the City of Blair shall be hard surfaced with either portland cement, concrete or asphalt. Off-street parking spaces in any Agricultural Zoning District or the Rural Residential Zoning District located  outside the corporate limits of the City of Blair may be required by the City Council to be hard surfaced with
 
either portland cement, concrete or asphalt as a requirement of a conditional use permit. Required off­ street parking areas for three (3) or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked, and shall be so designed, maintained and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk, or alley, and so that any automobile may be parked and un-parked without moving another. A garage shall not be considered as meeting off street parking qualifications unless the driveway access to the garage is not considered as off street parking for the purposes of these regulations . For  purposes of approximate computation , an off-street parking space and necessary access and maneuvering may be estimated at three hundred (300) square feet, but off-street parking requirements will be considered to be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements above are provided and maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the circumstances of the case, and in accordance with all ordinances and regulations of the City.

(110)	PARKWAYS : Those streets which are similar to an arterial, but with a large median for landscaping and somewhat slower traffic flow.

(111)	PEDESTRIAN WAYS : Is a tract ofland dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjoining streets or properties .

(112)	PERMANENT FOUNDATION : The masonry or concrete substmcture of a stmcture which directly supports the stmcture around its entire perimeter and at points within its perimeter where needed .

(113)	PERSON shall mean an individual, firm, co-partnership , joint venture , association , social club, fraternal organization , corporation, estate, tmst, receiver , syndicate, special district, or any other group or combination acting as an entity.

(114)	PLANNED DEVELOPMENT : Special development of certain tracts of land , planned and designed as a unit for one or more land uses under the regulations and procedures contained in this Ordinance and as approved by the City Council.

(115)	PLANNING AREA AND PLANNING JURISDICTION shall both mean the City and two (2) miles beyond the corporate limits as illustrated by the official zoning classification map .

(116)	PRINCIPAL/PRIMARY BUILDING : The building in which the main use of the lot is conducted .

(117)	PRINCIPAL/PRIMARY USE : The main use of a lot, building , or stmcture .


(118)	PRIVATE CLUB : A non-profit association of persons who are bona fide members paying annual dues, which owns, hires or leases a building or premises, or portion thereof, the use of such building or premises being restricted to members and their guests. The affairs and management of such private clubs are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at their annual meeting . It shall be permissible to serve food and meals on such premises providing adequate dining room space and kitchen facilities are available . The sale of alcoholic beverages to members and their guests shall be allowed provided  it is secondary and
 
incidental to the promotion of some other common objective by the organization , and further provided that such sale of alcoholic beverages is in compliance with the applicable Federal, State, County, and Municipal laws.

(119)	PROFESSIONAL OFFICE shall mean any building or portion of a building used or intended to be used as an office for a lawyer, architect , engineer, land surveyor, optometrist , accountant and other similar professions .

(120)	PUBLIC UTILITY: Any business which furnishes the general public (a) telephone service, (b) telegraph service, (c) electricity, (d) natural gas, (e) water and sewer, (f) cable television , (g) any other business so affecting the public interest as to be subject to the supervision or regulation by an agency of the State.

(121)	QUASI-PUBLIC ORGANIZATIONS shall mean any non-governmental organization that is devoted entirely to public service and welfare .

(122)	REPAIR GARAGE : See GARAGE , REPAIR


(123)	RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM : See CONDOMINIUM , RESIDENTIAL


(124)	RENTAL AND LEASING ESTABLISHMENTS , INSIDE STORAGE ONLY shall mean an
establishment renting or leasing, on a long or short term basis, and storing on location equipment and miscellaneous items, all of which equipment and miscellaneous items must be stored inside and no outside storage is utilized .

(125)	RENTAL AND LEASING ESTABLISHMENTS , OUTSIDE AND INSIDE STORAGE, shall
mean an establishment renting or leasing, on a long or short term basis, and storing on location either inside or outside, equipment or other items excluding general consumer or household items such as furniture, appliances, and yard or garden tools or equipment.

(125 .5) RETAINING WALL , shall mean a wall or terraced combination of walls used at a grade change to hold soil and other earth material at a higher position . Retaining walls may be attached to or independent from other strnctures . The exposed side of a retaining wall shall be known as a "face". The area between a lower wall and a successive higher wall shall be known as a "terrace".

(126)	RIGHT-OF-WAY: All property dedicated to the public or subject to public or private easement for street, highway , freeway, roadway, utility, or public works purposes .

(127)	SALVAGE YARD : Any lot, or the use of any portion of a lot, for the dismantling , storage or wrecking of machinery , farm machinery , and including motor vehicles or for the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking , or for the storage or keeping of junk  including  scrap metals or other scrap materials, with no burning permitted .

(128)	SIGHT TRIANGLE : a triangular-shaped portion ofland established at street intersections in which nothing is erected , placed , planted , or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstrnct
 
the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection . Also known as a sight easement.


(129)	SIGN: Any device which shall display or include any letter, word, model, banner , flag, pennant, insignia, device or representation used as, or which is in the nature of, an advertisement or announcement which directs attention to an object, product , place, activity, person , institution, organization or business but shall not include any display of official notice or official flag.

(130)	SIGN, ANIMATED OR MOVING : Any sign or part ofa sign that changes physical position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation .

(131)	SIGN, AWNING, CANOPY, OR MARQUEE : A sign that is mounted, painted, or attached to an awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by ordinance .

(132)	SIGN, BILLBOARD , OFF-SITE , OR OFF-PREMISE : A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located .

(133)	SIGN, GROUND : A sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire bottom is in contact with or is close to the ground and is independent of any other strncture.

(134)	SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION : A sign containing only the name and occupation of a permitted home occupation .

(135)	SIGN, ILLUMINATED : A sign lighted by or exposed to artificial lighting either by lights on or in the sign or directed toward the sign.

(136)	SIGNS, ON-SITE : A sign relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products , accommodations , services, or activities on the premises . On-site signs do not include signs erected by the outdoor advertising industry in the conduct of the outdoor advertising business .

(137)	SIGN, POLE : A sign that is mounted  on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade .

(138)	SIGN, POLITICAL : A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any national , state, or local election .

(139)	SIGN, PROJECTING : A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and projects more than twelve inches from such building .

(140)	SIGN, REAL ESTATE : A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises , or a portion of the premises , on which the sign is located .

(141)	SIGN, TEMPORARY, PORTABLE : A sign, flag, banner, pennant or valance constrncted of lightweight material which is not permanently attached to building or land and which is intended for
 
display for a limited period  of time .


(142)	SIGN, WALL: a sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or strncture in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting strncture for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than twelve inches from such building , or strncture.

(143)	SIGN AREA: The entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding but not including the supporting strncture. In the event a sign has more than one face, the combined area of each face shall equal the total area of the sign.

(144)	SORORITY shall mean a building or strncture housing a group of women associated for their common interest. Such group may eat, sleep, and otherwise use facilities as are provided on the premises .

(145)	STORAGE UNITS , MINI: Storage units primarily for the storage and housing of personal property including but not limited to household goods, boats, motor vehicles, with each unit generally not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet.

(146)	STORY shall mean a space in a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above, or if there be no floor above, then the space between such floor and the ceiling or roof above .   The basement as defined herein shall not be considered as a story of the building .

(147)	STREET shall be defined as meaning a public thoroughfare or right-of-way , dedicated , deeded or condemned for use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principle means of access to abutting property , including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard , highway , road or any other thoroughfare except as excluded herein .

(148)	STREET LINE shall mean the boundary line between the street right-of-way and the abutting property .

(149)	STREET, LOOP : A street having both ends terminating on another single street.


(150)	STREET, MARGINAL : A minor street which is parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street and which serves to reduce the number of access points to the arterial street and thereby increase traffic safety.

(151)	STREET NETWORK :
a.	EXPRESSWAY: A street which provides fast and efficient movement oflargevolumes of traffic between areas and does not provide a land service function .

b.	.  ARTERIAL : A street which provides for through traffic movement between and around areas with direct access to abutting property , subject to necessary control of entrances, exits, and curb use .

c.	COLLECTOR : A street which provides for traffic movement between arterials and local
 
streets, with direct access to abutting property .


d .	LOCAL :	A street which  provides  direct  access to abutting land , and  local traffic movement whether in business , industrial , or residential land .

(152)	STRUCTURE : Anything constructed or erected , the use of which requires permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground , but not including fences or retaining walls, or public items such as utility poles, street light fixtures, street signs and outdoor areas such as paved areas, driveways or sidewalks .

(153)	STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS : Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions , columns, beams, or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls . For the purpose of this regulation , the following shall not be considered as structural alterations :
a.	Attachment of a new front where structural supports are not changed .


b.	.   Addition  of fire escapes where  structural  supports are not  changed .


c.	New windows where lintels and  support walls are not materially  changed .


d .  Repair or replacement  of non- structural members .


(154)	STRUCTURE , TEMPORARY shall mean a structure which is readily movable .


(155)	TAVERN : An establishment in which the primary function is the public sale and serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises , including establishments , commonly known as key clubs, which are open, and in which alcoholic beverages are served , only to members and their guests.

(156)	VISUAL OBSTRUCTION shall mean any fence, hedge, tree, shrub, wall or structure exceeding three (3) feet in height , measured from the crown of intersecting or intercepting streets, alleys, or driveways, which limit the visibility of persons in motor vehicles on said streets, alleys or driveways .  This does not include trees kept trimmed of branches below a minimum height of eight
(8) feet.


(157)	VARIANCE : A variance is a waiver of the terms of the Zoning Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant , a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship . As used in this Ordinance a variance is authorized only for height , area, and size of structure or size of yards and  open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance , nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of non-conformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district or because of conditions created by the landowner.

(158)	WALL shall mean any structure or device forming a physical barrier , which is so constructed
 
that fifty (50) percent or more of the vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage oflight, and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane .

(159)	YARD : A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstmcted by any stmcture or portion of a stmcture provided , however , that fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstmctions of visibility and subject to the district regulations . In the case of corner lots that have streets on two or more sides, front yards of the required depth shall be provided on all street frontages.
In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one (1) of the front yards that would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the zoning administrator may waive the requirement which shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.
In the case of interior lot, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided , except the zoning administration may waive the requirement in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern of the adjacent lots.  The waiver shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.

(160)	YARD , FRONT : A yard extending from the front lot line adjoining a public street to the front of the building between side lot lines.

In the case ofreversed frontage corner lots, a front yard of the required depth shall be provided on either frontage, and a second front yard of half the depth required generally for front yards in the district shall be provided on the other frontage unless otherwise provided in the district regulations . In the case of corner lots with more than two (2) frontages, the zoning administrator shall determine the front yard requirements, subject to the following limitations .

1.	In the case of corner lots with more than two frontages existing and platted before to July 1, 1994:
A.	At least one front yard shall be provided having the full depth required generally in the district.
B.	No other front yard on such lot shall have less than one-half the full depth required generally .
2.	.  In the case of all such corner lots platted or re-platted  after to July 1, 1994, both of the front yards shall have the full depth required  generally in the district.   Depth of required  front yards  shall be measured  at right  angles to a straight  line joining  the foremost  points  of the side lot  lines. The foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to  be the point  at which the  side and  front lot lines would  have  met  without  such rounding .  The front lot line and the inner edge of the front yard  shall be parallel.

(161)	YARD, REAR : A yard extending from the rear lot line to the rear of the building between inner side yard line. In the case of through lots and corner lots, there will be no rear yards, but only front and side yards . Depth of a required rear yard  shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the rear lot line.
 
(162)	YARD, SIDE : A yard extending from the rear line of the required front yard to the rear lot line, or in the absence of any clearly defined rear lot line to the point on the lot farthest from the intersection of the lot line involved with the public street. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of front yards required . In the case of corner lots, yards remaining after foll and half-depth front yards have been established shall be considered side yards . Width of a required side yard shall be measured in such a manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line.

(163)	YARD, SPECIAL : A yard behind any required yard adjacent to a public street, required to perform the same fonction as a side or rear yard , but adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term "side yard" nor the term "rear yard" clearly applies . In such cases, the zoning administrator shall require a yard with minimum dimensions as generally required for a side yard or a rear yard in the district, determining which shall apply by the relation of the portion of the lot on which the yard is to be located to the adjoining lot or lots, with due regard to the orientation and location of strnctures and buildable areas thereon .








































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 4. ESTABLISHMENT AND DESIGNATION  OF DISTRICTS SECTION 401 PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS

It shall be a purpose of the Planning Commission to recommend the boundaries of the various original districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein . The Planning Commission shall make a preliminary report and hold public hearings thereon before submitting its final report , and the City Council shall not hold its public hearings or take action until it has received the final report of the Planning Commission .

SECTION 402 DISTRICTS CREATED

For the purpose of this Ordinance there are hereby created the following types of districts by which the jurisdiction area defined in SECTION 102 shall be divided :

AGG - General Agriculture District RRE - Rural Residential Estate District RL - Residential Low Density District
RM- Residential Medium Density District
RML - Multi-Family Low Residential Density District RMH- Multi-Family Residential High Density District A/CH - Agricultural/Highway Commercial District CCB-CentralBusinessDistrict
CL - Limited Commercial
A/ML - Agricultural/Light Industrial and Manufacturing District A/MH- Agricultural/Heavy Industrial and Manufacturing District OPD - Office Park District
SHM- Special - Mobile Home District SFP - Special - Flood Plain District
SPD - Special - Planned Development District


SECTION 403 DISTRICT ZONING MAP

The City is hereby divided into zones or districts, as shown on the Official Zoning Map which , together with all explanatory matter thereon, is thereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Ordinance . The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Chairman or the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk and bearing the seal of the City under the following words : "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in SECTION 403 of Ordinance No . 2022 of The City of Blair, Nebraska , together with the date of the adoption of this Ordinance ."

SECTION 404  ZONING MAP CHANGES

If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance changes are made in the district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map such changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the City Council with an entry on the Official Zoning Map the following change(s) were made in the Official Zoning Map : (brief
 
description of nature of change)" , which entry shall be signed by the Chairman or the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this Ordinance .

Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance and punishable as provided under Section 1702.

Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may, from time to time, be made or published , the Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the office of the City Administrator shall be the final authorized as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings , and other strnctures in the City.

SECTION 405  RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES

Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map the following rnles shall apply :

1.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways , or alleys shall be constrned to follow such center lines;

2.	.  Boundaries  indicated  as  approximately  following  platted  lot  lines  shall  be constrned as following such lot lines;

3.	Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be constrned as following such city limits;

4.	Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be constrned to be midway between the main tracks;

5.	Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be constrned to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be constrned as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be constrned to follow such center lines;

6.	Boundaries indicated  as parallel to or extensions offeatures indicated in subsection I through 5 above shall be so constrned . Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined  by the scale of the map ;

7.	Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections I through 6 above, the City Council shall interpret the district boundaries .
 
8.	Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this Ordinance the City Board of Zoning Adjustment may permit , as an exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot.

SECTION 406  ANNEXATION RULE

All territory which may hereafter be annexed to the zoning area shall be in the RL Residential Low Density District unless otherwise designated .












































(END OF SECTION)
 
(Blank Page)
 
ARTICLE 5.  AGG  AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS

The purposes and objectives of the Agricultural Districts are to preserve land best suited for agriculture from the encroachment of incompatible uses, to prevent the intmsion of urban development into agricultural areas which would make agricultural production uneconomical or impractical, to preserve in agricultural use land suited to eventual development in other uses until such time as streets, utilities and other community facilities may be provided or programmed as to ensure the orderly and beneficial conversion of these lands to nonagricultural use; to provide appropriate locations for certain types of establishments primarily serving agricultural producers ; to permit the application of regulations to major agricultural areas of the City which will reflect basic physical differences and attractions among such areas.

SECTION 501  AGG  GENERAL AGRICULTURAL  DISTRICT

501.1	INTENT . The intent of this district is to recognize the transition between agricultural uses of land and the community ; to encourage the continued use of that land which is suitable for agriculture, but limit any land uses that may be detrimental to normal community expansion .

501.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : The following shall be permitted as uses by right.

(1)	Any form of agriculture including the raising of crops, horticultural uses, animal husbandry , poultry husbandry and fisheries conforming to one animal unit per acre. Grain storage either publicly or privately owned , beyond 1,000 feet of the Blair corporate limits .

(2)	Single family dwellings .


(3)	Irrigation and flood control projects .


(4)	Signs subject to section 1114 of this ordinance .


(5)	Public utility and public service stmctures including electric transmission lines and distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings , public service pumping stations, and reservoirs .

(6)	Irrigation wells, water retention pits and silage bunkers , when in conformance with the following :
No irrigation wells, water retention pits, or re-use pits, or silage bunkers shall be located within thirty
(30) feet from any public right-of-way except that at township , county, state, or federal road intersections , such wells, pits, or bunkers must be located no closer than seventy (70) feet from the nearest intersection of the public right-of-way .

(7) Windbreaks , when in conformance with the following : No windbreaks consisting of planted trees and/or shmbs shall be located within thirty (30) feet from any public right-of-way , except that at township , county, state, or federal road intersections , such windbreaks must be located no closer than seventy (70) feet from the nearest intersection of public right-of-way .
 
501.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES  AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  accessory  uses and structures shall be permitted .

(1)	Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions . In accordance with Section 1103.02(1), there is no limit to the number of permitted accessory buildings .

(2)	Home occupations .


(3)	Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on the site.


501.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the AGG General Agricultural District in accordance with Article 14 of this Ordinance .

(1)	Airports and heliports including crop dusting strips;


(2)	Farm equipment service and repair ; veterinary services; commercial auction yards and barns; bulk storage of petroleum products for distribution or direct sales to agricultural consumers ;

(3)	Public and quasi-public uses of an education, recreational , or religious type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges ; nursery schools, private nonprofit schools and colleges ; churches, parsonages , and other religious institutions .

(4)	Agricultural service establishments primarily engaged in performing agricultural , animal husbandry or horticultural services on a fee or contract basis; agricultural product milling  and processing ; commercial grain warehouses ; establishments engaged in performing services such as crop dusting, fruit picking , grain cleaning, harvesting and plowing ; farm equipment services and repair.

(5)	Community facilities and institutions including monasteries , convents and other religious institutions ; public and private philanthropic and charitable institutions ; cemeteries ; hospitals , sanitariums, nursing homes and rest homes ; private , noncommercial clubs and lodges;

(6)	Public uses of an administrative , public service or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other buildings , structures, and facilities;

(7)	Penal institutions ;


(8)	Sewage treatment plants for primary and secondary treatment ; public and private sanitary land fills; gravel plants and asphalt or concrete batch plants ;

(9)	Salvage yards ;


(10)	Dirt, soil, sand , gravel, and rock borrow pits and processing  sites;
 

(11)	Boarding and training or breeding kennels ;


(12)	Gas and oil wells;


(13)	Agricultural retail and wholesale establishments and grocery stores, service stations and restaurants for convenience of mral areas;

(14)	Commercial feedlots, as defined in Section 303 .01, subject to the Department ofEnvironmental Quality 's Rules and Regulations pertaining to Livestock Waste Control, as amended .

(15)	Commercial auction yards and barns.


(16)	Single family residences , including mobile homes, for farm residents adjacent to the principal farm residence for occupation by relatives of consanguinity and marriage or for farmhands employed on the premises .

(17)	Family day care home, group day care home, or day care center.


(18)	Tmck sales, both new and used .


(19)	Contractor yards .


(20)	Golf Courses and Driving Ranges .


(21)	Mobile Home Parks, Campgrounds .


(22)	Private or Public Covered Bridges . Since covered bridges may cross or be located along property lines, the Planning Commission and City Council may waive the Minimum Yard Requirements for Primary Buildings and Accessory Buildings as well as the Creeks/Water Course Setback Requirements as part of their consideration of the conditional use permit.

501.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :  The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of
this Ordinance , the following regulations shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the AGG General Agricultural District.

(1)	Airport sites shall be so situated that the airport hazard area defined by the Nebraska Department of Aeronautics shall not include any existing obstmction regardless of public or private ownership of the airport .

(2)	Any use involving a business , service or process not completely enclosed in a stmcture, when located on a site abutting on or across a street or an alley from any Residential District , shall be screened by a solid fence or masonry wall or a compact growth of natural plant materials not less than six (6) feet in height ifthe Governing Body finds said use to be unsightly .
 
(3)	Commercial feedlots are not allowed within one (1) mile of the City ofBlair's corporate limits . No commercial feedlot shall be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of an existing residential structure other than that of the owner, operator or employee of the feedlot, nor shall a residential structure other than that of the owner, operator, or employee be located within one-thousand (1,000) feet of an existing feedlot.

(4)	No salvage or wrecking yard shall be located within five-hundred (500) feet of any public right-of-way or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any Residential District. Salvage and wrecking yards shall be screened on all sides by a solid fence or masonry wall or a compact growth of natural plant materials not less than eight (8) feet in height.

(5)	For borrow pits, the owner must submit grading plans(s) showing final grades, amounts, and material to be removed , method and direction of hauling , sediment control plan to restrict materials from washing on to or into public and/or private property , final seeding specifications, proposed dust and other airborne debris control plan, and a time table necessary for completion of the work.

(6)	Borrow area containing 20,000 square feet or more must submit a grading plan showing final grades, amount of material to be moved , a sediment control plan to restrict materials from eroding from the property , seeding specifications, and a time table necessary for completion of the work.

501.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All other uses and structures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from the AGG General Agricultural District.

501.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS   :
(1)	The minimum lot area for all uses prescribed in AGG District shall be ten (10) acres, except when a tract of at least three (3) acres is created as a result of the one lot split permitted after January 1, 1979 per Section 705 of the Blair Subdivision Regulations , and the second lot is greater than ten (10) acres.

(2)	The minimum lot width at the front building line shall be three-hundred (300) feet.


501.8	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS   :


(1) Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one-hundred twenty
(120) feet from the center line of a Federal Aid-Primary or Federal Aid-Secondary designated street or highway of fifty (50) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of not less than fifty (50) feet from the property line. These yard requirements shall apply to any yard abutting a public street or highway regardless of the lot being an interior or corner lot.

(2)	Rear yard : There shall be a minimum rear yard of not less than a depth of fifty (50) feet; provided , however , residential accessory structures and agricultural accessory structures, other than those that are used for the rearing , breeding , sheltering, or keeping oflivestock or other animals, including , but not limited to, cattle, swine, horses, sheep, goats, poultry , or domestic animals, may have a rear yard
 
setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.


(3)	Side yard : There shall be a minimum side yard of not less than fifty (50) feet; provided , however , residential accessory stmctures and agricultural accessory stmctures, other than those that are used for the rearing , breeding , sheltering, or keeping of livestock or other animals, including , but not limited to, cattle, swine, horses, sheep, goats, poultry , or domestic animals, may have a side yard setback of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.

501.085  ADDITIONAL   SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES :  In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no stmcture shall be installed or constmcted in violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .

501.9	MAXIMUM  LOT  COVERAGE :   No  limitation .


501.10	MAXIMUM  HEIGHT :   No  limitation .


501. 11 SIGN REGULA TIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

501.12 OFF-STREET PARKING : In granting a conditional use permit , the City Council may require that any or all of the proposed off-street parking be hard surfaced with either portland cement, concrete, or asphalt .

Notwithstanding the above, all such off-street parking shall comply with the provisions of Section
1111.03 of this Ordinance .


501.125    DRIVEWAYS :  Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .


501.13  UTILITY AND LOT AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL  STRUCTURES PER SECTION 1107
(1)	It shall be unlawful to occupy a residential stmcture or any building for living purposes that does not have an approved waste disposal system .

(2)	No waste absorption field (septic tank, cesspools, etc.) shall be constmcted any closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent property line.

(3)	There shall be no waste  absorption field located closer than fifty (50) feet from any other residential stmcture .

(4)	There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than one-hundred (100) feet from a water well, provided , however , where geology and subsurface conditions and topography would indicate that seepage could reach the well supply, a greater distance shall be required .

(5)	An individual residential waste absorption field shall contain a minimum often-thousand (10,000) square feet, exclusive of the area required by stmcture . The entire tract shall contain not less than twenty-thousand  (20,000) square feet.   If tract is less than two (2) acres, public water must be
 
available .























































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 6.  RESERVED



(Blank Page)
 
(Blank Page)
 
ARTICLE 7  R  RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

The purposes and objectives of the Residential Districts are to preserve and protect areas in the City which by their location, proximity to other land uses, the character of the natural environment , and accessibility to public services and facilities exhibit a high potential as living areas for the people . The regulations are intended to preserve the quality and character of existing residential neighborhoods , as well as encourage continuing maintenance and rehabilitation by insuring that incompatible uses of the land will not encroach upon the residential areas.

SECTION 701 RRE RURAL RESIDENTIAL ESTATE DISTRICT

701.1	INTENT : This district is intended primarily for application to subdivision of land in agricultural and scenic areas to : (a) permit the opportunity of developing estate-type lots which , because of their size, cannot be economically accommodated within urban areas; and (b) to encourage the provision of estate-type lots as a subdivision of land which will assure the provisions of at least those minimum physical improvements necessary to protect the health, safety and general welfare of people living on estate-type lots or parcels .

701.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  shall be permitted as uses by right :

(1)	Single-family  dwellings;


(2)	Raising of fruit and nut trees, vegetables and horticultural  specialties ;


(3)	Breeding , hatching , raising and fattening birds, rabbits, chinchillas, hamsters, or other small animals and fowl on a domestic and noncommercial basis, not to exceed one animal unit per acre, provided that no structure housing poultry or small animals shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line, or closer than twenty-five (25) feet to any dwelling on the site.

(4)	The raising or keeping of horses, not to exceed one (1) animal unit per acre provided that no stable shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any property line or to any dwelling on the site.

(5)	Public and private playgrounds , parks, community centers and other recreational facilities for communal use on an exclusive noncommercial basis .

(6)	Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings .


(7)	Public service pumping stations and/or elevated pressure tanks .


(8)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011. No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use .
 
701.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES : Accessory uses and stmcture normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and stmctures and to uses and stmctures permitted as exceptions shall be permitted .

701.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the RRE Rural Residential Estate District in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance .

(1)	Home  occupations .


(2)	Temporary subdivision sales offices and signs and model home display areas.


(3)	Signs subject to SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .


(4)	Family day care home, not operated within a private dwelling, group day care home, and day care center.

(5)	Borrow area.


(6)	Private or Public Covered Bridges . Since covered bridges may cross or be located along property lines, the Planning Commission and City Council may waive the Minimum Yard Requirements for Primary Buildings and Accessory Buildings as well as the Creeks/Water  Course Setback Requirements as part of their consideration of the conditional use permit.

701.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :  The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of
this Ordinance shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the RRE Rural Residential Estate District.

701.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All other uses and stmctures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from the RRE Rural Residential Estate District.

701.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS   :


(1)	The minimum lot area shall be :
(a)	Three (3) acres, in which case a private sewer and private well are permissible , or


(b)	1.25 acres up to 2 .99 acres with public water , or


(c)	30,000 square feet up to 1.249 acres with public water , sewer and paving .


(2)	Each lot shall have not less than eighty (80) feet of frontage, when a lot fronts on a cul-de-sac or loop street, where there are curbs and gutters and shall have not less than one hundred (100) feet of frontage where there are not curbs and gutters .
 
(3)	The minimum width of each lot shall be one hundred (100) feet.


(4)	Each lot shall have a depth of not less than one hundred fifty (150) feet.


701.8	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS   :


(1)	Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one-hundred (100) feet from the center line of Federal Aid-Primary or Federal Aid-Secondary  designated street or highway or fifty (50) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet from the property line. These yard requirements shall apply to any yard abutting a public street or highway regardless of the lot being an interior or corner lot.

(2)	Rear yard : The minimum rear yard of a principal strncture shall be twenty-five (25) feet.


(3)	Side yards : The minimum side yards of a principal strncture shall be ten (10) feet.


(4)	Distance between strnctures : The minimum distances between a single-family dwelling and another  strncture shall be ten (10) feet.

(5)	Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

(6)	YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS :
(A)	Side yard - Same as district in which accessory use is located except an accessory building may be located in the side yard as close as five (5) feet to the property line and/or ten
(10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater, providing it is located between the rear building line of the principle building and the rear property line and no building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way .

(B)	Front Yard - Accessory buildings may be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line, provided said accessory buildings meet front yard setback requirements only upon the approval of a conditional use permit. The conditional use permit may include but not limited to requirements for additional set back , landscaping , screening, etc.

(C)	Rear Yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line and/or within ten (10) feet of any other building , whichever is greater, and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way along the rear property line. Ifthe accessory building requires vehicular access perpendicular to an alley, a minimum fifteen (15) feet access driveway is required between  said accessory building and the alley.
701.085  ADDITIONAL   SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES :  In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no strncture shall be installed or constrncted in
 
violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .


701.09 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE : The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total lot area.

701. 10 MAXIMUM HEIGHT : The height of all strnctures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main strncture. The size limitations for accessory strnctures shall be subject to the provisions of SECTION 1103 and SECTION 1105 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City ofBlair, Nebraska .

701. 11 SIGN REGULA TIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

701.12 OFF-STREET PARKING : In granting a conditional use permit , the City Council may require that any or all of the proposed off-street parking be hard surfaced with either portland cement, concrete, or asphalt .

Not withstanding the above, all such off street parking shall comply with the provisions of Section
1111.03 of this ordinance .


701.125   DRIVEWAYS :    Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .


701.13 ADDITIONAL PAYING AND OTHER IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS : In addition
to the other requirements set forth above, the  following conditions shall  be required for any subdivision of land in the Rural Estate District :

(1)	Paving Requirement-For any subdivision of land which has any platted lot(s) with an area of thirty thousand square feet up to 1.25 acres, all streets, curb and gutter shall be paved with asphaltic concrete or concrete in conformance with Section 603, et. seq. of the Subdivision Regulations for the City of Blair, Nebraska , and shall also have a public water supply system and a wastewater distribution system that conforms to the rnles and regulations established by the State of Nebraska , Department of Environmental Quality Rules and Regulations (See Title 124 Chapter 4 of the DEQ Regulations , as amended from time to time)

(2)	For any subdivision ofland which has any platted lot(s) with a minimum lot size of 1.25 acres up to 2 .99 acres, such subdivision shall have a public water supply system and shall have a wastewater distribution system that conforms to the rnles and regulations established by the State of Nebraska , Department of Environmental Quality 's Rules and Regulations (See Title 124 Chapter 4 of the DEQ Regulations , as amended from time to time)
(3)	For any subdivision of land which has a minimum lot size of 3 acres, the developer must include, as part of the preliminary plat and final, at least one soil percolation test for every five lots spaced evenly throughout the subdivision and shall have a wastewater distribution system that conforms to the rnles and regulation established by the State of Nebraska , Department of Environmental Quality 's Rules and Regulations (See Title 124 Chapter 4 of the DEQ Regulations as amended from time tot time)
 

(4)	For any subdivision zoned Rural Residential Estate District shall contain a minimum of four lots or be contiguous to land previously zoned as Rural Residential Estate District.

701. 14 UTILITY AND LOT AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL  STRUCTURES PER SECTION 1107
(1)	It shall be unlawful to occupy a residential strncture or any building for living purposes that does not have an approved waste disposal system .

(2)	No waste absorption field (septic tank, cesspools, etc.) shall be constrncted any closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent property line.

(3)	There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than fifty (50) feet from any other residential strncture.

(4)	There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than fifty (100) feet from a water well provided ; however , where geology and subsurface conditions and topography would indicate that seepage could reach the well supply, a greater distance shall be required .

(5)	An individual residential waste absorption field shall contain a minimum of ten-thousand (10,000) square feet, exclusive of the area required by strncture. The entire tract shall contain not less than twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet. Iftract is less than two (2) acres, public water must be available .



























(END OF SECTION)
 
(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 702  RL  RESIDENTIAL LOW DENSITY DISTRICT

702.1	INTENT : This district is intended primarily to provide living areas within the City where development is limited to low density concentrations of one-family dwellings where regulations are designed to accomplish the following : To promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life; to provide space for community facilities needed to complement urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment ; to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of a utilities and public facilities designed to service only one-family residential uses in accord with standards of the comprehensive plan .

702.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  shall be permitted as uses by right :

(1)	Single-family   dwellings .


(2)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on undeveloped lots not in a platted subdivision or on subdivision lots which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011 . No subdivision lot or developed parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty
(50) feet from any other Use .


702.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES  AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  accessory uses and structures shall be permitted :

(1) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions .

702.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the RL Residential Low Density District in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance :

(1)	Home occupations and home professional offices, except barber and beauty shops;


(2)	Public and quasi-public uses of an education, recreational , or religious type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges ; nursery schools, private nonprofit schools and colleges ; churches, parsonages , and other religious institutions ;

(3)	Public and private charitable institutions ;


(4)	Public uses of an administrative , public service or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings , structures, and facilities;

(5)	Cemeteries, with or without  columbarium ;
 

(6)	Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings, public service pumping stations, and/or elevated pressure tanks;

(7)	Signs subject to SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .


(8)	Family day care home, not operated within a private dwelling, group day care home, or day care center.

702.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :  The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of
this Ordinance shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the RL Residential Low Density District.

702.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All other uses and structures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from the RL Residential Low Density District.

702.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS   :


(1)	The minimum lot area for single family dwellings shall be twelve-thousand (12,000) square feet;


(2)	Each lot shall have not less than fifty (50) feet of frontage when a lot fronts on a cul-de-sac or loop street.

(3)	The minimum width of each lot shall be eighty (80) feet;


(4)	Each lot shall have a depth of not less than one-hundred (100) feet.


(5)	Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

702.8	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS   :


(1)	Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one hundred (100) feet from the center line of a Federal Aid Primary or Federal Aid Secondary designated street or highway or thirty five (35) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of twenty five (25) feet.

(2)	Rear yard :  The minimum rear yard of a principal structure shall be twenty five (25)  feet.


(3)	Side yards : The minimum side yards of a principal structure shall be nine (9) feet.
a.	On the street side of a corner lot, side yards shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet.
For lots platted prior to July 1, 1994, side yards shall not be less than twelve and one-half (12.5) feet.
 
b.	. A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
c.	Attached garages or carports fronting on the side yard of a corner lot platted prior to July
1, 1994 shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sidewalk, or twenty (20) feet from the property line if no sidewalk exists, on a straight driveway approach, or fifteen (15) feet from the property line where the garage opening is perpendicular to the property line requiring a curved driveway approach .
d . The side yard requirements as set forth herein shall not apply to the common fire walls and the line thereof extended to the front and rear property lines of attached single family dwellings or town houses .

(4)	Distance between stmctures : The minimum distances between a single family dwelling and another stmcture shall be ten (10) feet. Each unit of an attached single family dwelling shall not be considered a separate stmcture for the purpose of this section.

(5)	YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS :


(A)	Side yard
a.	An accessory building may be located in the side yard as close as five (5) feet to the property line and/or ten (10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater, providing it is located between the rear building line of the principle building and the rear property line.
b.	. No building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way
c.	Accessory buildings or carports fronting on the side yard of a corner lot shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sidewalk, or twenty (20) feet from the property line if no sidewalk exists, on a straight driveway approach, or fifteen (15) feet from the property line where the garage opening is perpendicular to the property line requiring a curved driveway approach .

(B)	Front Yard - Lots of less than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet shall have no accessory buildings located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line. Lots of forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet or greater may have accessory buildings located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line only upon the approval of a conditional use permit, provided  said accessory buildings meet front yard setback requirements . The conditional use permit may include but not be limited to requirements for additional set back , landscaping, screening, etc. The conditional use shall last through the legal existence of the primary use .

(C)	Rear Yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line and/or within ten (10) feet of any other building, whichever is greater, and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right­ of-way along the rear property line. If the accessory building requires vehicular access perpendicular to an alley, a minimum fifteen (15) feet access driveway is required between said accessory building and the alley.
 

702 .085   ADDITIONAL    SETBACK   REQUIREMENTS   - CREEKS/WATER   COURSES :	In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no structure shall be installed or constructed in violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .

702 .09 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE : The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.
702 . 10 MAXIMUM HEIGHT : The height of all structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main structure. The size limitations for accessory structures shall be subject to the provisions of SECTION 1103 and SECTION 1105 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City ofBlair, Nebraska .

702 . 11 SIGN REGULATIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

702 . 12  OFF-STREET PARKING : Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions  of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

702 . 125  DRIVEWAYS :  Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .


702 . 13 UTILITY AND LOT AREA FOR RESIDENTIAL  STRUCTURES PER SECTION 1107
(1)	It shall be unlawful to occupy a residential structure or any building for living purposes that does not have an approved waste disposal system .

(2)	No waste absorption field (septic tank, cesspools, etc.) shall be constructed any closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent property line.

(3)	There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than fifty (50) feet from any other residential structure.

(4)	There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than fifty (100) feet from a water well provided ; however , where geology and subsurface conditions and topography would indicate that seepage could reach the well supply, a greater distance shall be required .

(5)	An individual residential waste absorption field shall contain a minimum of ten-thousand (10,000) square feet, exclusive of the area required by structure. The entire tract shall contain not less than twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet. Iftract is less than two (2) acres, public water must be available .








(END OF SECTION)
 
SECTION 703  RM  RESIDENTIAL MEDIUM DENSITY DISTRICT

703.1	INTENT : This district is intended primarily to provide living areas within the City where development is limited to medium density concentrations of one-family dwellings where regulations are designed to accomplish the following : To promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life; to provide space for areas and for institutions which require a residential environment ; to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities and public facilities designed to service only one-family residential uses in accord with standards of the comprehensive plan .

703.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  shall be permitted as uses by right :

(1)   Single-family dwellings .


703.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES  AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  accessory uses and structure shall be permitted :

(1)	Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions .

(2)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on undeveloped lots not in a platted subdivision or on subdivision lots which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011 . No subdivision lot or developed parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty
(50) feet from any other Use .


703.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the RM Residential Medium Density District in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance .

(1)	Home occupations and home professional offices.


(2)	Public and quasi-public uses of an educational , recreational or religious type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools; high schools and colleges ; churches, nursery schools; private nonprofit schools and colleges ; parsonages , and other religious institutions, public parks, public playgrounds ;

(3)	Public and private charitable institutions ;


(4)	Public uses of an administrative , public service or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings , structures, and facilities;

(5)	Cemeteries, with or without  columbarium ;
 

(6)	Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings ,
public service pumping stations, and/or elevated pressure tanks;


(7)	Convalescent , nursing and rest homes ;


(8)	Hospitals, medical and dental clinics and other medical and health facilities;
(9)	Two family dwellings;


(10)	Attached single family dwellings;


(11)	Residential condominiums with two (2) living units pursuant to Section  1116.


(12)	Signs subject to SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .


(13)	Family day care home, not operated within a private dwelling, group day care home, or day care center.

(14)	Mortuaries , funeral homes and funeral chapels .


703.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :  The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of
this Ordinance shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the RM Residential Medium Density District.

703.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All other uses and strnctures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from the RM Residential Medium Density District.

703.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS   :
(1)	The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings shall be seven thousand two-hundred (7,200) square feet; the minimum lot area for two family dwellings and attached single family dwellings shall be twelve thousand (12,000) square feet and the minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet.

(2)	Each lot shall have not less than forty (40) feet of frontage when a lot fronts on a cul-de-sac or loop street except any lot with a two family dwelling or attached single family dwelling shall have not less than sixty (60) feet of frontage when a lot fronts on a cul-de-sac or loop street.

(3)	The minimum width of each lot shall be seventy (70) feet provided , however , the minimum lot requirement shall not apply to individual dwelling units of attached single family dwellings .

(4)	Each lot shall have a depth of not less than ninety (90) feet.


(5)	Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for
 
rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side. 703 .08  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS :

(1)	Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one hundred (100) feet from the center line of a Federal Aid Primary or Federal Aid Secondary designated street or

highway or thirty five (35) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of twenty five (25) feet from the property line.

(2)	Rear yard : The minimum rear yard of a principal strncture shall be twenty five (25) feet.


(3)	Side yards : The minimum side yards of a principal strncture shall be seven (7) feet.
a.	On the street side of a corner lot, side yards shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet.
For lots platted prior to July 1, 1994, side yards shall not be less than twelve and one-half (12.5) feet.
b.	.	A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall not be less than ten
(10) feet.
c.	Attached garages or carports fronting on the side yard of a corner lot platted prior to July 1, 1994 shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sidewalk, or twenty (20) feet from the property line if no sidewalk exists, on a straight driveway approach, or fifteen (15) feet from the property line where the garage opening is perpendicular to the property line requiring a curved driveway approach .
d . The side yard requirements as set forth herein shall not apply to the common fire walls and the line thereof extended to the front and rear property lines of attached single family dwellings or town houses .

(4)	Distance between strnctures : The minimum distances between a residential strncture and another strncture shall be ten (10) feet.  Each unit of an attached single family dwelling shall not be considered a separate  strncture for the purpose  of this  section.

(5)	YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS :


(A)	Side yard -
a.	An accessory building may be located in the side yard as close as five (5) feet to the property line and/or ten (10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater, providing it is located between the rear building line of the principle building and the rear property line.
b.	. No building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way
c.	Accessory buildings or carports fronting on the side yard of a corner lot shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sidewalk, or twenty (20) feet from the property line if no sidewalk exists, on a straight driveway approach, or fifteen (15) feet from the property line where the garage opening is perpendicular to the property line requiring a curved driveway approach .
 
(B)	Front Yard - No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line.

(C)	Rear Yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line and/or within ten (10) feet of any other building , whichever is greater, and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right­ of-way along the rear property line. If the accessory building requires vehicular access perpendicular to an alley, a minimum fifteen (15) feet access driveway is required between said accessory building and the alley.

703 .085   ADDITIONAL    SETBACK   REQUIREMENTS   - CREEKS/WATER   COURSES :     In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no strncture shall be installed or constrncted in violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .

703 .09 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE : The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.

703 . 10 MAXIMUM HEIGHT : The height of all strnctures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main strncture. The size limitations for accessory strnctures shall be subject to the provisions of SECTION 1103 and SECTION 1105 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City ofBlair, Nebraska .

703 . 11 SIGN REGULATIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

703 . 12  OFF-STREET PARKING : Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions  of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

703 . 125  DRIVEWAYS :    Driveways  shall be paved  as per section 303 .01(51.5) .





















(END OF SECTION)
 
SECTION 704  RML  MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL LOW DENSITY DISTRICT

704.1	INTENT: This district is intended primarily to provide living areas within the City where development is limited to low density concentrations of multiple-family dwellings and single family dwellings which are compatible in character and density with the multiple-family residential environment where regulations are designed to accomplish the following: To promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life; to provide space for community facilities needed to compliment urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment; to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities and public facilities designed to service only residential and residential service uses in accord with standards of the comprehensive plan.

704.2	PERMITTED   PRINCIPAL   USES   AND   STRUCTURES:    The  following   shall  be
permitted as uses by right;

(1)	Single family dwellings;

(2)	Two family dwellings;

(3)	Attached single family dwellings;

(4)	Residential condominiums with two (2) living units pursuant to Section  1116;

(5)	Churches, parsonages, and other religious  institutions;

(6)	Public parks, public playgrounds.

(7)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011. No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use. Parcels three
(3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use.

704.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES: The following accessory uses and structures shall be permitted.

(1) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions.

704.4	EXCEPTIONS: After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the RML Multi-Family Residential Low Density District in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance:

(1)	Home occupations and home professional offices;
 
(2)	Public and quasi-public uses of an educational, recreational or religious type including public and parochial elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools and colleges; nursery schools; private nonprofit schools and colleges.

(3)	Public and private charitable institutions;

(4)	Public uses of an administrative, public service or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings, structures and facilities;

(5)	Cemeteries, with or without columbarium;

(6)	Electrical   distribution   substations,   gas  regulator   stations,   communications   equipment buildings, public service pumping stations, and/or elevated pressure tanks;

(7)	Convalescent, nursing and rest homes;

(8)	Hospitals, medical and dental clinics and other medical and health facilities;

(9)	Professional  offices;

(10)	Mortuaries, funeral homes and funeral chapels;

(11)	Mobile home parks under prescribed conditions of SECTION 1112.02 of this Ordinance;

(12)	Signs subject to SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance;

(13)	Multi-family dwellings, to a maximum of six units.

(14)	Residential condominiums, to a maximum of six (6) living units pursuant to Section  1116.

(15)	Family day care home, not operated within a private dwelling, group day care home, or day care center.

16)	Parking lots.

17)	Boarding and rooming houses.

704.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS:  The requirements of ARTICLE  14 of
this  Ordinance  shall  apply  as  minimum  requirements   for  granting  exceptions  in  the  RML Multi-family Residential Low Density District.

704.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES: All other uses and structures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from the RML Multi-family Residential Low Density District.
704.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS:
 
(1)	The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings shall be six thousand (6,000) square feet;

(2)	The minimum lot area for two family, attached single family dwellings, shall be eight thousand (8,000) square feet, each additional unit shall have a minimum lot area of four thousand (4,000) square feet per dwelling unit;

(3)	Each lot shall have not less than forty (40) feet of frontage when a lot fronts on a cul-de-sac or loop street except any lot with a two family dwelling or attached single family dwelling shall have not less than sixty (60) feet of frontage when a lot fronts on a cul-de-sac or loop street;

(4)	The minimum width of each lot shall be sixty (60) feet provided, however, the minimum width requirement shall not apply to individual dwelling units of attached single family dwellings.

(5)	Each lot shall have a depth of not less than eighty (80) feet.

(6)	Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

704.8	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS:

(1)	Front yard: There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one hundred (100) feet from the center line of a Federal Aid Primary or Federal Aid Secondary designated street or highway or thirty five (35) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of twenty (20) feet from the property line.

(2)	Rear yard: The minimum rear yard of a principal structure shall be ten (10) feet, provided, however, if the principal structure is other than a single family dwelling and the site abuts a residential district without separation by an alley, the minimum rear yard shall be fifteen (15) feet.

(3)	Side yards: The minimum side yard of a principal structure shall be seven (7) feet.
a.	On the street side of a comer lot, side yards shall not be less than ten (10) feet.

b.	A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall be not less than ten
(10)      feet.

c.	The minimum side yard shall be nine (9) feet for any site adjacent to a RL Residential Low Density District.

d.	Attached garages or carports fronting on the side yard of a comer lot shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sidewalk, or twenty (20) feet from the property line if no sidewalk exists, on a straight driveway approach, or fifteen (15) feet from the property line where the garage opening is perpendicular to the property  line requiring a curved driveway approach.
 
e.	The side yard requirements as set forth herein shall not apply to the common fire walls and the line thereof extended to the front and rear property lines of attached single family dwellings or town houses.

(4)	Distance between structures: The minimum distances  between a residential structure and another structure shall be ten (10) feet. Each unit of an attached single family dwelling shall not be considered a separate structure for the purpose of this section.

(5)	YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY  BUILDINGS:

(A)	Side yard -
a.	An accessory building may be located in the side yard as close as five (5) feet to the property line and/or ten (10) feet from any other building, whichever is greater, providing it is located between the rear building line of the principle building and the rear property line.

b.	No building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way

c.	Accessory buildings or carports fronting on the side yard of a comer lot shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sidewalk, or twenty (20) feet from the property line if no sidewalk exists, on a straight driveway approach, or fifteen (15) feet from the property line where the garage opening is perpendicular to the property line	requiring a curved driveway approach.

(B)	Front Yard - No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line.

(C)	Rear Yard - Unless specifically permitted, no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line and/or within ten (10) feet of any other building, whichever is greater, and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way along the rear property line. If the accessory building requires vehicular access perpendicular to an alley, a minimum fifteen (15) feet access driveway is required between said accessory building and the alley.

704.085 ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS - CREEK/WATER COURSES: In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements, no structure shall be installed or constructed in violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance.

704.9	MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE: The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.

704.10	MAXIMUM HEIGHT: The height of all structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main structure. The size limitations for accessory structures shall be subject to the provisions of SECTION 1103 and SECTION 1105 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City of Blair, Nebraska.
 
704.11	SIGN REGULATIONS:  All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance.

704.12	0FF-STREET PARKING:  Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions of Section 204 of this Ordinance.

704.125   DRIVEWAYS:  Driveways shall be paved as per section 303.01(51.5).















































(END OF SECTION)
 


(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 705  RMH  MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL HIGH DENSITY DISTRICT

705.1	INTENT : This district is intended primarily to provide living areas within the City where development is limited to high density concentrations or multiple-family dwellings and single family dwellings which are compatible in character and density with the multiple-family residential environment where regulations are designed to accomplish the following ; to promote and encourage a suitable environment for family life; to provide space for community facilities needed  to compliment urban residential areas and for institutions which require a residential environment ; to minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of utilities and public facilities designed to service only residential  and residential  service uses in accord  with standards of the comprehensive  plan .

705.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : The following shall be permitted as uses by right.

(1) Single-family dwellings;


(2)	Attached  single family dwellings;


(3)	Two family dwellings;


(4)	Residential condominiums pursuant to Section 1116.


(5)	Multiple-family  dwellings with forty-eight  (48) or fewer living units .


(6)	Churches, parsonages and other religious institutions .


(7)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011. No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use .

705.3	PERMITTED  ACCESSORY  USES  AND  STRUCTURES :   The following  accessory uses and structures shall be permitted :

(1) Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions .

705.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the RMH Multi-Family Residential High Density District in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance :

(1) Home occupations and home professional offices;


(2)	Public and quasi-public uses of an educational , recreational or religious type including public and
 
parochial elementary schools, junior high schools and colleges ; nursery schools; private and nonprofit schools and colleges ; public parks, public playgrounds ;

(3)	Public and private charitable institutions ;


(4)	Public uses of an administrative , public service or cultural type including city, county, state or federal administrative centers and courts, libraries, museums, art galleries, police and fire stations and other public buildings , stmctures and facilities;

(5)	Cemeteries, with or without  columbarium ;


(6)	Electrical distribution substations, gas regulator stations, communications equipment buildings ,
public service pumping stations, and/or elevated pressure tanks;


(7)	Convalescent , nursing and rest homes ;


(8)	Boarding and rooming houses;


(9)	Hospitals, medical and dental clinics and other medical and health facilities;


(10)	Professional offices;


(11)	Mortuaries , funeral homes and funeral chapels;


(12)	Signs subject to SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance ;


(13)	Family day care home, not operated within a private dwelling, group day care home, or day care center;

(14)	Multiple family dwellings with greater than forty-eight (48) living units;


(15)	Parking lots.


705.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :  The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of
this Ordinance shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the RMH Multi-Family Residential High Density District.

705.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All other uses and stmctures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from theRMHMulti-family Residential High Density District.

705.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS   :
(1)	The minimum lot area for single-family dwellings shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet;


(2)	The minimum lot area for multiple family dwelling units : (2) to (6) units = three thousand
 
(3,000) square feet per unit. Each additional unit shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit.

(3)	Each lot shall have not less than forty (40) feet of frontage when a lot fronts on a cul-de-sac or loop street.
(4)	The minimum width of each lot shall be sixty (60) feet.


(5)	Each lot shall have a depth of not less than eighty (80) feet.


(6)	Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

705.8	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS   :


(1)	Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one hundred (100) feet from the center line of a Federal Aid Primary or Federal Aid Secondary designated street or highway or thirty five (35) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of fifteen (15) feet from the property line.

(2)	Rear yard : The minimum rear yard of a principal strncture shall be ten (10) feet, provided , however , if the principal strncture is other than a single family dwelling and the site abuts a residential district without separation by an alley, the minimum rear yard shall be fifteen (15) feet.

(3)	Side yards : The minimum side yards of a principal strncture shall be seven (7) feet.
a.	On the street side of a corner lot, side yards shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
b.	. A side yard providing access to more than one dwelling unit shall be not less than ten (10) feet.
c.	The minimum side yard shall be nine (9) feet for any site adjacent to a RL   Residential
Low Density District.
d . Attached garages or carports fronting on the side yard of a corner lot shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sidewalk, or twenty (20) feet from the property line if no  sidewalk exists, on a straight driveway approach, or fifteen (15) feet from the property line where the garage opening is perpendicular to the property line requiring a curved driveway approach .
e. The side yard requirements as set forth herein shall not apply to the common fire walls and the line thereof extended to the front and rear property lines of attached single family dwellings or town houses .

(4)	Distance between strnctures : The minimum distances between a residential strncture and another strncture shall be ten (10) feet.  Each unit of an attached single family dwelling shall not be considered a separate  strncture for the purpose  of this  section.

(5)	YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS :
 
(A)	Side yard -
a.	An accessory building may be located in the side yard as close as five (5) feet to the property line  and/or ten (10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater, providing it is located between the rear building line of the principle building and the rear property line.
b.	. No building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way
c.	Accessory buildings or carports fronting on the side yard of a corner lot shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the sidewalk, or twenty (20) feet from the property line if no sidewalk exists, on a straight driveway approach, or fifteen (15) feet from the property line where the garage opening is perpendicular to the property line requiring a curved driveway approach .

(B)	Front Yard - No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line.

(C)	Rear Yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line and/or within ten (10) feet of any other building , whichever is greater, and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right­ of-way along the rear property line. If the accessory building requires vehicular access perpendicular to an alley, a minimum fifteen (15) feet access driveway is required between said accessory building and the alley.

705.085  ADDITIONAL  SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES :   In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no structure shall be installed or constructed in violation of section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .

705.09 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE : The maximum lot coverage shall not exceed seventy (70) percent of the total lot area.

705. 10 MAXIMUM HEIGHT : The height of all structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main structure. The size limitations for accessory structures shall be subject to the provisions of SECTION 1103 and SECTION 1105 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City ofBlair, Nebraska .

705. 11 SIGN REGULATIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

705. 12 OFF-STREET PARKING : Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions  of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

705. 125  DRIVEWAYS :    Driveways  shall be paved  as per section 303 .01(51.5) .



(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 8  ACH AGRICULTURAL/BUSINESS  AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS

The several classes of business and commercial districts included in this Ordinance are designed to provide the opportunity for the various types of retail stores, offices, service establishments and wholesale business to concentrate for the convenience of the public ; to be established in such relationships to each other as to be mutually beneficial ; and to be located and grouped on sites that are in logical proximity to the respective geographical areas and respective categories of patrons which they serve.

SECTION 801  ACH AGRICULTURAL/HIGHWAY  COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

801.1	INTENT : The ACH Agricultural/Highway Commercial District is intended primarily for application to areas along major highway entrances to a community in accord with policies of the comprehensive plan for controlled access to the highway is afforded for the convenience of patrons traveling the highway . For the purposes of Section 77-1343 R.R.S . Neb . the predominant use for this district is agricultural and horticultural uses .

801.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : The following shall be permitted as uses by right except when located within 200 feet of any Residential District , in which case a conditional use permit will be required to allow the following uses :

(1)	Retail and Service which provide services or supply commodities primarily for the convenience of  patrons traveling on state highways and major county road  entrances to the community including :
Auditorium , exhibition hall, club
Auto and truck parts stores (retail only) Athletic complexes and health centers
Barber, beauty , tanning , and manicure shops Bars, cocktail lounges or nightclubs
Boat sales and services Bowling alley
Bus depots and transit stations
Car and truck sales, both new and used , with full service and repairs Car wash
Convenience stores with gasoline sales Dry cleaning and laundry establishments Feed , grain, and fertilizer sales
Furniture stores
Garden and lawn supplies stores, nurseries and greenhouses Hotels and motels
Ice cream and confectionery stores Lumber and building materials Offices
Plumbing and heating services Recreational vehicle sales and service
 
Rental and lease establishments , inside storage only Restaurants , including drive-in restaurants
Sign Shops Soda fountains Theaters
Veterinary  services and  small animal hospitals


(2)	Any principal permitted use in the CCB - Central Business District as specified in Section 802.02 if the total strncture or building contains principal uses and strnctures specified in Section 802.02 and such building or strncture contains 7,500 square feet or more .

(3)	Signs subject to SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .


(4)	Road side rest areas.


(5)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011 . No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use .

801.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES  AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  accessory uses and strnctures shall be permitted :

(1)	Accessory uses and strnctures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and strnctures shall be permitted including the following :

(2)	Offices and retail stores incidental to and on the same site with a highway commercial establishment prescribed in SECTION 801.02 of this Ordinance .

801.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the A/CH Highway Commercial District in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance .

(1)	Automobile service stations


(2)	Car and trnck detailing shops; provided that no repair garage work is done


(3)	Repair Garages


(4)	Car and trnck sales, both new and used , without full service and repairs


(5)	Mini-storage units


(6)	Contract constrnction offices and services, when all materials are contained within the walls of
 
the building


(7)	Farm implement  and  farm machinery  fabrication , sales and  service, and farm equipment  and supplies, sales and  service

(8)	Mobile Home sales


(9)	Amusement parks ; carnivals, circuses, outdoor festivals and  other  transient  amusement enterprises ; drive-in theaters ; golf driving ranges ; pony rings ; skating rinks ; and miniature golf course;

(10)	Churches and other religious institutions ;


(11)	Private clubs and lodges;


(12)	Public buildings and grounds;


(13)	Go-Cart  race tracks .


(14)	Overnight recreational vehicle parking areas limited to six spaces in conjunction with another permitted use .

(15)	Multi-family   dwellings .


(16)	Family day care home, group day care home, or day care center.


(17)	Public Utility strnctures, services and facilities


(18)	Any principal permitted use in the CCB - Central Business District as specified in Section 802.02 if the total strncture or building contains principal uses and strnctures specified in Section 802.02 and such building or strncture contains less than 7,500 square feet.

(19)	Rental  and  lease  establishments ,  outside  storage; provided  however ,  no  rental  or  lease establishments for constrnction equipment shall be allowed .

801.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :  The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of
this Ordinance shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the A/CH Highway Commercial District.

(1)	Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from any R Residential District , a solid wall or fence, vine covered open fence or compact evergreen hedge six (6) feet in height shall be located on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard .

(2)	Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted use or conditional use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence six (6) feet in height , provided that no
 
materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence.


(3)	No use shall be permitted and no process , equipment or materials shall be used which are found by the Governing Body to be objectionable to persons living or working in the vicinity by reasons of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried waste, noise, vibrations , illumination , glare or unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion .

801.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All other uses and stmctures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from the A/CH Highway Commission District.

801.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS   :
(1)	The minimum lot areas shall be eight thousand (8,000) square feet.


(2)	Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. Curb cuts  for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

801.8	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS   :
(1)	Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one hundred (100) feet from the center line of a Federal Aid-Primary or Federal Aid-Secondary designated  street or highway or thirty-five (35) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of twenty (20) feet from the property line. These yard requirements shall apply to any yard abutting a Federal Aid-Primary or Federal Aid-Secondary designated street or highway regardless of the lot being an interior or corner lot.

(2)	Rear yard : The minimum rear yard five (5) feet except when abutting a RResidential District(s) set back shall be ten (10) feet.

(3)	Side yard : The minimum side yard five (5) feet except when abutting a R Residential District(s) set back shall be ten (10) feet.

(4)	Distance between stmctures : The minimum distances between a residential or other principal stmcture and another stmcture shall be ten (10) feet.

(5)	Additional set back requirements for multi-family dwellings : In addition to all other minimum rear, side, and front yard requirements herein, there shall be a minimum set back requirement of one hundred twenty (120) feet from the property line bordering on any street or highway for any multi-family dwelling unit which has been allowed pursuant to Section 801.04 herein .

(6)	An additional set back requirement to all other minimum rear, side, and front yard requirements for antennas and transmitting stmctures shall be a minimum set back requirement equal to the height of said antenna or transmitting stmcture . Additionally no antenna or transmitting stmcture shall be located within a distance equal to the height of the tower of any utility transmission lines serving the
 
premises  other than lines exclusively  serving the premises upon which the tower is located .


(7)	YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS :
(A)	Side yard - Same as district in which accessory use is located except an accessory building may be located in the side yard as close as five (5) feet to the property line and/or ten (10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater, providing it is located between the rear building line of the principle building and the rear property line and no building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way . If the accessory building abuts any "R" Residential District(s), the side yard requirement increases to ten (10) feet.

(B)	Front Yard - No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line.

(C)	Rear Yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line and/or within ten (10) feet of any other building , whichever is greater, and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way along the rear property line. Ifthe accessory building abuts any "R" Residential District(s) , the rear yard requirement increases to ten (10) feet.

801.085  ADDITIONAL   SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES :  In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no strncture shall be installed or constrncted in violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .

801.09   MAXIMUM  LOT  COVERAGE :   No  limitations .


801. 10 MAXIMUM HEIGHT : No strncture shall exceed forty-five (45) feet except an antenna or transmitting strncture or by approval of a conditional use permit. .

801. 11 SIGN REGULA TIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

801.12	REPAIR GARAGE REQUIREMENT. In addition to all other restrictions and requirements as provided herein, in the circumstance of a repair garage, all vehicles or motorized equipment awaiting repair, under repair , and all parts and materials shall be screened on all sides by a solid fence or a masonry wall or compact growth or natural plant materials not less than eight feet in height. Such screened area shall be limited to an area behind the rear line of any building or strncture used as a repair garage on the premises .

801.13	CAR AND TRUCK SALES REQUIREMENTS : In addition to all other restrictions and requirements as provided herein, all areas which are used for the sale or storage of vehicles and are located within five hundred feet (500') of a Federal Aid-Primary or Federal Aid-Secondary designated street or highway shall be hard surfaced with concrete or asphalt . All lots shall provide and maintain a minimum often percent (10%) of the front yard as a permeable, uncovered and unused surface that contains grass, flowers, shrnbs, trees or other living material.
 
801.14	SCREENING REQUIREMENTS . Screening pursuant to this section shall be required between the A/CH - Highway Commercial District and any residential district except when there is a distance of not less than two hundred feet (200') from any residential structure in the residential district and any building , parking area, or any other construction or improvement except landscaping in the A/CH - Highway Commercial District. Screening pursuant to this section shall be required only at such time a building permit is obtained for improvements in the A/CH - Highway Commercial District , and the value of the improvements listed on said building permit is equal to or greater than 20% of the assessed valuation of the A/CH - Highway Commercial property being so improved .

(1)	The screening shall consist of a solid or semi solid fence or wall at least six (6) feet in height or hedges, shrubs, trees, or other living landscape which effectively provides a solid , dense, and opaque mass, and shall be not less than six (6) feet in height or by planting vegetation which shall reach a height  of not less than six (6) feet within three (3) years .

(2)	Landscaping - Required front and rear yards shall be landscaped . A landscaping plan shall be submitted contemporaneously  with the building permit application .  The landscaping shall be approved  by the City Administrator.

(3)	Said screening shall not be required where the A/CH - Highway Commercial District and residential district are divided by a street or alley with a right of way not less than fifty (50) feet in width .

(4)	Said screening requirement shall not be required where the wall of any building is greater than five (5) feet from the set back requirement within the A/CH - Highway Commercial District, and there are no windows or other openings except for doors for emergency purposes only.

(5)	In the event hedges, shrubs, trees or other living landscape is used for the screening one (1) break or opening in the screen not more than twenty (20) feet in width shall be permitted per business or use within the A/CH - Highway Commercial District unless the business or use has direct alley access from the business property without such break.

801. 15 OFF-STREET PARKING : Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions  of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

801.155   DRIVEWAYS :  Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .











(END OF SECTION)
 
SECTION 802 CCB CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT

802.1	INTENT : The intent of the CCB Central Business District is to provide a commercial areafor those establishments serving the general shopping needs of the trade area and in particular , those establishments customarily oriented to the pedestrian shopper. The grouping of uses is intended to strengthen the central business area as the urban center of trade, service, governmental and cultural activities .

802.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : The following shall be permitted as uses by right except when located within 200 feet of any Residential District , in which case a conditional use permit will be required to allow the following uses :

(1)	Offices;


(2)	Retail stores and service establishments which supply commodities or provide services primarily to meet the needs ofresidents of the trade area including :
Antique stores.
Apparel  and  accessory  stores. Art galleries .
Art supply and picture framing stores.
Automobile parts and supply stores; provided that no repair or installation service is performed on site; and further provided that no goods shall be stored or displayed for sale outside of the building .
Bakeries .
Banks, including  drive-in banks and  other lending agencies .
Barber and beautician services.
Beer, wine and alcoholic beverage establishments , on and off sale.
Bicycle shops.
Bookstores, rental  libraries  and  reading  rooms .
Bus depots and transit stations, provided that buses or other transit vehicles shall not be stored , serviced or repaired on site.
Camera, photographic supply stores. Civic, social and fraternal associations .
Community buildings owned  by public agencies .
Confectionery stores.
Convenience stores with sale of gasoline, provided that no repair service is performed on site. Computer sales and service.
Cleaning and laundering drop-off/pick-up stores, provided that cleaning and laundering is not conducted on these premises .
Clothing and costume rental establishments . Credit services, including loan offices. Dental services.
Detached  ATM banking facility .
Department stores.
Drapery, curtain and upholstery stores.
 
Drng and proprietary stores. Eating places, indoor and outdoor.
Electrical appliance sales and repair stores. Employment agencies .
Food stores, general retail. Florist shops.
Furniture and home furnishings stores.
Garden supply stores and nurseries , provided that all equipment, supplies, merchandise and plants, shall be kept within a completely enclosed building provided that fertilizer of any type shall be stored and sold in packaged form only.
Gift, novelty and souvenir stores. Hardware retail stores.
Health food stores.
Hobby and craft supply stores. Hotels, motels and apartment hotels .
Household appliance and sales and repair shops. Interior decorating shops.
Jewelry stores, including clock and watch repairing . Laundry, self-service and cleaning establishments . Leather goods and luggage stores.
Locksmiths  .
Mail order businesses , retail and wholesale . Massage and physical culture studios. Medical and orthopedic appliance stores. Music stores.
Music and dance studios.
Newspaper, printing and engraving shops. Newsstands and magazines stores.
Office furniture and supplies, retail stores. Office supply and business machine stores.
On-site signs, in accordance with provisions of section 1114. Paint , glass and wallpaper stores, retail.
Parcel delivery services.
Parking  lots, parking  garages and  other off-street parking  facilities .
Pet and pet supplies stores. Personnel and professional services. Photography studios.
Printing and engraving services.
Plumbing, heating and ventilating equipment showrooms with storage of floor samples only.
Radio and television broadcast studios.
Recreation centers, indoor only.
Sales and showrooms, including rental of equipment, provided all displays and merchandise are within the enclosed walls of the buildings .
Savings and loan associations .
Secondhand  stores and  pawnshops .
 
Secretarial, service and letter shops. Shoe repair services.
Shoe sales, retail.
Signs, and outdoor advertising strnctures in accordance with provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .
Sporting goods, retail and wholesale .
Stamp and coin stores. Stationary stores.
Stores or shops for the sale of retail goods.
Tailor and dressmaking shops.
Telephone and telegraph exchange services. Theaters, auditoriums, and assembly rooms . Travel and tour agencies .
Utility offices and  administrative  services.
Variety stores.


(3)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011 . No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use .

802.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES  AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  accessory uses and strnctures shall be permitted :

(1) Accessory uses and strnctures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and strnctures and to uses and strnctures permitted as exceptions .

802.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the CCB Central Business District in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance .

(1)	Electrical distribution substations and gas regulator stations;


(2)	Public parks ;


(3)	Private clubs and lodges;


(4)	Public buildings and grounds;


(5)	Single family dwellings residential uses (the minimum off street parking and loading requirements of Section 1111 may be waived for good cause shown);

(6)	Residences on the second floor or in the basement of commercial buildings (the minimum off street parking and loading requirements of Section 1111 may be waived for good cause shown);
 

(7)	Multi-family residential uses (the minimum off street parking and loading requirements of Section 1111 may be waived for good cause shown);

(8)	Other trade and service uses which are similar to the permitted principal uses and which are in harmony with the intent of this district.

802.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :  The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of
this Ordinance shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the CCB Central Business District :

(1)	Where a site adjoins or is located access an alley from any R Residential District , a solid wall or fence, vine covered open fence or compact evergreen hedge six (6) feet in height  shall be located on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard .

(2)	Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted use or conditional use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence six (6) feet in height , provided that no materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence.

(3)	All business , services and processes shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed stmcture, except for off-street parking and off-street loading areas, convenience stores, outdoor dining areas, garden shops, Christmas tree lots, bus depot and transit stations, and electric distribution substations .

(4)	No use shall be permitted and no process , equipment or materials shall be used which are found by  the Governing Body to be objectionable to persons living or working in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried waste, noise, vibrations, illumination , glare, or unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion .

802.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All other uses and stmctures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from the CCB Central Business District.

802.7	MINIMUM  LOT  REQUIREMENTS :   No  limitations .


802.8	MINIMUM   YARD  REQUIREMENTS  :


(1)	Front yard : No limitations ; provided that where a lot is abutting on property in any R Residential District and fronting on the same street, there shall be a minimum front yard often
(10) feet.


(2)	Rear yard :  The minimum rear yard abutting a R Residential District shall be ten (10) feet.


(3)	Side yard :  The minimum side yard abutting a R Residential District shall be ten (10) feet.
 
802.085  ADDITIONAL   SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES :  In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements, no structure shall be installed or constructed in violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .

802.09   MAXIMUM  LOT  COVERAGE :   No  limitations .


802. 10 MAXIMUM HEIGHT :  No structure shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet.


802. 11 SIGN REGULATIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

802. 12 OFF-STREET PARKING : Off-street parking is required per Section 1111. Properties located South of the alley of Blocks 35 through 39 and North of the alley of Blocks 44 through 48 are eligible to receive a waiver to the parking requirements granted by the City Council after a recommendation from the Planning Commission . Off-street  parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

802. 125  DRIVEWAYS :  Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .































(END OF SECTION)


(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 804  CL  LIMITED COMMERCIAL DISTRICT

804.1	INTENT : The CL Limited Commercial District is intended to provide an area for residential and limited commercial services.

804.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : The following shall be permitted as uses by right except when located within 200 feet of any Residential District , in which case a conditional use permit will be required to allow the following uses :

(1)	Offices


(2)	Professional office buildings , including clinics and doctor 's buildings .


(3)	Single-family dwellings .


(4)	Two-family dwellings .


(5)	Multi-family dwellings with forty-eight or fewer living units .


(6)	Home occupations .


(7)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011 . No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use .

804.3	PERMITTED  ACCESSORY  USES  AND  STRUCTURES :   The following  accessory uses and structures shall be permitted :

(1)	Buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses .


(2)	Parking lots.


804.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the CL Limited Commercial District in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance :

(1)	Barber shops.


(2)	Beauty shops.


(3)	Mortuary , funeral home  and  funeral chapels .


(4)	Motel.
 

(5)	Photographer.


(6)	Telephone  exchange .


(7)	Commercial    centers .
(8)	Family day care home, not operated within a private dwelling, group day care home, or day care center.

(9)	Multiple family dwellings with greater than forty-eight  (48) living units .


804.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :  The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of
this Ordinance shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the CL Limited Commercial District.

(1)	Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from any R Residential District , a solid wall or fence, vine-covered open fence or compact evergreen hedge six (6) feet in height shall be located on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard .

(2)	Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted use or conditional use shall be permitted only within an area surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence six (6) feet in height , provided that no materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence.

(3)	No use shall be permitted and no process , equipment or materials shall be used which are found by the Board to be objectionable to persons living or working in the vicinity by reasons of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried waste, noise, vibrations , illuminations , glare, or unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion .

804.6	MINIMUM  LOT  REQUIREMENTS  :
(1)	The minimum lot area for single family and commercial shall be 5,000 square feet. Multiple family uses of (2) to (6) units shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet per unit. Each additional unit shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per unit.

(2)	Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line on city property . Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

804.7	MINIMUM   YARD  REQUIREMENTS  :
(1)	Front yard : On all streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of no less than a depth of twenty-five (25) feet from the property line.

(2)	Rear yard :  The minimum rear yard  shall be five (5) feet.


(3)	Side yard :   The minimum side yard  shall be five (5) feet.
 

(4)	Distance between stmctures : The minimum distances between a residential or other principal stmcture and another stmcture shall be ten (10) feet.

(5)	Yard  requirements  for accessory  buildings :
(A)	Side yard - Same as district in which accessory use in located except an accessory building may be located in the side yard as close as five (5) feet to the property line and/or ten (10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater, providing it is located between the rear building line of the principle building and the rear property line and no building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way .

(B)	Front Yard - No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line.

(C)	Rear Yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line and/or within (10) feet of any other building, whichever is greater, and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way along the rear property line.

804.075  ADDITIONAL   SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES :  In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no stmcture shall be installed or constmcted in violation of Section 1110.04 of this Zoning Ordinance .

804.8	MAXIMUM  LOT  COVERAGE :   No  limitations .


804.9	MAXIMUM HEIGHT : The height of all stmctures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet for the main stmcture . The size limitations for accessory stmctures shall be subject to the provisions of SECTION 1103 and SECTION 1105 of the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance of the City ofBlair, Nebraska .

804. 10 SIGN REGULATIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

804. 11 OFF-STREET PARKING : Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions  of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

804. 115  DRIVEWAYS :  Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .









(END OF SECTION)
(Blank Page)
 

 
SECTION 805 OFFICE PARK DISTRICT

805.1	INTENT : The intent of the Office Park District is to encourage the development of corporate office headquarters and a variety of professional and medical offices in a park like setting. This district is intended to be located on arterial streets in close proximity to commercial , industrial and/or public facilities and to buffer these higher use areas from single and multifamily residential districts . The district is intended to provide an appealing atmosphere, stressing the quality of the environment with the use of landscaping , street trees, bushes, natural appearing rock formations , etc. to partially screen parking areas and soften the appearance of the OPD - Office Park District.

805.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : The following shall be permitted as uses by right except when located within two-hundred (200) feet of any Residential District , in which case a conditional use permit will be required to allow the following uses :

(1)	Office buildings used only for the administration functions of companies , corporations, social or philanthropic organizations or societies.

(2)	Professional  offices limited to :
a.	Accountants , financial services, lawyers and brokerage firms.
b.	.	Architects , engineers, planners , landscape  architects .
c.	Doctors, dentists, medical clinics and surgical offices.
d .	Chiropractors,  physical  therapists .
e.	Real estate, insurance companies , mortgage firms.


(3)	Service facilities limited to :
a.	Counseling services for rehabilitation , treatment and therapy .
b.	.	Child  care centers and preschools when integrated  within a office building .
c.	Commercial uses for support retail, such as convenience stores, office supply and copying, photographic and printing services.

(4)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011. No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use .

805.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES : Thefollowingaccessoryusesand strnctures shall be permitted :

(1) Buildings and uses customarily incidental to the permitted uses, including but not limited to parking lots and parking garages, outdoor sitting and recreation areas, athletic fields, walking paths, ponds and reflecting pools .

805.04. EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit the following conditional uses as exceptions in the OP District
 
in accordance with ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance :


(1)	Apartments or living quarters when located within an office building .


(2)	Constmction   offices  where   all  equipment   and   materials  are  stored  inside  a  permanent stmcture .
(3)	Contractor  yards .


(4)	Restaurants , either within an office building or in a stand alone building .


(5)	Public utility  stmctures, services and  facilities .


(6)	Miniature  golf courses, recreational  facilities .


(7)	Other uses which are similar to the permitted principal uses and which are in harmony with the intent of this district.

805.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS : The requirements of ARTICLE 14 of this Ordinance shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the OPD - Office Park District.

(1)	Where a site adjoins or is located across an alley from any R Residential District , a Solid wall or fence, vine covered open fence or compact evergreen hedge six (6) eet in height shall be located on the property line common to such districts, except in a required front yard .

(2)	Open storage of materials attendant to a permitted use or conditional use shall be permitted only within an areas surrounded or screened by a solid wall or fence six (6) feet in height , provided that no materials or equipment shall be stored to a height greater than that of the wall or fence.

(3)	No use shall be permitted and no process , equipment or materials shall be used which are found by the Governing Body to be objectionable to persons living or working in the vicinity by reasons of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried waste, noise, vibrations , illumination , glare or unsightliness or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion .



805.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All other uses and stmctures which are not specifically permitted or not permissible as exceptions shall be prohibited from the OP District.

805.065  MINIMUM  LOT  REQUIREMENTS :


(1)  The minimum lot areas shall be eight thousand (8,000) square feet. 805.07 MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS :
 
(1)	Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of twenty-five (25) feet from the property line to allow for more extensive landscaping and greenery area.
(2)	Side yard : The minimum side yard of twenty (10) feet shall be provided , except when abutting a Residential District(s) the setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
(3)	Rear yard : The minimum rear yard  of twenty (20) feet shall be provided , except when abutting a Residential District(s) the set back shall be thirty-five (35) feet.
(4)	Distance between stmctures : The minimum distances between commercial office buildings shall be twenty (20) feet for a maximum of a three (3) story building , and an additional ten
(10) feet for each story above a three story building .
(5)	Yard  requirements  for accessory  buildings :
(A)	Side yard - Same as district in which accessory use is located . No accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way .

(B)	Front Yard - No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line.

(C)	Rear Yard - Same as district in which accessory use is located . No accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way .

805.075 ADDITIONAL  SETBACK REQUIREMENTS - CREEK/WATER COURSES :
In addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no stmcture shall be installed or constmcted in violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .

805.8	MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE : Sixty-five (65) percent.


805.9	MAXIMUM HEIGHT : A five (5) story building , or Seventy (70) feet.


805. 10 SIGN REGULATIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

805. 11 OFF-STREET PARKING : Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

805. 115   DRIVEWAYS :  Driveways  shall be paved  as per section 303 .01(51.5) .














(END OF SECTION)
 
(Blank Page)
 
ARTICLE	9. DISTRICTS
 
A/ML	AGRICULTURAL/INDUSTRIAL	AND	MANUFACTURING
 

SECTION 901	A/ML   AGRICULTURAL/LIGHT  INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING  DISTRICT

901.1	INTENT : The AML Agricultural/Industrial zones are intended to achieve the following purposes : to reserve appropriate located areas for various types of industrial plants and related activities; to protect area appropriate for industrial use from intrnsion by residences and other inharmonious uses; to protect residential and commercial properties and to protect nuisance-free non­ hazardous industrial plants to concentrate in mutually beneficial relationship to each other; to provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial areas, and to provide industrial employment opportunities for residents of the City. For the purposes of Section 77-1343 R.R.S . Neb ., the predominant use for this district is agricultural and horticultural purposes .

901.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : The following shall be permitted as uses by right except when located within 500 feet of any Residential District , in which case a conditional use permit will be required to allow the following uses :

(1)	Wholesale, storage and warehouse uses;


(2)	Signs subject to SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance ;


(3)	Agriculture, horticultural (crops only);


(4)	Automobile service stations;


(5)	Printing and publishing  businesses ;


(6)	Trnck and freight terminals ;


(7)	Utility substation, pumping station, and water reservoir;


(8)	Gasoline filling station;


(9)	Building materials, lumber yards and fuel yards, with or without retail sales;


(10)	Contractors yards;


(11)	Highway maintenance yards or buildings ;


(12)	Railroad yards;


(13)	Repair garage;
 
(14)	Any industrial use which can meet the performance  standards for this district set forth in SECTION 1115.01 of this Ordinance provided , such is not specifically prohibited .
(15)	Mail order sales, catalog sales and coupon redemption businesses .


(16)	Computerized  billing and mailing businesses .


(17)	Offices


(18)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011. No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum  separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use .

901.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES  AND  STRUCTURES :  The following  accessory uses and structures shall be permitted :

(1)	Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions ;
(2)	Offices, retail stores and watchmen 's living quarters incidental to and on the same site with an industrial uses;
(3)	Medical facilities accessory to an industrial use .


901.4	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit as exceptions any use which is consistent with the intent of this district and which is not prohibited in accordance with Article 14 of this Ordinance .

(1)	Wireless Telecommunications Towers . (Note : See Section 1102.02 for regulations regarding Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Facilities .)

(2)	Rental and Leasing Establishments , Outside and Inside Storage.


(3)	Golf driving ranges, golf courses, miniature golf courses and bowling alleys.


(4)	Impound Lots if screened on all sides by a solid fence, masonry wall or a compact growth of natural plant materials not less than eight (8) feet in height.

(5)	Other uses which are similar to the permitted principal uses and which are in harmony with the intent of this district.

901.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS : The requirements of Article 14 of this Ordinance , the following regulations shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the ML Light Industrial and Manufacturing District :

(1)	All uses shall meet or exceed the performance standards set forth in SECTION 1115.01 of this
 
Ordinance  .


(2)	A use not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed stmcture, on a site across a street or alley from an R Residential District, shall be screened by a solid wall of fence, vine-covered open fence or compact evergreen hedge, not less than six (6) feet in height.

(3)	Where a site adjoins an R Residential District, a solid wall or fence, vine-covered open fence or compact evergreen hedge, six (6) feet in height, shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard .

(4)	The storage above ground or below ground of liquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature shall not exceed one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) gallons when stored on one (1) lot of less than one (1) acre in area nor shall storage exceed more than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons in one (1) tank. Storage ofliquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature in excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons, shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any stmcture intended for human habitation or closer than two-hundred (200) feet from any R Residential District.

(5)	Not less than five (5) feet of a required yard adjoining a street shall be landscaped and permanently maintained where such required yard adjoins a residential district, and excluding areas which are required for access to doors, openings, or other loading facilities .

(6)	All open and undeveloped portions of any lot shall be maintained in good condition free from weeds, dust, trash and debris.

901.6	PROHIBITED USES AND  STRUCTURES  :


1.	All residential uses of any kind .


2.	.	Anhydrous  Ammonia  Plants .


3.	All other uses and stmctures which are not specifically permitted, or cannot meet the performance standards for industry set forth in Section 1115.01 of this Ordinance or which are not permissible as exceptions , shall be prohibited .

901.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS : No limitations except for the following : Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.

901.8	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS   :


(1)	Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one-hundred (100) feet from the center of a Federal Aid-Primary or Federal Aid-Secondary designated street or highway or thirty-five (35) feet from the property line, whichever is greater. On all other streets
 
or highways there shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of twenty (20) feet from the property line. These yard requirements shall apply to any yard abutting a Federal Aid­ Primary of Federal Aid-Secondary designated street or highway regardless of the lot being an interior or corner lot.

(2)	Rear yard :  The minimum rear yard abutting an R Residential District(s) shall be twenty-five
(25)	feet, five (5) feet when property does not abut a residential district.


(3)	Side yard :  The minimum side yard abutting an R Residential District(s) shall be twenty-five
(25)	feet, five (5) feet when property does not abut a residential district.


(4)	An additional set back requirement to all other minimum rear, side, and front yard requirements for antennas and transmitting strnctures shall be a minimum set back requirement equal to the height of said antenna or transmitting strncture. Additionally no antenna or transmitting strncture shall be located within a distance equal to the height of the tower of any utility transmission lines serving the premises other than lines exclusively serving the premises upon which the tower is located .

(5)	YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS :


(A)	Side yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the side property line except when property abuts any Residential District(s) an accessory building shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the side property line, and/or ten (10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way along the rear property line.

(B)	Front Yard - No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line.

(C)	Rear Yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line except when property abuts any Residential District(s) an accessory building shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the rear property line, and/or ten (10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way along the rear property line.

901.085	ADDITIONAL  SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS  - CREEK/WATER  COURSES :	In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements , no strncture shall be installed or constrncted in violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .

901.9	MAXIMUM  LOT  COVERAGE :   No  limitations .


901.10	MAXIMUM  HEIGHT :	No  strncture  shall  exceed  seventy-five  (75)  feet  without  a conditional use permit.  No  strncture shall exceed  one hundred  (150) feet except an antenna or
 
transmitting strncture.


901. 11 SIGN REGULA TIONS : All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provision of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

901.12 REPAIR GARAGE REQUIREMENT. In addition to all other restrictions and requirements as provided herein, in the circumstance of a repair garage, all vehicles or motorized equipment awaiting repair , under repair , and all parts and materials shall be screened on all sides by a solid fence or a masonry wall or compact growth or natural plant materials not less than eight feet in height. Such screened area shall be limited to an area behind the rear line of any building or strncture used as a repair garage on the premises .

901. 13 OFF-STREET PARKING : Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions  of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

901.135 DRIVEWAYS : Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .








































(END OF SECTION)
 
(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 902	A/MH   AGRICULTURAL/BEA VY INDUSTRIAL AND MANUFACTURING  DISTRICT

902.1	INTENT : The intent of the A/MH Agricultural/Heavy Industrial and manufacturing district is to provide space for the widest range of industrial operations permitted in the City, for those industrial uses which are able to meet certain performance standards to protect nearly non­ commercial and non-industrial uses from undesirable environmental conditions . Residential and other similar uses are prohibited from this district in order to limit environmental effects associated with certain commercial and industrial uses, irrespective of their meeting performance standards . For the purposes of Section 77-1343 R.R.S . Neb . the predominant use for this district is agricultural and horticultural uses .

902.2	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : The following shall be permitted as uses by right except when located within 500 feet of any Residential District , in which case a conditional use permit will be required :

(1)	Wholesale , storage and warehouse uses;


(2)	Signs subject to SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance ;


(3)	Agriculture , Horticultural (crops only);


(4)	Automobile service stations;


(5)	Rental and lease establishments , outside and inside storage;


(6)	Any industrial use which , in the judgement of the City Administrator , can meet the performance standards for this district set forth in SECTION 1115.02 of this Ordinance , provided such use is not specifically prohibited .

(7)	Row crop agricultural production (planting, fertilizing, harvesting) or alfalfa I feed grass production on parcels which have been regularly used for such production prior to January 1, 2011. No parcel in this zoning district shall be switched to this Use from a different use . Parcels three (3) acres or larger may continue with this Use and other Permitted or Excepted Uses with a minimum  separation of fifty (50) feet from any other Use .

902.3	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND  STRUCTURES :


(1)	Accessory uses and structures normally appurtenant to the permitted uses and structures and to uses and structures permitted as exceptions ;

(2)	Offices, retail stores and watchmen's living quarters incidental to and on the same site with an industrial use .

(3)	Wireless Telecommunications Towers . (Note : See Section 1102.02 for regulations regarding
 
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Facilities .) 902 .04  EXCEPTIONS :
(1)	Anhydrous Ammonia Plants


(2)	Impound Lots if screened on all sides by a solid fence, masonry wall or a compact growth of natural plant materials not less than six (6) feet in height.

(3)	After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled, the City Council may permit as exceptions and uses which are consistent with the intent of this district and which is not prohibited in accordance with Article 14 of this Ordinance .

902.5	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS : The requirements of Article 14 of this Ordinance , the following regulations shall apply as minimum requirements for granting exceptions in the MH Heavy Industrial and Manufacturing District.

(1)	All uses shall meet or exceed the performance standards set forth in SECTION 1115.02 of this Ordinance ;

(2)	Where a site adjoins an R Residential District , a solid wall, or fence, vine-covered open fence or compact evergreen hedge, six (6) feet in eighth shall be located on the property line except in a required front yard.

(3)	A use not conducted entirely within a completely enclosed strncture, on a site across a street or alley from an R Residential District , shall be screened by a solid wall or fence, vine-covered open fence or compact evergreen hedge, not less than six (6) feet in height.

(4)	Storage ofliquid petroleum products or chemicals of a flammable or noxious nature in excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons, shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any strncture intended for human habitation or closer than two-hundred (200) feet from any R Residential District.

(5)	Not less than five (5) feet of a required yard adjoining a street shall be landscaped and permanently maintained, excluding areas which are required for access to doors, openings or other loading facilities .

902.6	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All residential dwellings of any kind, and all other uses and strnctures which are not specifically permitted , cannot meet the performance standards of industry set forth in SECTION 1115.02 of this Ordinance or which are not permissible as exceptions , shall be prohibited .

902.7	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS : No limitations except for the following : Driveways shall have a maximum grade often (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line on city property .  Curb cuts  for straight curbs and the flare
 
for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side. 902 .08  MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS :
(1)	Front yard : There shall be a minimum front yard of not less than a depth of one-hundred (100) feet from the center line of a Federal Aid-Primary or Federal Aid-Secondary designated street or highway or thirty-five (35) feet from the property line whichever is greater.  On all other streets or highways there shall be a minimum front yard on not less than a depth of twenty (20) feet from the property line. These yard requirements shall apply to any yard abutting a Federal Aid-Primary and Federal Aid-Secondary designated street or highway regardless of the lot being an interior or corner lot.

(2)	Rear yard : The minimum side yard abutting an R Residential District shall be twenty-five (25) feet, five (5) feet when property does not abut a residential district.

(3)	Side yard : The minimum side yard abutting an R Residential District shall be twenty-five (25) feet, five (5) feet when property does not abut a residential district.

(4)	Distance between structures : The minimum distance between principal  structures  shall  be twenty  (20) feet.

(5)	An additional set back requirement to all other minimum rear, side, and front yard requirements for antennas and transmitting structures shall be minimum set back requirement equal to the height of said antenna or transmitting structure. Additionally no antenna or transmitting structure shall be located within a distance equal to the height of the tower of any utility transmission lines serving the premises other than lines exclusively serving the premises upon which the tower is located .

(6)	YARD REQUIREMENTS FOR ACCESSORY BUILDINGS :


(A)	Side yard - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building shall be located closer than five (5) feet from the side property line except when property abuts any Residential District(s) an accessory building shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the side property line, and/or ten (10) feet from any other building , whichever is greater and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or right-of-way long the rear property line.

(B)	Front Yard - No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line.

(C)	Rear Yard  - Unless specifically permitted , no accessory building  shall be located
closer than five (5) feet from the rear property line except when property abuts any Residential District(s) an accessory building shall be a minimum of twenty-
five (25) feet from the rear property line, and/or ten (10) feet from any other building ,
whichever is greater  and no accessory building shall be located within any easement or
 
right-of-way along the rear property line.


902.085  ADDITIONAL   SETBACK  REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES :  In
addition to any other minimum yard requirements, no strncture shall be installed or constrncted in
violation of Section 1110.5 of this Zoning Ordinance .


902 .09   MAXIMUM  LOT  COVERAGE :   No  limitations .


902 . 10  MAXIMUM HEIGHT :  No strncture shall exceed two hundred fifty (250) feet except an antenna or transmitting strncture.

902 . 11  SIGN REGULATIONS :  All signs shall be in conformance with the regulations provided herein and with the provisions of SECTION 1114 of this Ordinance .

902 . 12 OFF-STREET PARKING :  Off-street parking shall be hard  surfaced in conformance with the provisions  of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

902 . 125  DRIVEWAYS :    Driveways  shall be paved  as per section 303 .01(51.5) .





































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 10  S  SPECIAL MODIFIED AND APPENDED DISTRICTS

These district regulations are intended to provide specific conditions for uses and stmctures which would otherwise not be included in the district regulations of ARTICLES 5 through 9 of this Ordinance .

SECTION 1001  SHM  MOBILE HOME DISTRICT

	INTENT : This district is intended for those areas where it is determined that mobile homes as defined in SECTION 303 .01 of this Ordinance are compatible with the character of conventional housing and , further, that for the purposes of SECTION 1001 of this Ordinance , mobile homes shall be considered to be single family dwelling units subject to the same use regulations as conventional single-family dwelling units . Mobile homes are allowed only in areas designated SHM - Special Mobile  Home  District.

	STANDARDS : All mobile homes and mobile home parks must meet the following standards :

(1)	The mobile home shall have :


a.	No less than seven hundred fifty (750) square foot floor area, excluding garages .


b.	.	No less than a sixteen (16) foot exterior width .


c.	Permanent connections to permanently located utilities complying with plumbing and electrical codes.

d .		A  certificate  stating  the  constmction  complies  with  the  Federal  Department  of Housing and Urban Development's mobile home constmction and safety standards .

(2)	The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an adequate and approved foundation for the placement and tie-down of the mobile home, thereby securing the super­ stmcture against uplift , sliding, rotation , or overturning .

(3)	The mobile home or trailer stand shall be on incombustible materials and shall not shift or settle unevenly under the weight of the mobile home or trailer due to frost action, inadequate drainage, vibration or other forces acting upon the super-stmcture . The mobile home or trailer stand may be provided by means of a solid concrete footer block (16" x 16" x 4" Minimum) placed on solid uniform soil with at least two (2) standard concrete blocks with cells placed vertically beside each other on the footer block. A solid 4" concrete cap covering the two (2) concrete blocks shall be provided as the bearing area to be positioned directly beneath the steel frame of the mobile home or trailer. Such clocking shall be provided along the full length of the mobile home or trailer unit , spaced not more than ten (10) feet apart, and not more than five (5) feet from the ends of the unit.
 
(4)	The mobile home or trailer stand shall be provided with anchors and the tie downs such as cast-in-lace concrete "dead men", eyelets imbedded in concrete foundations or runways , screw augers, arrowhead anchors or other devices securing the stability of the mobile home or trailer. The tie-down devices shall be compatible with the foundation system provided forthe mobile home or trailer such that the tie-downs are designated to resist the action of frost in the same manner as the foundation system .

(5)	The skirting of all mobile homes and trailers is required . Such skirting shall not attach a mobile home or trailer permanently to the ground , but shall be sufficient to withstand wind load requirements and shall not provide a harborage for junk or rodents, nor create a fire hazard . Such skirting shall be provided with removable access panels sufficient to provide easy access to all utility connection points of the mobile home or trailer and its subsequent connection to the utility raisers if they are located within the skirted area.

(6)	Mobile home parks shall obtain all licensing as required by the State ofNebraska Department of Health and Human Services

	MINIMUM  LOT  REQUIREMENTS  :


(1)	Individual mobile home lots shall have an area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet per single wide mobile home and six thousand (6,000) square feet for double wide mobile homes, and the total number of lots per gross acre shall not exceed six (6).

(2)	The mobile home park shall have direct access to a public street or highway by a right-of-way at least fifty (50) feet in width and a minimum length of one hundred (100) feet to permit the easy entrance and exit from the mobile home park. Service roads shall be provided to each mobile home space. Each service road shall provide for continuous forward movement , shall connect with a street or highway , and shall have a minimum clear width of twenty (20) feet paved with a suitable dustless material.

(3)	Walkways not less than four (4) feet wide shall be provided from mobile home spaces to the service buildings . All walkways within the park shall be hard surfaced and lighted at night with a minimum illumination of twenty-five (25) watt lamps spaced at intervals of not more than one hundred  (100) feet.

(4)	Each mobile home space shall have a width of at least forty (40) feet and a length of at least seventy-five (75) feet.

	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS : Mobile homes shall be situated on individual lots so there will be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet between mobile homes and that each mobile home will be set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the nearest service road . Mobile homes parked end-to-end shall have an end-to-end clearance of not less than ten (10) feet. Enclosed additions shall be considered a part of the mobile home in measuring required yard distance . The required area for each mobile home space shall not include area required for access or service roads, service buildings , recreation areas, office, and other similar mobile home park
 
needs .

	OFF-STREET PARKING : Two off-street parking spaces for each mobile home space shall be provided at each mobile home space or in group parking . Off-street parking shall be hard surfaced in conformance with the provisions of Section 204 of this Ordinance .

1001.055  DRIVEWAYS :  Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .



















































(END OF SECTION)
 
(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 1002   SFP - FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT

	INTENT : The Legislature of the State ofNebraska has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units  to adopt zoning regulations designed to protect the public  health ,  safety  and general welfare . The Legislature , in Sections 31-1001 to 31-1022, R.R.S . 1943 (as amended), has further assigned the responsibility to adopt, administer , and enforce  floodplain  management regulations to the county, city or village with zoning jurisdiction over the flood-prone area. Therefore, these regulations are intended to minimize the extent of floods and reduce the height and violence thereof ; to minimize the hazard of loss of lives and property caused by floods; and to secure safety from floods through the confinement of floods through reasonable limits by regulating and restricting areas of development along or in natural watercourses and drainways . This district is created to be appended to any district which is subject to periodic flooding .

	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : Any permitted principal use and structure in the Parent District to which this district is made a part , provided , that such uses and structures meet the minimum requirements of this Section.

	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES : Any permitted accessory use and structure in the Parent District to which this district is made a part , provided , that such uses and structures meet the minimum requirements of this Section.

	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit all conditional uses permitted as exceptions in the Parent District of which this district is made a part , provided , that such uses and structures meet the minimum  requirements  of this  Section .

	GENERAL CONDITIONS AND CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS :
Notwithstanding the requirements of Article 14 of this Ordinance , the regulations in this Section shall supplement any General Conditions and/or Conditions for Granting Exceptions which are provided in the Parent District of which this district is made a part . These regulations shall supersede those of the Parent District where there is a conflict among regulations .

	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All uses prohibited in the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be prohibited .

	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS : The lot requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum lot requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS : The yard requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum yard requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

1002.085   ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS - CREEKS/WATER COURSES : The
additional setback requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the
 
additional  setback  requirements .


	MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE : The lot coverage requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the maximum lot coverage requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

1002. 10 MAXIMUM HEIGHT : The height requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the maximum height requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

1002. 11 SIGN REGULATIONS : The sign regulations of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements for sign regulations subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

1002. 12 OFF-STREET PARKING : The off-street parking requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be applicable .

1002. 13 DEFINITIONS : Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Section shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage and so as to give this Section its most reasonable application .

APPEAL - a request for a review of the City Administrator and/or his designee 's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance .

AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING - a designated AO or AH zone or a community 's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident.  Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD - the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

BASE FLOOD - the flood having one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

BASE FLOOD ELEVATION - elevation indicated in the official flood plain study as the elevation of the 100-year flood .

BASE FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION - an elevation one foot higher than the water surface elevation of the base flood .



BASEMENT - any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
 
CHANNEL - a natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent, with a definite bed and banks to confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. Channel flow, thus, is that water which is flowing within the limits of a defined channel.

COMMUNITY - any state or area or political subdivision thereof which has authority to adopt and enforce plain management regulations for the areas within its jurisdiction .

DEVELOPMENT - any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other stmctures, mining , dredging, filling, grading, paving , excavation, or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials .

EXISTING CONSTRUCTION - (for the purposes of determining rates) stmcturesforwhich the "start of constmction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRM 's effective before that date. "Existing Constmction" may also be referred to as "existing stmctures".

EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION -a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the constmction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum , the installation ofutilities, the constmction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community .

EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUF ACTORED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION
- the preparation of additional sites by the constmction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the constmction  of streets, and  either final site grading or the pouring  of concrete pads) .

FLOOD or FLOODING - a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from :

1)	the overflow of inland or tidal waters ; or


2)	the unusual and rapid accumulation of mn-off of  surface waters from any source.

FLOOD FRINGE (FF) - that area of the floodplain, outside of the floodway, that on an average is likely to be flooded once every 100 years (i.e., that has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any one year) .

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - an official map of a community , on which the Flood Insurance Study has delineated the Flood Hazard Boundaries and the zones establishing insurance rates applicable to the community .

FLOOD INSURANCE  STUDY - the official report provided  by the Federal Emergency
 
Management Agency . The report contains flood profiles , as well as the Flood Boundary Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood .

FLOODPLAIN - any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of "FLOOD or FLOODING").

FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plan, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations .

FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM - those physical stmctural works constmcted specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard ." Such a system typically includes levees or dikes. These specialized modifying works are those constmcted in conformance with sound engineering standards .

FLOOD PROOFING - any combination of stmctural and non-stmctural additions, changes or adjustments to stmctures, including utility and sanitary facilities, which would preclude the entry of water. Stmctural components shall have the capability ofresisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy .

FLOODWAY (FW) or REGULATORY FLOODWAY - the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent portion of the floodplain that must be reserved in order to discharge the I 00-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point , assuming equal conveyance reduction outside the channel from the two sides of the floodplain .

FREEBOARD - a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard " tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, clogged bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed .

HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE - the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to constmction next to the proposed walls of a stmcture .

HISTORIC STRUCTURE - any stmcture that is (a) listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a list maintained by the Department oflnterior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register ; (b) certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historic significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district ; or (c) individually listed on a state inventory of historic places .

LOWEST FLOOR - the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) . An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
 
storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building 's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built  so as to tender the stmcture in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance .

MANUFACTURED HOME - a stmcture, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities . The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufacture home lots for rent or sale.

NEW CONSTRUCTION - stmctures for which the start of constmction or substantial improvement is commenced on or after the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such stmctures .

NEW MANUF ACTORED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the constmction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum , the installation ofutilities, the constmction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is complete before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community ..

OVERLAY DISTRICT - a district in which additional requirements act in conjunction with the underlying zoning district(s) . The original zoning district designation does not change.

PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND - at least 51 percent of the actual cash value of the stmcture is above ground .

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - a vehicle which is (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections ; (c) designed to be self­ propelled or permanently towable by a light duty tmck ; and (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living quarters for recreational , camping, travel, or seasonal use .

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA- the land in the floodplain within a community subject to one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

START OF CONSTRUCTION - (for other than new constmction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) includes substantial improvement , and means the date the building permit was issued , provided the actual start of constmction, repair , reconstmction , rehabilitation , addition, placement , or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit  date. The actual  start means the first placement  of permanent
 
constrnction of a strncture on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the constrnction of columns, or any work beyond the state of excavation ; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation . Permanent constrnction does not include land preparation , such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways ; nor does it include excavation for a basement , footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings , such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main strncture. For a substantial improvement , the actual start of constrnction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other strnctural part of a building , whether or not the alteration affects the external dimensions of the building .

STRUCTURE - a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground , as well as a manufactured home, and a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground .

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - damage of any origin sustained by a strncture whereby the cost of restoring the strncture to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the strncture before the damage occurred .

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - any reconstrnction , rehabilitation , addition, or other improvement of a strncture, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the strncture before "start of constrnction " of the improvement. This includes strnctures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed . The term does not , however , include either (1) any project for improvement of a strncture to correct existing violations of state or local health , sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a "historic strncture," provided that the alteration will not preclude the strncture's continued designation as a "historic strncture."

VARIAN CE - a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this ordinance which permits constrnction  in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship .

VIOLATION - a failure of a strncture or other development to be fully compliant with the community 's floodplain management regulations .

1002. 14   FINDINGS OF FACT


1)	FLOOD LOSSES RESULTING FROM PERIODIC  INUNDATION :   The flood
hazard areas of Blair, Nebraska , are subject to inundation which results in loss oflife and property , health , and safety hazards , disrnption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base all of which adversely affect the public health , safety, and general welfare .
2)	GENERAL CAUSES OF THESE FLOOD LOSSES : These flood losses are caused
 
by : (1) The cumulative effect of obstmction in floodways causing increases in flood heights and velocities , (2) The occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to others, which are inadequately or otherwise protected from flood damages .

3)	METHODS  USED  TO  ANALYZE  FLOOD  HAZARDS :	This  Section uses  a
reasonable method of analyzing flood hazards which consists of a series ofinterrelated steps.

A)	Selection of a base flood which is based upon engineering calculations which permit a consideration of such flood factors as its expected frequency of occurrence, the area inundated , and the depth of inundation . The base flood selected for this ordinance is representative of large floods which are reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur on the particular streams subject to this ordinance . It is in the general order of a flood which could be expected to have a one percent (1%) chance of occurrence in any one year, as delineated on the Flood Insurance Study, and illustrative materials, dated January 6, 2012 , as amended .

B)	Calculation of water surface profiles based upon a hydraulic engineering analysis of the capacity of the stream channel and overbank areas to convey the base flood .

C)	Computation of the floodway required to convey this flood without increasing flood heights more than 1 foot at any point.

D)	Delineation of floodway encroachment lines within which no obstmction is permitted which would cause any water surface increase along the floodway profile .

E)	Delineation of floodway fringe, i.e., that area  outside  the  floodway encroachment lines, but which still is subject to inundation by the base flood .

1002. 15 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE : It is the purpose of this Section to promote the public health , safety, and general welfare and to minimize those losses described in Section 1002. 14 by applying the provisions of this Section to :

1)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health , safety, or property in times of flooding or cause undue increases in flood heights or velocities .

2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, be provided with flood protection at the time of initial constmction .

3)	Protect  individuals  from  buying  lands  which  are  unsuited   for  intended  purposes  because of flood hazard .
 

4)	Assure that eligibility is maintained for property owners in the community to purchase flood insurance in the National Flood Insurance Program.

1002. 16 JURISDICTION : This Section shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Blair identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated January 6, 2012 , as amended, as A Zones (including AE, AH, AO, AR or A99 Zones) and/or within the Zoning Districts FW and FF established in Section 1002.21 of this Section. In all areas covered by this Section no development shall be permitted except upon the issuance of a floodplain development permit , granted by the City Council or its duly designated representative , under such safeguards and restriction as they may reasonably impose for the promotion and maintenance of the general welfare, health of the inhabitants of the community and where specifically noted in Sections 1002.22 through 1002.26.

1002. 17 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER : The City Administrator and/or his designee is hereby designated as the City Council 's duly designated Enforcement Officer under this Section.

1002. 18       INTERPRETATION   OF  DISTRICT  BOUNDARIES   AND  MISCELLANEOUS
PROVISIONS : The boundaries of the floodway and flood fringe overlay districts shall be determined by scaling distances on the official zoning map or on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or Floodway Map . Where interpretation is needed to the exact location of the boundaries of the districts as shown on the official zoning map, as for example where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Enforcement Officer shall make the necessary interpretation . In such cases where the interpretation is contested , the Board of Adjustment will resolve the dispute . The base flood elevation for the point in question shall be the governing factor in locating the district boundary on the land . The person contesting the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to present his case to the Board of Adjustment and to submit his own technical evidence, if he so desires.

1)	Compliance .  Within identified special flood hazard areas of this community , no development shall be located , extended , converted or structurally altered without foll compliance with the terms of this Section and other applicable regulations .

2)	Abrogation and Greater Restrictions . It is not intended by this Section to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions . However , where this Section imposes greater restrictions , the provision of this Section shall prevail. All other Sections inconsistent with this Section are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.

3)	Interpretation . In their interpretation and application , the provisions of this Section shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the governing body and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.

4)	Warning and Disclaimer of Liability . The degree of flood protection required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering
 
and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions or the flood height may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This Section does not imply that areas outside floodway and flood fringe district boundaries or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages . This Section shall not create liability on the part of the City of Blair or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that may result from reliance on this Section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

5)	Severability . If any section, clause, provision or portion of this Section is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction , the remainder of this Section shall not be affected thereby .

6)	Application for Appeal. Where a request for a permit to develop or a variance is denied by the City Administrator and/or his designee, the applicant may apply for such permit or variance directly to the Board of Adjustment. The Board of Adjustment may grant to deny such request by appropriate resolution adopted within thirty (30) days after such application to the Board of Adjustment.

1002. 19      FLOODPLAIN  DEVELOPMENT  PERMIT  PROCEDURE :    No  person ,  firm  or
corporation shall initiate any floodplain development or substantial improvement as defined in Section 1002. 13, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate permit for development as described in Section 1002.20.

The City Administrator and/or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Section. Duties of the City Administrator and/or his designee shall include, but not be limited to :

1)	Review of all development permit applications to assure that sites are reasonably safe from flooding and that the permit requirements of this Section have been satisfied .

2)	Review applications for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required by Federal or State law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S .C. 1334.

3)	Review all subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, to determine whether such proposals will be  reasonably safe from flooding . Such proposals must meet the requirements of Sections  1002.22 through 1002.26.

4)	Notify adjacent communities and the Nebraska Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency .
5)	Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said
 
watercourse  so that the flood  carrying capacity is not diminished .


6)	Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures in special flood hazard areas.

7)	Verify, record and maintain record of the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed .

8)	When   floodproofing    is   utilized   for   a   particular   structure    the    City Administrator and/or his designee shall be presented certification from a registered professional engineer or architect.

	APPLICATION FOR PERMIT : To obtain a floodplain development permit , the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose . Every such application shall :

1)	Identify and describe the development to be covered by the floodplain development permit.

2)	Described the land on which the proposed development is to be done by lot, block , tract , house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or development.

3)	Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed development is intended .


4)	Be accompanied by plans and specifications for the proposed development.

 
5)	Be signed by the permitee or his or her authorized agent who may be to submit evidence to indicate such authority .
 
required
 

6)	Give   such  other   information   as  reasonably   may   be   required	by  the   City Administrator and/or his designee .

	ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS : The mapped floodplain areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Blair are hereby divided into the two following districts : a Floodway Overlay District (FW) and a Flood Fringe Overlay District (FF), as identified in the Flood Insurance Study and accompanying maps . Within these districts all uses not meeting the standards of this Section and those standards of the underlying zoning district shall be prohibited . These zones shall be consistent with the A Zones (including AE, AH, AO, AR or A99 Zones) as identified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated January 6, 2012 , as amended .

	BASIC STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT : No   permit  for
development shall be granted for new construction , substantial improvements and other development(s) , including the placement of manufactured homes within the identified floodplain,
 
unless the conditions of this Section are satisfied .


1)	All areas identified as A Zones on the FIRM (excluding AE, AH or AO Zones) are subject to inundation of the base flood ; however , the water surface elevation has not been provided on the FIRM . These A Zones shall be subject to all development provisions of Section I 002 .24. The community shall utilize any base flood elevation or floodway data currently available through Federal, State or other sources, including any data developed pursuant to Section I 002 .22 (6), in meeting with the standards of this Section.

2)	New constmction, subdivision proposals , substantial improvements , prefabricated buildings , placement of manufactured homes and other developments shall meet the following :

A)	Designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the stmcture resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy .

B)	New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and on-site waste disposal systems shall be located so as to avoid impairment or contamination .

C)	Constmction shall be done with materials resistant to flood damage, utilizing methods and practices that minimize flood damages . Electrical, heating, ventilation , plumbing , and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and located to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding .

D)	All utility and sanitary facilities shall be elevated and floodproofed up to one foot above the regulatory flood protection elevation .

3)	If a floodway has not been designated in an A Zone, no development or substantial improvement shall be permitted within the special flood hazard areas unless the applicant for the  land use has demonstrated that the proposed development or substantial improvement , when combined with all other existing and reasonably anticipated developments or substantial improvements , will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (I) foot at any location as shown on the Flood Insurance Study.

4)	Storage of Material and Equipment


A)	The storage or processing of materials which are, in times of  flooding, buoyant , flammable, explosive , or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, are prohibited .
 

B)	Storage of other material or equipment is allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation, or if readily removable from the area within the limited time available after a flood warmng .

5)	Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development , including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, are required to assure that :

A)	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;


B)	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical , and water systems, shall be located , elevated and constmcted to minimize or eliminate flood damage;

C)	Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards .

6)	All new subdivision proposals and other proposed developments , including proposals for manufactured home parks, of greater than five (5) acres or fifty (50) lots, whichever is the lesser, shall include within such proposals the base flood elevation data.

	FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT (FF); PERMITTED USES . Any use permitted
in Section 1002.25 shall be permitted in the Flood Fringe Overlay District (FF). No use shall be permitted in the district unless the standards of Section 1002.22 are met.

	STANDARDS FOR THE FLOOD FRINGE OVERLAY DISTRICT


1)	New constmction and substantial improvements of residential stmctures shall have the lowest floor, including basement , elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation .

2)	New constmction and substantial improvements of non-residential  stmctures shall have the lowest floor, including basement , elevated one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to be floodproofed so that below  such  a level the  stmcture  is  watertight  with  walls  substantially impermeable to the passage  of water and with stmctural components having the capability ofresisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy . A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review the stmctural design, specifications, and plans for the constmction, and shall certify that the design and methods of constmction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this Section. Such certification shall be provided to the City Administrator and/or his designee, as set forth in Section 1002. 19 (7).
3)	All new constmction and substantial improvements that fully enclose areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
 
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters . Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria : A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided . The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade . Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters .

4)	Within AH Zones, adequate drainage paths around strnctures on slopes are required in order to guide flood waters around and away from proposed strnctures .

5)	Manufactured  Homes :


A)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Manufactured homes must be anchored in accordance with local building codes or FEMA guidelines . In the event that over-the-top frame ties to ground anchors are used , the following specific requirements (or their equivalent) shall be met :

i)	Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations . Manufactured homes less than 50 feet long require only one additional tie per side.

ii)	Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points . Manufactured homes less  than  50 feet long require only four additional ties per  side at intermediate points .

iii)	All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds .

iv)	Any additions to manufactured homes shall be similarly anchored .


B)	Manufactured homes, which are placed  or substantially improved  in the following locations, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one (1) foot above the base flood  elevation ; and shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation  system pursuant  to the provisions  of Section  1002.24 (5)(A) above :

i)	Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision ;
ii)	In a new manufactured home park or subdivision ;
 
iii)	In an expansion  to  an  existing  manufactured  home  park  or subdivisions; or

iv)	In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within which any manufactured home  has incurred "substantial damage" as the result  of a flood ;

C)	Manufactured  homes to be placed  or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision , which are not subject to the provisions of Section 1002.24 (5)(B) above, shall be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system in accordance with the provisions of Section  1002.24 (5)(A) above, and shall be elevated so that either :

i)	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation ; or

ii)	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade . In either situation, manufactured homes .

6)	Recreational vehicles placed on sites within the special flood hazard areas on the community 's official map shall either :
i)	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days,


ii)	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or


iii)	Meet the permit requirements and the elevation and  anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" of this Section.

A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use ifit is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions .

7)	Located within the areas of special flood hazard may be areas designated as AO Zones . These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate ; therefore, the following regulations apply within AO Zones :

A)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community 's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified) .
 

B)	All  new  construction   and   substantial  improvements  of  nonresidential structures shall :

i)	Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as one foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community 's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified), or

ii)	Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely floodproofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability ofresisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy . Such certification shall be provided to the City Administrator and/or his designee, as set forth in Section 1002. 19 (7).

C)	Adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes shall be required in order to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures .

	FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT (FW); PERMITTED USES :  Only uses having a
low flood-damage potential and not obstructing flood flows shall be permitted within the Floodway Overlay District to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other Sections .

The following are recommended uses for the Floodway Overlay District :


1)	Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture , nurseries , forestry .


2)	Residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking and play areas.


3)	Non-residential areas such as loading areas, parking and airport landing strips.


4)	Public and private  recreational uses such as golf courses, archery ranges, picnic grounds, parks, wildlife and nature preserves .

	STANDARDS FOR THE FLOODWAY OVERLAY DISTRICT


New structures for human habitation are prohibited . All encroachments , including fill, new construction , substantial improvements , and other developments are prohibited unless certification is provided by a registered professional engineer or architect who demonstrates through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the development shall not result in any increase in water surface elevations along the floodway profile during occurrence of the base flood discharge . The uses are subject to the standards of Sections 1102.22 through 1102.24.
 
	VARIANCE  PROCEDURES


1)	The Board of Adjustment as established by the City of Blair shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Section.

2)	The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement , decision, or determination made by the City Administrator and/or his designee in the enforcement or administration of this Section.

3)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Adjustment or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the District Court as provided in Section 19-912, R.R.S . 1943 (as amended) .

4)	In passing upon such applications , the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluation , all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Section; and :

A)	The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

B)	The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;


C)	The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;

D)	The importance  of the  services provided  by the proposed  facility to the community ;

E)	The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable ;


F)	The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
G)	The  compatibility  of  the  proposed   use  with  existing  and  anticipated development ;

H)	The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

I)	The safety of access to the property  in times of flood for ordinance and emergency vehicles ;

i)	The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
 
ii)	The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical , and water systems, and streets and bridges .

5)	Conditions  for variances :


A)	Generally, variances may be issued for new  constmction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing stmctures constmcted below the base flood level, providing items 2 - 6 below have been fully considered . As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases .

B)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic stmctures upon a determination that the  proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the stmcture 's continued designation as a historic stmcture and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the stmcture .

C)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels along the floodway profile during the base flood discharge would result .

D)	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary , considering the flood hazard , to afford relief

E)	Variances shall only be issued upon :


i)	A showing of good and sufficient cause;


ii)	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant ; and

iii)	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased	flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances .

F)	The applicant shall be given a written notice over the signature of a city official that :
i)	The issuance of a variance to constmct a stmcture below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage ;
 
and


ii)	Such constmction below the base flood level increases risk to life and property . Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions as required by this Section.

	NONCONFORMING  USE :


1)	A stmcture or the use of a stmcture or premises which was lawful before the passage or amendment of the Section, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Section, may be continued subject to the following conditions :

A)	No  such use  or  substantial  improvement  of that use  shall be expanded ,
changed , enlarged , or altered in a way which increases its conformity .


B)	If such use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any future use of the building premises shall conform to this Section. The Utility Department shall notify the City Administrator and/or his designee in writing of instances of nonconforming uses where utility services have been discontinued for a period of six months .

C)	Uses or adjuncts thereof which are or become nuisances shall not be entitled to continue as nonconforming uses .

D)	If any nonconforming use or stmcture is destroyed by any means, including flood , it shall not be reconstmcted if the cost is more than 50 percent of the market value of the stmcture before the damage occurred , except if it is reconstmcted in conformity with the provisions of this Section. This limitation does not include the cost of any alteration to comply with existing state or local health , sanitary, building , or safety codes or regulations or the cost of any alteration of a stmcture listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places, provided that the alteration shall not preclude its continued designation .

	PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION : Violation of the provisions of this Section or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special exceptions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Section or fails to comply with any ofits requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $100.00, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Blair or other appropriate authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation .
	AMENDMENTS : The regulations , restrictions , and boundaries set forth in this Section may from time to time be amended , supplemented , changed , or appealed to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973, provided , however , that no such action may be
 
taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto , at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard . At least 15 days notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in newspaper of general circulation in the City of Blair. A copy of such amendments shall be provided to the Federal Emergency Management Agency . The regulations of this Section are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations as published in Title 44 of the Code of Federal Regulations and the 1983 Nebraska Flood Plain Management Act.


















































(END OF SECTION)
(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 1003  SPD  PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT

	INTENT : The provisions of this Section are to be applied in instances where tracts or land of considerable size are developed , redeveloped or renewed as integrated and harmonious units, and where the overall design of which units warrants modification of the standards contained elsewhere in this Ordinance . A planned development , to be eligible under this Section must be :

(1)	In accordance with the comprehensive plan of the City including all plans for redevelopment and renewal ;

(2)	Composed of such uses, and in such proportions , as are most appropriate and necessary for the integrated functioning of the planned development and for the City.

(3)	So designed in its space allocation , orientation, texture, materials, landscaping and other features as to produce an environment of stable and desirable character , complimenting the design and values of the surrounding neighborhood , and showing such unusual merit as to reflect credit upon the City.

This district is created to be appended to all residential , commercial and industrial districts to provide for the placement and location of more than one building on a lot in an arrangement to permit more feasible, original and better siting of buildings .

	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : Uses and stmctures permitted under the provisions of the regulations of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be permitted .

	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES : Accessory uses and stmctures permitted under the provisions of the regulations of the Parent District and those normally appurtenant to the uses and stmctures permitted as exceptions shall be permitted .

	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to exceptions have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit conditional uses permitted as Exceptions in the Parent District of which this district is made a part .

	SPECIAL CONDITIONS AND CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING  EXCEPTIONS :
Notwithstanding the requirements of Article 14 of this Ordinance , the following regulations shall supplement the Special Conditions and/or Conditions for Granting Exceptions which are provided in the Parent District of which this district is made a part . These regulations shall supersede those of the Parent District where there is a conflict among regulations .
 
(1)	Minimum Area of Tract : The minimum area of a tract of land to be zoned as an appended SPD Planned Development District is dependent on the Parent District as follows :
Parent Zoning Districts	Minimum Area (Acres) R Residential		3
B Commercial	2
M Industrial	8


The tract for the use as a SPD Planned Development District shall be under single or joint ownership .


(2)	Procedures : When a property owner or developer intends to develop a tract ofland containing at least the minimum area for that Parent District and involving more than one establishment , or in the case of a residential zoned  area, more than one dwelling unit , he/she may apply for zoning the property to a SPD Planned Development District. The rezoning change shall be an amendment to the zoning map as an appendage to the existing Parent District. The rezoning change may also be a request to change the existing Parent District to another Parent District with the SPD Planned Development District.
An applicant for a change in zoning to SPD Planned Development District must satisfy the Planning Commission that he/she has the ability to carry out the proposed plan and shall prepare and submit a schedule for constmction .
Such applicant also shall prepare and submit a Preliminary Development Plan for review and approval by the Planning Commission which shall include :

(a).  A topographic map showing contours at intervals of two feet.


(b).  A plot plan showing :
1.	Building and sign stmcture locations on the tract. 2 .  Access for streets.
3.	Parking arrangement and number of spaces.
4.	Interior drives and service areas.
5.	Area set aside for public open space.


(c).  Location map showing the development and zoning of the adjacent property within 200 feet, including the location and the type of buildings and stmctures thereon .

(d).  The full legal description  of the boundaries of the properties to be included in the area to be zoned SPD Planned Development District.

(e).  A map showing the general arrangement of streets within an area of 1,000 feet from the boundaries of the area to be zoned SPD Planned Development District.

(f). A map showing location of proposed sewer, water and other utility lines.


(g). A description of general character of proposed buildings and any signs to be placed on the site.
 
The applicant may further be asked to furnish other information , such as typical building floor plans, building elevations to show the general architectural character of the buildings , some indications as to size and type of landscape plant materials, pavements , and other major site improvements .

The applicant may be asked to submit the tentative financial plan and description of the intended means of financing any proposed common areas or common improvements , and statements covering ownership and maintenance of common easements or other common areas, such as open space or recreational facilities .

Upon approval of the Preliminary Development Plan by the Planning Commission , the applicant shall prepare and submit a final Development Plan, which shall incorporate any changes or alterations requested . Alterations in the preliminary schedule of constrnction shall be submitted at this time. The final Development Plan and the Planning Commission's recommendation shall be forwarded to the City Council for their review and final action .

In the event that within 18 months following approval by the City Council, the applicant does not proceed with constrnction in accordance with the plan so approved , the Planning Commission shall initiate action to rezone the property to the original zoning district. A public hearing , as required by law, shall be advertised and held at which time the applicant shall be given an opportunity to show why constrnction has been delayed . Following the hearing , the Planning Commission shall make findings of fact and shall make a recommendation to the City Council.

All plans and documents shall become a part of the amendment and shall form the basis for issuance of a building permit in conformity therewith .

Changes in the Development Plan, which increase the number of dwelling units or establishments , the arrangement of buildings , the number of parking stalls, any increase in the size or number of other improvements , and the alignment of driveways or roadways shall require a resubmission for approval of the application for rezoning . Any minor changes or adjustments or decrease in the number of dwelling units, common facilities and recreation facilities may be approved by the Zoning Administrator without resubmission .

	PROHIBITED USES AND STRUCTURES : All uses prohibited in the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be prohibited .

	MINIMUM LOT REQUIREMENTS : The lot requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum lot requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

In the event the tract of land to be developed as an SPD Planned Development District lies in more than one Parent District , the provisions of the more restrictive Parent District shall be applicable .

In an appended residential district, the number of dwelling units that may be permissible on the proposed tract to be developed as an SPD Planned Development District shall be determined by using the lot area per dwelling unit requirements of the zoning district, provided , however , that the total lot
 
area of the proposed tract shall be reduced by the areas covered or occupied by buildings , streets, roadways, drives, parking areas, and unusable land areas such as streams, drainage ways, creeks, or land with grade slopes exceeding a twenty-five percent (25%) grade .

	MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS : The yard requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum yard requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

1003.085 ADDITIONAL  SETBACK REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES : The
additional setback requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the additional setback requirements .

1003.09 MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE : The lot coverage requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the maximum lot coverage requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

1003. 10 MAXIMUM HEIGHT : The height requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the maximum height requirements subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

1003. 11 SIGN REGULATIONS : The sign regulations of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be the minimum requirements for sign regulations subject to additional requirements as prescribed by the City Council.

1003. 12 OFF-STREET PARKING : The off-street parking requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be applicable .

1003. 125  DRIVEWAYS :  Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .





















(END OF SECTION)
 
SECTION 1004  SRD  SPECIAL REDEVELOPMENT  DISTRICT

	INTENT : The Special Redevelopment District (SRD) is an overlay district intended to accommodate unique land use, urban design, and other distinctive characteristics of older established neighborhoods . The SRD district, used in combination with a base district, allows variations in permitted uses and site development regulations that are adapted to the needs of a specific site, area or neighborhood . Variations allowed in an SRD overlay district are established by a Redevelopment Area Plan, enacted by the City Council as part of the City's comprehensive plan .

	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES :  Uses and structures permitted under the provisions of the regulations of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be permitted .

	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES : Accessory uses and structures permitted under the provisions of the regulations of the Parent District and those normally appurtenant to the uses and structures permitted as exceptions shall be permitted .

	EXCEPTIONS : After the provisions of this Ordinance relating to modifications to the Parent District(s) regulations have been fulfilled , the City Council may permit all conditional uses permitted as Exceptions in the Parent District of which this district is made a part .

	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS : Notwithstanding the requirements of Article 14 of this Ordinance , the following regulations shall supplement the Conditions for Granting Exceptions which are provided in the Parent District of which this district is made a part . These regulations shall supersede those of the Parent District where there is a conflict among regulations .

	REQUIREMENTS FOR SRD DISTRICT DESIGNATION :


(1)	Minimum   Area :
Each SRD district must include a lot or a combination of contiguous lots, a block or a number of contiguous blocks , and include intervening streets, alleys and private ways .

(2)	Redevelopment   designation :
The  property  included  in  each  SRD  district  must  have  been  identified  111  an  adopted Redevelopment Area Plan and be included an a redevelopment district.

	APPLICATION FOR CREATION OF AN SRD DISTRICT :


(1)	Initiation :
An application for an SRD district may be initiated by the following :
(A)	Property owner(s) representing a majority of the area within the proposed SRD district,
measured by square footage of the proposed SRD district.


(B)	The Planning  Commission .
 
(C)	The City Council.


(2)	Content  of the Application :
An application for creation of an SRD district shall include the following information :
(A)	Statement of Pwpose , describing the current use and condition of the district, the planned redevelopment , rationale for why the existing base district(s) are not fully adaptable to the specific needs of the redevelopment , a schedule for construction or redevelopment , and evidence that the applicant(s) have the ability to carry out the proposed redevelopment plan .

(B)	District  Site Drawing  showing :
1.	The boundaries of the proposed SRD district, specifying the base zoning district(s) and the full legal description of all properties included within the proposed district.

2.	. The zoning and full legal description of all properties within 300 feet of the proposed district, as well as the location and use of buildings and structures located within said 300 feet.

3.	Existing and proposed buildings and sign structures, including setbacks from property lines.

4.	Existing and proposed access to streets, interior drives and service areas.


5.	Proposed parking layout and number of parking spaces.


6.	If site grading is to be done, a topographic map showing current contours at intervals of two feet and the proposed grading plan .

(C)	Project Narrative describing distinctive neighborhood characteristics ; land uses; unique building and design features; site development , parking and circulation constraints; and other features to the proposed  SRD district.

(D)	Requested Modifications to be made in existing base district regulations , including use, site development , off-street parking , landscaping and/or other zoning regulations .

The applicant may further be asked to furnish other information , such as typical building floor plans, building elevations to show the general architectural character of the buildings , some indications as to size and type of landscape plant materials , pavements , and other major site improvements .

	CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL OF AN SRD DISTRICT :


(1)	The City Council may adopt an SRD district ifthe area meets one (1) or more of the following criteria :
(A)	The area has distinctive building features, such as scale, size, type of construction , or distinctive building materials that should be preserved .
 
(B)	The area has distinctive site planning features, such as lot platting , setbacks, street layout,
alleys or sidewalks that the base district regulations cannot accommodate .


(C)	The area has distinctive land use patterns, including mixed land uses or unique uses or activities that the base district cannot accommodate .

(D)	The area has sufficient on-street and off-street parking to support the use, but does not meet on-site parking requirements .

(E)	The area has special natural or streetscape characteristics , such as creek beds, parks,
gardens or street landscaping that should be preserved or respected .


	ADOPTION OF AN SRD DISTRICT :


(1)	The ordinance adopting the SRD district shall include a statement of purpose for the district, a reference to the approved redevelopment area plan, a list of modifications to the base district(s) regulations , and other conditions placed upon the district by the planning commission and city council.

(2)	Each SRD district shall be shown on the zoning map, identified sequentially by year and order of enactment , i.e. SRD-200801, SRD-200802, etc.

































(END OF SECTION)
 
(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 1005 SMC SPECIAL MEDICAL COMPLEX DISTRICT

	INTENT : This zoning district is to be appended to another primary district in which hospitals or medical , dental, or health clinics are a use permitted by exception to provide for the placement and location of hospitals , medical , dental, or health clinics, to allow such entities the option of expansion with certain limitations .

	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURE : Any principal uses permitted in the zoning district to which the SMC - Special Medical Complex District classification is appended shall continue . In addition, a hospital or medical , dental, or health clinic shall be a permitted principal use .

	EXCEPTIONS : Any conditional use permitted in the primary zoning district to which the SCM - Special Medical Complex district is appended .

	MINIMUM LIGHT AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS : All height and lot area requirements in the primary zoning district to which the SMC - Special Medical Complex district is appended shall apply to a hospital or medical , dental, or health clinic. The additional following minimum lot and height requirements shall apply to a hospital or medical , dental, or health clinic. The minimum lot area for a parking lot for hospital or medical , dental, or health clinic purposes shall be 15,000 contiguous square feet. The minimum lot area for hospital or medical , dental, or health clinics shall be 40,000 contiguous square feet.

	MAXIMUM HEIGHT :  Maximum height  shall be fifty-five feet for any hospital or medical,
dental, or health clinic.


	SIDE AND REAR YARD REQUIREMENTS :


(1)	Side and rear yard requirements for hospital or medical , dental, or health clinics shall be equal in footage to the height of the strncture.

(2)	From parking to any side or rear lot line the minimum set back requirement shall be seven feet except no set back requirement shall apply to a lot line abutting a dedicated alley.

	FRONT SET BACK REQUIREMENTS : The front yard set back requirement shall be the same as the primary zoning district to which the SMC - Special Medical Complex district is appended .

1005.075 ADDITIONAL  SETBACK REQUIREMENTS  - CREEKS/WATER  COURSES : The
additional setback requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made part shall be the additional setback requirements .

	MAXIMUM LOT  COVERAGE :   There shall be no maximum  lot coverage requirements .
 
	OTHER APPLICABLE  PROVISIONS  :


(1)	Where a hospital or medical , dental, or health clinic adjoins or is located across an alley, any lot or parcel upon which a residential stmcture is located , a solid wall or fence, vine covered open fence, or compact evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be located on the property line common to such residential stmcture except in the front yard. Said screening requirement shall not be required ifthere preexists on the adjacent residential property screening which complies with the requirements of this section. Such screening requirement shall also not be required where the wall of any building is not greater than five (5) feet from the set back requirement within the primary district to which this SMC
- Special Medical Complex district is appended , and there are no windows or other openings except for doors for emergency purposes only.

(2)	Any illumination or lighting for hospital or medical , dental, or health clinics shall be directionalized so as prohibit lighting of any adjacent residential stmcture .

1005. 10 OFF-STREET PARKING : The off-street parking requirements of the Parent District of which this district is made a part shall be applicable .

1005. 105  DRIVEWAYS :    Driveways  shall be paved  as per  section 303 .01(51.5) .


1005. 11 SIGN REGULATIONS : The sign regulations of the Parent District to which this district is appended shall be applicable in this district. In addition, the following are also applicable .

(1)	Directional ground signs and/or wall signs shall be allowed at all driveway entrances and exits, main drive intersections and above emergency room entrances . Such signs shall have a maximum height of six (6) feet and a maximum size of 50 square feet. Facilities in excess of30,000 square feet may have one directional ground sign per driveway entrance with a maximum height often (10) feet and a maximum size of 100 square feet. Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be moving or flashing in nature .

(2)	One on-premises wall sign per building facade, not exceeding 100 square feet in area, or one on­ premises ground sign for each building , not exceeding a maximum height of six (6) feet and a maximum size of 60 square feet in area, limited to identifying the building or activity being conducted on the premises . Such signs may be illuminated but shall not be moving or flashing in nature .













(END OF SECTION)
 
SECTION 1006  SMI  SPECIAL MIXED USE INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT


	INTENT : The Special Mixed Use Industrial District (SMI) is an overlay district intended to accommodate unique land use and other distinctive characteristics of the older established industrial area north of the railroad tracks in the central part of Blair. The SMI district, used in combination with the base A/ML - Agricultural/Light Industrial and Manufacturing District, allows variations in permitted  uses and  site development regulations that are adapted to the needs of this special area.

	PERMITTED PRINCIPAL USES AND STRUCTURES : Uses and stmctures permitted under the provisions of the regulations of the Parent A/ML District of which this district is made a part shall be permitted .

	PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES : Accessory uses and stmctures permitted under the provisions of the regulations of the Parent A/ML District of which this district is made a part and those normally appurtenant to the uses and stmctures permitted as exceptions shall be permitted .

	EXCEPTIONS : Exceptions permitted under the provisions of the regulations of the Parent A/ML District of which this district is made a part shall be permitted,  along with the following additional exceptions :

(1)	Any principal permitted use or excepted use allowed in the CCB - Central Business District (Sections 801.02 and 801.04).

(2)	Any principal permitted use or excepted use allowed in the A/CH - Agricultural/Commercial Highway District (Sections 802.02 and 802.04).

	CONDITIONS FOR GRANTING EXCEPTIONS : All provisions for the granting of exceptions under the Parent A/ML District of which this district is made a part shall be followed .

	ADOPTION OF AN SMI DISTRICT :


(1)	The ordinance adopting the SMI district shall include a map detailing the boundaries of the district.

(2)	Each SMI district shall be shown on the zoning map, identified sequentially by year and order of enactment , i.e.  SMI-200901,  SMI-200902,  etc.








(END OF SECTION)
(Blank Page)
 
ARTICLE 11 SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS SECTION 1101 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS
Sight Triangle Easement :
On a corner lot in all districts, except the CCB Central Business District , continuous unobstrncted sight distance shall be provided for safe traffic operations . The sight triangle consists of the area measured along the curb or outside lane of a street, beginning at the point where the two curb lines would intersect perpendicularly . No obstrnction , including fences, hedges, walls, shrnbbery or other manmade or natural obstrnctions shall exist between a height of two and one-half (2 1/2) feet and ten
(10) feet within a sight triangle of the following dimensions as set forth in the table below using the diagram shown below and incorporated by this reference herein . The two and one-half (2 1/2) foot height restriction shall be measured from the center of the street with the lowest elevation within the boundary of the sight triangle . The ten (10) foot height restriction shall be measured from the center of the street with the highest elevation within the boundary of the sight triangle . For irregular street intersections which are not perpendicular for two hundred (200) feet, the following dimensions shall
be doubled .			---


















 
$T i:<:e<T    C.L.A$SI FICATlON
(Ms::Asu2s:P AL.CNS Curb or
outside lane)

''"A"    (t>r ANCS  JN   FEe:.T)








SIGHT TRIANGLE ALIGNMENT

*All Local to Collector, Local to Arterial, Collector to Arterial and Arterial to Arterial  should be controlled by stop signs and traffic signals.
Source :	The Illustrated  Book of Development  Definitions, (Moskowitz, Harvey and  Carl Lindbloom,  1995).
 
(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 1102  FENCES, HEDGES AND RETAINING WALLS
Fences and Hedges : Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, fences and hedges may be permitted in any required yard , provided that no fence or hedge along the sides or front edge of any front yard shall be over three and one half (3 1/2) feet in height. Additionally , no fence or hedge shall exceed 2 1/2 feet in height when located within the site triangle of a corner lot.

A)	The following regulations shall apply to the constrnction of fences.


1)	No solid fence shall be constrncted closer to the street than the front property line. If sidewalk is located within the front yard , no fence shall enclose the sidewalk nor shall a fence be constrncted nearer than six inches (6") to the sidewalk.

2)	No fence erected in a required  front  yard  shall  materially  obstrnct  public  view . No component of a front yard fence shall exceed 3 Yz' feet in height , nor shall any strnctural member  exceed  thirty  six inches (36") in area, as measured  using the horizontal  cross section.

3)	No fence shall be constrncted which will constitute a traffic hazard as identified in the site triangle of a corner lot (See Section 1101).

4)	No fence constrncted in the second front yard (the side yard abutting the street) of a corner lot shall exceed forty eight inches (48") in height. For the purposes of this section, the "second front yard " shall be deemed to be in the area extending from the front corner of the house to the rear lot line on the side of the lot immediately adjacent to the City Street.

5)	No fence shall be constrncted in such a manner or be of such design as to be hazardous or dangerous to persons or animals by intent of its constrnction or by inadequate maintenance (examples of hazardous or dangerous fences shall be wire strand fences such as electrical conduit wire fences, barbed wire fences, chicken wire fences, etc.). Permitted types offences shall include chain link fencing, wood fencing (including split rail and split rail with plastic coated wire backing) , wrought iron, plastic , vinyl e-F and other ornamental fencing or masonry (see Item #6).

6)	Applicants for masonry fences must first locate the property pins or have a licensed surveyor locate or set the property pins to confirm the location of the property lines. The side of concrete fences facing any adjoining property or right of way must be brick or stone textured .

7)	No fence within Residential Districts, except fences erected upon public or parochial school grounds or in public parks and in public playgrounds , shall be constrncted of a height greater than six (6) feet.

8)	All fences shall conform to the constrnction standards of the building code and other ordinances .
 

9)	In commercial and industrial districts, maximum height of fences shall be six (6) feet.
Except , when industry standards for certain types of businesses require fences of greater heights, the Zoning Administrator at his/her discretion may allow greater heights .

10)	All fences or parts thereof which are solid shall be constrncted so that all posts, braces, stringers, and all other strnctural members faced to the interior or the lot or parcel being fenced .

11) Effective from and after July 1, 1998, the Rules and Regulations of the International Building Code pertaining to confinement and fencing of outdoor pools shall be in effect and shall be enforced .

12) All fence posts shall be made of wood , wrought iron, plastic , vinyl, ornamental fencing and masonry or of similar material as the remainder of the fence.

B)	The following regulations shall apply to the constrnction of retaining walls .


1)	PURPOSE  AND  INTENT .


a)	To allow for the review of retaining walls of a size that may impact surrounding buildings , land , and uses;

b)	To require the constrnction ofretaining walls in a manner consistent with engineering and constrnction best practices ; and


c)	To lessen the impact oflarge retaining walls on abutting properties and the public by encouraging the use of landscaping and aesthetically pleasing design elements .

2)	APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS : The regulations and requirements contained herein shall apply to all retaining walls erected in the City of Blair, except the following :

a)	Retaining walls that are six (6) feet in height or less shall not require a building permit but must meet the requirements of this section.


b)	A terraced combination of walls, in which each separate wall is six (6) feet in height or less and in which each terrace is at least two times (2x) the height of the next lowest wall, shall not require a building  permit but must meet the requirements of this section.

3)	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS : Following are the general requirements for retaining walls, including walls six (6) feet in height or less that do not require a building permit.   No  retaining   wall  shall  be  constrncted   in  excess  of  these  General
 
Requirements regarding maximum height or maximum slope without first obtaining a Conditional Use Permit (see Subsection B(4) below) .


a)	Permit and Design - A building permit shall be required for all retaining walls that are over six (6) feet in height. All retaining walls requiring a permit must be designed by an engineer licensed in Nebraska .


b)	Terracing - Terracing of retaining walls is allowed and encouraged . In a terraced retaining wall system, if a successive wall is setback from the next lowest wall at least two times (2x) the height of the next lowest wall, the walls shall be considered as separate walls . Ifa successive wall is setback from the next lowest wall less than two times (2x) the height of the next lowest wall, the multiple walls shall be treated as a single wall and the height shall be measured as described in subsection 3(c) below .


c)	Determining Retaining Wall Height - The height  of a retaining wall shall be the distance from the grade at the front of the wall to the grade at the back of the wall at the same section. For walls that are not a constant height the largest of these measurements shall be used to determine the height of the wall. Multiple walls treated as a single wall shall be measured from the grade at the front of the lowest wall to the grade at the back of the highest successive wall.

d)	SetbackandMaximumHeightRequirements-
I.	Applicants for retaining walls located within three (3) feet of a property line must first locate the property pins or have a licensed surveyor locate or set the property pins to confirm the location of the property lines.

IL Retaining walls which discharge storm water at their base from downspout drains located on any structure shall be located at least three (3) feet from the property line. Such discharge locations shall be constructed and maintained to eliminate any erosion from the base of the wall or adjoining property .

111. Front yard(s) - No retaining wall erected in a required front yard shall materially obstruct public view or constitute a traffic hazard as identified in the site triangle of a corner lot (See Section 1101). No retaining wall shall be constructed closer than six (6) inches from the front property line without an easement from the City. No retaining wall in a required front yard shall exceed three and a half(3 YS) feet in height. No retaining wall bordering and facing the driveway or approved  parking  areas shall exceed ten (10) feet in height.

iv.   Side and rear yard(s) - No retaining wall shall be constructed closer than six
(6) inches from the side or rear property line. Ifthe face of the retaining wall is towards the inside of the property , a permanent easement must exist for all areas outside the property requiring geogrid support and backfill , and such easements must be recorded against all effected properties . No retaining wall shall exceed ten (10) feet in height.
 

e)	Wall Surcharge - Retaining walls shall have a maximum 1:4 (25%) slope in the soil surcharge uphill from the retaining wall for a minimum distance of two times (2x) the height of the wall.

f)	Nonconforming Retaining Walls - Retaining walls constmcted and/or permitted prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be allowed to remain in their existing state; however , significant changes or alterations to such walls shall be made in conformity with these regulations . The repair and routine maintenance of nonconforming retaining walls shall be allowed without requiring conformity with these regulations .


4)	CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT REQUESTS TO EXCEED GENERAL HEIGHT AND/OR SLOPE LIMITATIONS :

a)	A Conditional Use Permit application may be submitted for the following exceptions only :
1.	Retaining walls to exceed  the maximum  heights indicated  in Subsection B(3)(d) .


11.   Retaining walls to exceed the maximum 1:4 (25%) slope in the soil surcharge indicated in Subsection B(3)(e).

b)	A Conditional Use Permit application must address, and will be evaluated on, the following criteria :
1.	That  the  proposed  retaining  wall  is  otherwise  in  compliance  with  the provisions of this Section;

11.   That the proposed retaining wall will not adversely impact adjacent property ,
the public or public infrastmcture ;


111.   That the proposed retaining wall is the minimum stmcture necessary to allow a subject property to be reasonably utilized .

Notwithstanding the above, any real estate located outside the corporate limits of the City of Blair and which is included in the General Agricultural Zoning District or the Rural Residential Estate Zoning District shall be exempt regarding fences and hedges from the requirements set forth hereinabove in this Section.

 
SECTION	1102.01 GENERATORS
 
SATELLITE	DISHES,	TELEVISION	ANTENNAS,	WIND
 

Satellite dishes over twenty (20) inches in diameter, television antennas, and wind generators shall not be located in the front, other street yard or side yard , but may be located in the rear yard if they are at least five (5) feet from the side lot line, ten (10) feet from the rear lot line, and on corner lots they shall be  set back the full required  front yard  set-back  on the other  street yard  frontage .   If these
 
strnctures are located on top of the main strncture, they must meet the minimum set-backs for the district.

If these strnctures are to be located on a double frontage lot, they may be located in the front yard which is opposite of the direction which the majority of the residential strnctures in the block face as long as they are at least twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way and five (5) feet from the side lot line.

1102.02  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS  TOWERS AND FACILITIES

 
1102.02(1)
1102.02(2)
1102.02(3)
1102.02(4)
1102.02(5)
1102.02(6)
1102.02(7)
1102.02(8)
1102.02(9)
1102.02(10)
1102.02(11)
1102.02(12)
1102.02(13)
1102.02(14)
1102.02(15)
1102.02(16)
1102.02(17)
1102.02(18)
1102.02(19)
1102.02(20)


1102.02(1)
 
Purposes Definitions
Development of Towers Setbacks
Strnctural Requirements
Separation or Buffer Requirements Method of Determining Tower Height Illumination
Exterior Finish Landscaping Access
Stealth Design
Telecommunications Facilities on Antenna Support Strnctures Modification of Towers
Certification and Inspections Maintenance
Criteria for Site Development Modifications Abandonment
Severability
Conflicts (Repeal of Ordinances) Purposes .
 
The general purpose of this Ordinance is to regulate the placement, constrnction , and modification of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities in order to protect the health , safety, and welfare of the public, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive wireless telecommunications marketplace in the City.

Specifically, the purposes of this Ordinance are:


(a)	To regulate the location of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities in the City;


(b)	To protect residential  areas and land uses from potential adverse impact of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities ;
 
(c)	To minimize adverse visual impact of Towers and Telecommunications Facilities through careful design, siting, landscaping , and innovative camouflaging techniques ;

(d)	To promote and encourage shared use/collection of Towers and Antenna Support Strnctures as a primary option rather than constrnction of additional single-use Towers;

(e)	To promote and encourage utilization of technological designs that will either eliminate or reduce the need for erection of new Tower strnctures to support antenna and Telecommunications Facilities ;

(f)	To avoid potential damage to property caused by Towers and Telecommunications Facilities by ensuring such strnctures are soundly and carefully designed , constrncted , modified , maintained , and removed when no longer used or are determined to be strncturally unsound ; and

(g)	To ensure that Towers and Telecommunications Facilities are compatible with surrounding land uses .

1102.02(2)   Definitions .
The following words, terms, and phrases , when used in this Section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning :
(a)	Act means the Telecommunications Act of 1996.


(b)	Antenna Support Structure means any building or strncture other than a Tower which can be used  for location of Telecommunications Facilities .

(c)	Applicant means any Person that applies for a Tower development permit.


(d)	Application means the process by which the Owner of a parcel of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City submits a request to develop, constrnct , build , modify , or erect a Tower upon such parcel of land . Application includes all written documentation , verbal statements, and representations , in whatever form or fonun, made by an Applicant to the City concerning such a request.

(e)	Engineer means any engineer licensed  by the State of Nebraska .


(f)	Owner means any Person with fee title or a long-term (exceeding ten (10) years) leasehold to any parcel of land within the zoning jurisdiction of the City who desires to develop, or constrnct , build , modify , or erect a Tower upon such parcel of land .

(g)	Person is any natural person , firm, partnership , association, corporation , company, or other legal entity, private or public , whether for profit or not for profit.

(h)	Stealth means any Tower or Telecommunications Facility which is designed to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses, including, but not limited to, architecturally screened
 
roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into architectural elements, and Towers designed to look other than like a Tower such as light poles, power poles, and trees . The term Stealth does not necessarily exclude the use of uncamouflaged lattice, guyed , or monopole Tower designs .

(i)	Telecommunications Facilities means any cables, wires, lines, wave guides, antennas, and any other equipment or facilities associated with the transmission or reception of communications which a Person seeks to locate or has installed upon or near a Tower or Antenna Support Strncture. However , Telecommunications Facilities shall not include :
(1)	any satellite earth station dish which is twenty (20) inches in diameter or less, or otherwise regulated under Section 1102.01 hereinabove ; and ,

(2)		any amateur radio station operator/receive-only antenna .  This section shall not govern the installation of any antenna owned or operated by an amateur radio operator and used exclusively for receive-only antennas and for private noncommercial purposes which shall be regulated elsewhere in the zoning regulations for the City of Blair, Nebraska and the municipal code of the City of Blair, Nebraska .
(j)	Tower means a self-supporting lattice, guyed, or monopole strncture constrncted from grade
which  supports  Telecommunications  Facilities .


1102.02(3) Development  of Towers .


(a)	No person shall build, erect, or constrnct a Tower upon any parcel ofland within any zoning district  unless a conditional use permit shall have been issued in the manner provided in Article 14 hereinafter.  No person shall build , erect, or constrnct a Tower upon any parcel of land except within the following zoning districts :

1.	A/ML--AGRICULTURAL/LIGHT   INDUSTRIAL  AND MANUFACTURING


2.	.               A/MH--AGRICULTURAL/HEAVY   INDUSTRIAL


3.	AGG-- GENERAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT ; provided however , no person shall build , erect or constrnct a tower within one mile from the corporate limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska , as amended from time to time .

(b)	Towers are exempt from the maximum height restrictions of the districts where located .
Towers shall be permitted to a height of one hundred and fifty (150) feet. Towers may be permitted in excess of one hundred and fifty (150) feet in accordance with  1102.02(17) "Criteria for Site Plan Development Modifications ."

(c)	No new Tower shall be built , constrncted , or erected within the zoning jurisdiction of the City unless the Tower is capable of supporting another Person's operating Telecommunications Facilities comparable in weight , size, and surface area to the Telecommunications Facilities installed by the Applicant on the Tower within six (6) months of the completion of the Tower
 
constrnction .


(d)	An Application to develop a Tower shall include :
(1)	The name, address, and telephone number of the Owner and lessee of the parcel of land upon which the Tower is situated . Ifthe Applicant is not the Owner of the parcel of land upon which the Tower is situated , the written consent of the Owner shall be evidenced in the Application .

(2)	The legal description and address of the parcel of land upon which the Tower is situated .

(3)	The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners of other Towers or fusible Antenna Support Strnctures within a one-half (YS) mile radius of the proposed new tower site, including City-owned property .
(4)	A description of the design plan proposed by the Applicant must identify its utilization of the most recent technological design, including microcell design, as part of the design plan . The Applicant must demonstrate the need for Towers and why design alternatives, such as the use of microcell , cannot be utilized to accomplish the provision of the Applicant's telecommunications services.
(5)	An affidavit attesting to the fact that the Applicant  made  diligent ,  but  unsuccessful , efforts to obtain permission to install or collocate the Applicant's Telecommunications Facilities  on  City-owned   Towers  or usable  Antenna   Support  Strnctures located  within a one-half( YS) mile  radius  of the  proposed   Tower  site.

(6)	An affidavit attesting to the fact that the Applicant made diligent , but unsuccessful , efforts to install or collocate the Applicant's Telecommunications Facilities on Towers or usable Antenna Support Strnctures owned by other Persons located within a one­ half (YS) mile radius of the proposed  Tower site.

(7)	Written technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that the proposed Tower or Telecommunications Facilities cannot be installed or collocated on another Person 's Tower or usable Antenna Support Strnctures owned by other Persons located within a one-half( YS) mile radius of the proposed Tower site.

(8)	A written statement from an Engineer(s) that the constrnction and placement of the Tower  will not interfere with public safety communications and the usual and customary  transmission or reception of radio, television, or other communications services enjoyed  by adjacent residential and non-residential properties .

(9)	Written, technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that the proposed strncture meets the standards set forth in 1102.02(5), "Strnctural Requirements ", of this Ordinance .

(10)	Written, technical evidence from a qualified Engineer(s) acceptable to the Fire Marshall and the building official that the proposed site of the Tower or Telecommunications Facilities does not pose a risk of explosion, fire, or other danger
 
to life or property due to its proximity to volatile, flammable, explosive , or hazardous materials such as LP gas, propane, gasoline, natural gas, or corrosive or other dangerous  chemicals .

(11)	In order to assist the City staff, Planning Commission and City Council in evaluating visual impact, the Applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing the proposed site of the Tower with a photo-realistic representation of the proposed Tower as it would appear viewed from the closest residential property and from adjacent roadways .

(12)	The Act gives the FCC sole jurisdiction of the field ofregulation of RF emissions and does not allow the City to condition or deny, on the basis of RF impacts, the approval of any Telecommunications Facilities (whether mounted on Towers or Antenna Support Stmctures) which meet FCC standards . In order to provide information to its citizens, the City shall make available, upon request , copies of ongoing FCC information and RF emission standards for Telecommunications Facilities transmitting from Towers or Antenna Support Stmctures. Applicants shall be required to submit information on the proposed power density of their proposed Telecommunications Facilities and demonstrate how this meets FCC standards . Applicants shall certify that all franchises or licenses required under federal, state or local law for the constmction and/or operation of a wireless communication system in the City have been obtained and shall file a copy of all such required franchises and/or licenses with the City staff

(13)	Identification of  the  entities  providing  the  backhaul  network  for  the  tower(s) described in the application and other towers or cellular sites owned and/or operated by the applicant_,_

(e)	The Planning Commission may require an applicant to supplement any information the Commission considers inadequate or the applicant has failed to comply . In granting a conditional use permit , conditions may be imposed to the extent that the Commission and the City Council conclude that such conditions are reasonably necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties . The Commission or the Council may deny an Application on the basis that the Applicant has not satisfactorily supplied the information required in this subsection . Applications shall be reviewed by the City in a prompt manner and all decisions shall be supported in writing setting forth the reasons for approval or denial.

The Commission and City Council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit , although the Commission and City Council may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Commission and City Council conclude that the goals of this section are better served thereby ;

1.	Height of proposed tower.


2.	.         Proximity of the tower to residential stmctures and residential district boundaries .
 
3.	Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties .


4.	Surrounding  topography .


5.	Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.


6.	Design of tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtmsiveness .

7.	Proposed ingress and egress.


8.	Availability of suitable existing towers, other stmctures or alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or stmctures .

No new towers shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Commission and the City Council that no existing tower stmcture alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or stmctures can accommodate the applicant's proposed tower. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower stmcture alternative technology can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may include any of the following (although nothing should be constmed to infer that meeting one, some or all of the following shall entitle the applicant to approval) .
1.	No existing towers or stmctures are located within the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering requirements .

2.	. Existing towers or stmctures are not of sufficient  height  to  meet  applicant's engineering requirements .

3.	Existing towers or stmctures do not have sufficient stmctural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.

4.	The applicant's proposed antenna would cause interference with the antenna on existing towers or  stmctures or the antenna on the existing towers or stmctures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna .

5.	The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or stmcture or to adapt an existing tower or stmcture are commercially unreasonable .

6.	The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and stmctures unsuitable .

The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or stmctures is  unsuitable . Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable .
 
1102.02(4) Setbacks.


(a)	All Towers shall be set back on all sides a distance equal to the minimum front yard, rear yard and side yard setback requirement in the applicable zoning district. In addition to the minimum yard setback requirements , all towers shall be set back one (1) additional foot per each foot of Tower height.

(b)	Setback requirements for Towers shall be measured from the base of the Tower to the property line of the parcel of land on which it is located .

(c)	Setback requirements may be modified, as provided in 1102.02(17), when placement ofa Tower in a location which will reduce the visual impact can be accomplished . For example, adjacent to trees which may visually hide the Tower.

1102.02(5)  Stmctural  Requirements .


All Towers must be designed and certified by an Engineer to be stmcturally sound and , at minimum, in conformance with the applicable Building Code, and any other standards outlined in this Ordinance . All Towers in operation shall be fixed to land .

1102.02(6) Separation or Buffer Requirements .


For the purpose of this Ordinance, the separation distances between Towers shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of the existing or approved stmcture and the proposed base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed Tower. Tower separation distances from residentially zoned lands  shall be measured from the base of a Tower to the closest point of residentially zoned property . The minimum Tower separation distances from residentially zoned land and from other Towers shall be calculated and applied irrespective of City jurisdictional boundaries .
(a)	Towers shall be separated from all residentially zoned lands by a minimum of two hundred
(200) feet or two hundred (200) percent of the height of the proposed Tower, whichever is greater.

(b)	Proposed Towers must meet the following minimum separation requirements from existing Towers  or Towers which  have  been  granted  a conditional  use permit  but  are not yet constmcted at the time a conditional use permit is granted pursuant to this Code :

(1)	Monopole Tower  stmctures  shall  be  separated  from  all  other  Towers, whether monopole , self-supporting lattice, or guyed, by a minimum of seven hundred and fifty (750) feet.

(2)	Self-supporting lattice or guyed Tower stmctures shall be separated from all other self-supporting or guyed Towers by a minimum of fifteen hundred (1,500) feet.

(3)	Self-supporting lattice or guyed Tower stmctures shall be separated from all monopole Towers by a minimum of seven hundred and fifty (750) feet.
 

1102.02(7) Method of Determining Tower Height.


Measurement of Tower height for the purpose of determining compliance with all requirements of this Section shall include the Tower structure itself, the base pad , and any other Telecommunications Facilities attached thereto which extend more than twenty (20) feet over the top of the Tower structure itself   Tower height shall be measured from grade .

1102.02(8)  Illumination .


Towers shall not be artificially lighted except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Upon commencement of construction of the Tower, in cases where there are residential uses located within a distance which is three hundred (300) percent of the height of the Tower from the Tower and when required by federal law, dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA .

1102.02(9) Exterior  Finish .


Towers not requiring FAA painting or marking shall have an exterior finish which enhances compatibility with adjacent land uses, as approved by the appropriate reviewing body .

1102.02(10)  Landscaping .


All landscaping  on a parcel of land containing Towers, Antenna Support Structures, or Telecommunications Facilities shall be in accordance with the applicable landscaping requirements in the zoning district where the Tower, Antenna Support Structure, or Telecommunications Facilities are located . The City may require landscaping in excess of the requirements in the City Code in order to enhance compatibility with adjacent land uses . Landscaping shall be installed on the outside ofany fencing .

1102.02(11) Deleted 1102.02(12) Stealth Design .
Stealth design is encouraged . The issue of stealth design will be considered as an element of the building design criteria considered as part of the issuance of the conditional use permit.

No signs shall be allowed on any antenna or tower.


1102.02(13) Telecommunications Facilities on Antenna Support Structures.


Any Telecommunications Facilities which are not attached to a Tower may be permitted on any Antenna Support Structure at least fifty (50) feet tall, regardless of the zoning restrictions applicable to the zoning district where the structure is located . Telecommunications Facilities are prohibited on all other structures .  The owner of such structure shall, by written certification to the
 
zoning administrator , establish the following at the time plans are submitted for a building permit :


(a)	That the height from grade of the Telecommunications Facilities shall not exceed the height from grade of the Antenna Support Strncture by more than twenty (20) feet;

(b)	That any Telecommunications Facilities and their appurtenances , located above the primary roof of an Antenna Support Strncture, are set back one (1) foot from the edge of the primary roof for each one (1) foot in height above the primary roof of the Telecommunications Facilities . This setback requirement shall not apply to Telecommunications Facilities and their appurtenances , located above the primary roof of an Antenna Support Strncture, if such facilities are appropriately screened from view through the use of panels, walls, fences, or other screening techniques approved by the City. Setback requirements shall not apply to Stealth antennas which are mounted to the exterior of Antenna Support Strnctures below the primary roof, but which do not protrnde more than eighteen (18) inches from the side of such an Antenna Support Strncture.

1102.02(14) Modification  of Towers .


(a)	A Tower existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance , which was in compliance with the City's zoning regulations immediately prior to the effective date of this Ordinance , may continue in existence as a nonconforming strncture. Such nonconforming strnctures may be modified or demolished and rebuilt without complying with any of the additional requirements of this Section, except for Sections 1102.02(6), "Separation or Buffer Requirements ," 1102.02(15), "Certification and Inspections," and 1102.02(16), "Maintenance ," so long as:

(1)	The Tower is being modified or demolished and rebuilt for the sole purpose of accommodating , within six (6) months of the completion of the modification or rebuild , additional Telecommunications Facilities comparable in weight , size, and surface area to the discrete operating Telecommunications Facilities of any Person currently installed on the Tower ;

(2)	An Application for a conditional use permit is made in the manner provided in this Article and Article 12;. The grant of a conditional use permit pursuant to this Section allowing the modification or demolition and rebuild of an existing nonconforming Tower shall not be considered a determination that the modified or demolished and rebuilt Tower is conforming ; and

(3)	The height of the modified or rebuilt Tower and Telecommunications Facilities attached thereto do not exceed the maximum height allowed under this Ordinance .

(b)	Except as provided in this Section, a nonconforming strncture or use may not be enlarged , increased in size, or discontinued in use for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days. This Ordinance shall not be interpreted to legalize any strncture or use existing at the time this Ordinance is adopted , which strncture or use is in violation of the Code prior to enactment of this Ordinance .
 

1102.02(15) Certification  and  Inspections .


(a)	All Towers shall be certified by an Engineer to be stmcturally sound and in conformance with the requirements of the Building Code and all other constmction standards set forth by the City's Code and federal and state law. For new monopole Towers, such certification shall be submitted with an Application pursuant to 1102.02(3) of this Ordinance and every five (5) years thereafter. For existing monopole Towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty
(60) days of the effective date of this Ordinance and then every five (5) years thereafter. For new lattice or guyed Towers, such certification shall be submitted with an Application pursuant to 1102.02(3) of this Ordinance and every two (2) years thereafter. For existing lattice or guyed Towers, certification shall be submitted within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this Ordinance and then every two (2) years thereafter. The Tower owner may be required by the City to submit more frequent certifications should there be reason to believe that the stmctural and electrical integrity of the Tower is jeopardized .

(b)	The City or its agents shall have authority to enter onto the property upon which a Tower is located , between the inspections and certifications required above, to inspect the Tower for the purpose of determining whether it complies  with the Building Code and all other constmction standards provided by the City Code and federal and state law.

(c)	The City reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time, upon reasonable notice to the Tower owner. All expenses related to such inspections by the City shall be borne by the Tower owner.

1102.02(16)  Maintenance .


(a)	Tower owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care and shall install and maintain in use nothing less than commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisances to the public .

(b)	Tower owners shall install and maintain Towers, Telecommunications Facilities, wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the National Electric Code and all FCC, state, and local regulations , and in such manner that will not interfere with the use of other property .

(c)	All Towers, Telecommunications Facilities , and Antenna Support Stmctures shall at all times be kept and maintained in good condition, order, and repair so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any Person .

(d)	All maintenance  or constmction  of Towers, Telecommunications  Facilities , or Antenna Support Stmctures shall be performed by licensed maintenance and constmction personnel.

(e)	All Towers shall maintain compliance with current RF emission standards of the FCC .
 
(f)	In the event that the use of a Tower is discontinued by the Tower owner, the Tower owner shall provide written notice to the City of its intent to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued .

1102.02(17) Criteria for Site Plan Development Modifications .


(a)	Notwithstanding the Tower requirements provided in this Ordinance, a modification to the requirements may be approved by the City Board of Zoning  Adjustment  ("Board  of Adjustment") as a variance in accordance with the following :

(1)	In  addition  to  the  requirement  for  a  Tower  Application ,  the  Application  for modification shall include the following :

(i)	A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that might occur as a result of approving the modification .

(ii)	A description of off-site or on-site factors which mitigate any adverse impacts which might occur as a result of the modification .

(iii)	A technical study that documents and supports the criteria submitted by the Applicant upon which the request for modification is based . The technical study shall be certified by an Engineer and shall document the existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and its relationship to surrounding rights-of-way and properties .

(iv)	For a modification of the setback requirement , the Application shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed Tower could be located , attempts by the Applicant to  contact  and negotiate an agreement for collocation, and the result of such attempts .

(v)	The Board of Adjustment may require the Application to be reviewed by an independent Engineer under contract to the City to determine whether the antenna study supports the basis for the modification requested .

The cost of review by the City's Engineer shall be reimbursed to the City by the Applicant.


(2)	The Board of Adjustment  shall consider the Application for modification based on the following criteria :

(i)	That the Tower as modified will be compatible with and not adversely impact the character and integrity of surrounding properties .

(ii)	Off-site or on-site conditions exist which mitigate the adverse impacts, if any, created by the modification .
 
(iii)    In addition, the Board may include conditions on the site where the Tower is to be located if such conditions are necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed Tower and mitigate any adverse impacts which arise in connection with the approval of the modification .

(b)	In addition to the requirements of subparagraph (a) of this Section and the requirements of Article 13, in the following cases the Applicant must also demonstrate, with written evidence, the following :
(1)	In the case of a requested modification to the setback requirement , 1102.02(4), that the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel ofland upon which the Tower is proposed to be located and the alternative for the Person is to locate the Tower at another site which is closer in proximity to a residentially zoned land .

(2)	In the case of a request for modification to the separation and buffer requirements from other Towers of 1102.02(6), "Separation or Buffer Requirements, " that the proposed site is zoned A/MH or A/ML and the proposed site is at least double the minimum standard for separation from residentially zoned lands as provided for in 1102.02(6).

(3)	In the case of a request for modification of the separation and buffer requirements from residentially zoned land of 1102.02(6), ifthe Person provides written technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that the proposed Tower and Telecommunications Facilities must be located at the proposed site in order to meet the coverage requirements of the Applicant's wireless communications system and ifthe Person is willing to create approved landscaping and other buffers to screen the Tower from being visible to residentially zoned property .

(4)	In the case of a request for modification of the height limit for Towers and Telecommunications Facilities or to the minimum height requirements for Antenna Support Strnctures, that the modification is necessary to :
(i)	facilitate collocation of Telecommunications Facilities in order to avoid constrnction of a new Tower ;
(ii)	to meet the coverage requirements of the Applicant's wireless communications system, which requirements must be documented with written, technical evidence from an Engineer(s) that demonstrates that the height of the proposed Tower is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily, and no Tower that is taller than such minimum height shall be approved .

(c)	In addition to the foregoing, the Applicant must demonstrate that, by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of his property , the strict application of any enacted regulation under this article would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue hardships upon the owner of such property . The Board of Adjustment may authorize a variance from such strict
 
application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship , if such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of any ordinance or resolution . No such variance shall be authorized by the Board of Adjustment unless it finds that :

(a)	The strict application of the zoning regulation would produce undue hardship ;


(b)	such hardship is not shared generally by other properties in the same zoning district and the same vicinity ;

(c)	the authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property and the character of the district will not be changed by the granting of the variance ; and

(d)	the granting of such variance is based upon reason of demonstrable and exceptional hardship as distinguished from the variations for purposes of convenience, profit  or caprice .

1102.02(18) Abandonment.


(a)	If any Tower shall cease to be used for a period of 180 consecutive days, the City Council shall notify the Owner, with a copy to the Applicant , that the site will be subject to a determination by the City Council that such site has been abandoned . The Owner shall have thirty (30) days from receipt of said notice to show, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tower has been in use or under repair during the period . Ifthe Owner fails to show that the Tower has been in use or under repair during the period , the City Council shall issue a final determination of abandonment for the site. Upon issuance of the final determination of abandonment , the Owner shall, within seventy-five (75) days, dismantle and remove the Tower.

(b)	To secure the obligation set forth in this Section, the Applicant (and/or Owner) shall post a bond in an amount to be determined by the City Council at the time of the approval of the issuance of the conditional use permit based on the anticipated cost ofremoval of the Tower.

1102.02(19)  Severability .


That if any clause, section, or other part of this Ordinance shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction , the remainder of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby, but shall remain in full force and effect.
(Blank Page)
 
SECTION 1103 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES

	USE FOR DWELLING : Accessory buildings shall not be used for dwelling purposes unless specifically permitted .

	SIZE LIMITATIONS
Accessory buildings are intended to remain secondary in nature to  the primary building or strncture on the land or tract of land in which they are located . Accessory buildings in all Residential Districts (does not include AGG) shall meet the following additional requirements :

1.	The maximum number of accessory buildings shall be limited to two (2) strnctures .

2.	.	No accessory building shall be located between the front building line of the principle building and the front property line, except :
A)	In RRE Districts upon the approval of a conditional use permit.  The conditional use permit may include but not limited to requirements for additional set back , landscaping , screening, etc. All accessory buildings must meet front yard setback requirements .
B)	In RL Districts on lots of forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet or greater upon the approval of a conditional use permit. The conditional use permit may include but not limited to requirements for additional set back , landscaping , screening, etc. All accessory buildings must meet front yard setback requirements .

3.	A)	For  lots that  are  10,000  square feet  or  smaller, the  maximum  combined  total square footage of all accessory buildings shall not exceed the greater of:
1)	Fifty (50) percent of the total square footage of the primary building 's ground
coverage area (area calculated at the exterior of the building at ground level) .
2)	Eight hundred and sixty four (864) square feet.

B)	For lots larger than 10,000 square feet  but  less  than  2  acres, the  maximum combined total  square footage  of all accessory  buildings  shall  not  exceed  the greater of:
1)	Fifty (50) percent of the total square footage of the primary building's ground coverage area (area calculated at the exterior of the building at ground level)
2)	Eight hundred and sixty four (864) square feet plus one (1) percent of the lot size above 10,000 square feet, not to exceed twelve hundred (1,200) square feet.

C)	For lots of at least 2 acres but less than 5 acres, the maximum combined total square footage of all accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty-four hundred (2,400) square feet.

D)	For lots of at least 5 acres, the maximum combined  total  square footage of all accessory buildings shall not exceed thirty-two hundred (3,200) square feet.
 

4.	The combined total square footage area of the primary and accessory buildings shall not exceed the maximum allowable Lot Coverage Area as allowed by the zoning classification in which the buildings are located .

5.	The maximum allowable height of an accessory building , at its highest point , shall be the greater of: a) The height of the primary strncture or the maximum height allowed in the base zoning district , whichever is less, or b) Twenty (20) feet. For purposes of this provision , height shall mean vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade of the building to the highest point of the building .

6.	No accessory strncture shall be constrncted without a primary  building or strncture .
No accessory building shall remain if the primary strncture is removed or demolished .

	VEHICLE ACCESS : Unless otherwise specifically permitted, any accessory building requiring vehicle access from an alley way shall be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line.

	ATTACHED ACCESSORY USE : Any accessory attached to the principle building shall be considered as a part of the principle building and shall meet the same requirements as specified for the principle building in said district.



	FIRE HAZARDOUS ACCESSORY USES : No accessory use shall be located within ten (10) feet of a residential dwelling that creates a fire hazard or would subject the residential strncture to a potential fire, such as a detached fireplace, barbecue ovens, flammable liquid storage, etc.

	CAR PORTS : Car ports are not considered strnctures . Car ports can not be use for storing anything but cars and pickups .

SECTION 1104 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON A LOT

In any zoning district except AGG, RRE, RL, RM, RML and RMH, more than one (1) strncture housing a permitted or permissible  principal use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this Ordinance shall be met for each principal strncture as though it were on an individual lot.

SECTION 1105  EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT REGULATIONS

The height limitations contained in this Ordinance shall not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, domes, chimneys, grain elevators and accessory agricultural strnctures .

SECTION 1106  STRUCTURES TO HAVE ACCESS
 

Every building hereafter erected or moved with the exception of  nonresidential  agricultural related stmctures in A Agricultural zoned districts, shall be on a lot adjacent to a public or approved private street and all stmctures shall be so located on lots as to  provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection and required off-street parking .



SECTION 1107 UTILITY AND LOT AREA REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES

1.	It shall be unlawful to occupy a residential stmcture or any building for living purposes that does not have an approved waste disposal system .

2.	.  No waste absorption field (septic tank, cesspools, etc.) shall be constmcted  any closer  than twenty-five (25) feet from any adjacent property line.

3.	There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than fifty (50) feet from any other residential stmcture.

4.	There shall be no waste absorption field located closer than fifty (50) feet from a water well provided ; however , where geology and subsurface conditions and topography would indicate that seepage could reach the well supply, a greater distance shall be required .

5.	An individual residential waste absorption field shall contain a minimum of ten-thousand (10,000) square feet, exclusive of the area required by stmcture. The entire tract shall contain not less than twenty-thousand (20,000) square feet. If tract is less than two (2) acres, public water must be available .

SECTION 1108  TEMPORARY STRUCTURES

Temporary stmctures incidental to constmction work, but only for the period of such work , are permitted in all districts; however , basements and cellars shall not be occupied for residential purposes until the building is completed .



SECTION 1109  CARETAKERS QUARTERS

Caretaker's quarters are permitted in all districts, if included in the principle stmcture, providing said use is incidental to the principal use .

SECTION 1110 ADJUSTMENTS TO FRONT, REAR, AND SIDE YARD REQUIRE­ MENTS

1.	In all districts except A/ML and A/MH, where forty (40) percent or more of the frontage on one (1) side of a street between the nearest boundary lines of two (2) intersection streets, within the same zoning district , is developed  with buildings that have established , with a variation of
 
five (5) feet or less, a front yard of greater or lesser depth than herein required , new buildings shall be erected no closer to the street right-of-way than the average front yard setback line established by such existing buildings .

2.	.  In all districts except A/ML  and  AIMH, where forty (40) percent  or more of the lots  are developed with buildings or attached decks that have established , with a variation of five (5) feet or less, a rear yard of lesser depth than herein required , new attached decks may be erected  with a rear yard of lesser depth than herein required , not to exceed the average rear yard setback  line established by such existing buildings or attached decks.

3.	In the A/ML and A/MH districts, the City Council may, upon recommendation of  the Planning Commission, grant a Conditional  Use Permit that would allow a front yard set back different than herein required , if:
a.	forty percent  (40%) or more  of the frontage  on one side of the  street between  the
nearest boundary lines of two (2) intersecting streets, and for a distance of one block in either direction, is developed with buildings that have established , with a variation of five feet (5') or less, a front yard of greater or lesser depth than herein required :
b.	.   the entire two block area is within the same zoning district ;
c.	the front yard  of less depth than required  would  have no deleterious  effect  on the value of adjacent property and would pose no threat to health or safety; and
d .   said lot does not front upon a Federal Aid-Primary , Federal Aid-Secondary , or State highway .

Such Conditional Use Permit shall allow new buildings to be erected to closer to the street right­ of-way than the average front yard setback line established under the provisions of 2(a) immediately herein above .

4.	Where two (2) lots are under common  ownership and have been permanently appended to each other by an agreement in writing by the owner thereof, mnning with the land and binding upon the heirs, personal representatives , successors, and assigns of such owners, which provides that such lots or  portions of lots are permanently appended (meaning that they may not be conveyed without the other in a simultaneous transaction to the same grantee); for the determination of minimum front, rear, and side yard requirements , the outer boundary of such lots shall be considered the lot line for establishing set back requirements , and no setback from any internal lot lines, separating such permanently appended lots, shall be required .

SECTION 1110.5 ADDITIONAL SETBACK REQUIREMENTS FOR STRUCTURES ADJACENT  TO CREEKS AND DRAINAGEW AYS

No person shall be granted a permit for the constmction of any stmcture, bank stabilization stmctures, poles, and sign stmctures adjacent to any creek or watercourse unless such stmcture is located so that no portion thereof is any closer to the creek or watercourse than will allow a maximum three-to-one slope plus 20 feet between the water 's edge of the creek or watercourse . "Water 's edge" shall be deemed to be that point constituting the edge of the water during normal flow conditions .
 
A property shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section upon an application filed by the property owner supported by a showing by a registered professional engineer that adequate bank stabilization stmctures or slope protection will be installed in the constmction of said stmcture, having an estimated useful life equal to that of the stmcture, which will provide adequate erosion control conditions coupled with adequate lateral support so that no portion of said  stmcture adjacent to the stream will be endangered by erosion or lack of lateral support. In the event that the stmcture is adjacent to any stream which has been channelized or otherwise improved by any agency of government, then such certification providing an exception to this Section may take the form of a certification as to the adequacy and protection of the improvements  installed by such governmental agency .

SECTION 1111  PARKING REGULATIONS

	PARKING,  STORAGE, OR USE OF MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT :  No
major recreational equipment as defined in SECTION 303 .01 shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot or in any location not approved for such use, except such use shall be permitted  on a temporary basis for a period of not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours .

	PARKING AND STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES : Automotive vehicles  or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall not be parked or stored in any R Residential District other than in completely enclosed buildings . Abandoned  automobiles shall be removed in accordance with SECTION 5-411 of the Blair Code.

	MINIMUM   OFF-STREET   PARKING   AND   LOADING  REQUIREMENTS :    Off­
Street motor vehicle parking and loading space shall be provided on any lot on which any of the indicated stmctures and  uses  are hereafter  established .  Such  space  as defined  in  SECTION 303 .01 of this Ordinance shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or an alley . A required loading space shall include a ten (10) foot by fifty (50) foot space with a minimum of fourteen (14) feet of height clearance . The loading space shall  be located as to avoid undue interference with public use of streets, alleys and walkways . Minimum off-street parking and loading requirements , which shall be set forth in the Schedule of Minimum Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements , hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a pat of this Ordinance . If minimum off-street parking required in said schedule cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal stmcture or use is conducted the City Council, after recommendation from the Planning Commission , may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property , provided that such space lies within two hundred (200) feet of the entrance to such principal stmcture or use .

	SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS:

Structures and Uses                    Minimum Off-Street                   Minimum Off-Street
Parking Regulations	Loading Requirements

Auto Repair Garage                      1 space per 500 sq. ft. of gross     1 space per establishment
floor area
 


Structures and Uses	
Minimum Off-Street Parking Regulations	
Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements
Bowling Alleys	4 spaces per alley	I space per establishment
Car and Trnck Sales	I space per 500 sq. ft. of gross	I space per establishment
	floor area	
Contractor Yard	I space per 500 sq. ft. of gross	I space per establishment
	floor area	

Educational Uses, Nursery	
Parking spaces equal to 20%	
2 spaces per strncture
and Primary	of capacity in students	
Educational Uses, All Others	Parking spaces equal to 40%	2 spaces per strncture
	of capacity in students	
Funeral Homes and Chapels	8 spaces per reposing room	2 spaces per establishment
Hospitals	I space per 2 beds	3 spaces per strncture
Hotels	I space per 2 rental units	I space per establishment
Industrial Uses	I space per 2 employees on	2 spaces per establishment
	largest shift	
Libraries	I space per 500 sq. ft. on floor	I space per strncture
	area	
Lodging and Boarding Houses	I space per 2 rental units	None required
Medical Clinics	5 spaces per staff doctor or	None required
	dentist	

Mobile Home Park	
2 spaces per dwelling unit	
None required
Motels	I space per rental unit	None required
Offices and Office Buildings	I space per 300 sq. ft. of gross	None required
	floor area	

Private Clubs and Lodges	
I space per 500 sq. ft. of floor	
I space per establishment
	area	
Residential  Strnctures (multi-family)	2 spaces per dwelling unit *	None required
Residential  Strnctures (multi­ family), occupants are 65	I Y2 spaces per dwelling unit *	None required
years of age and older		
(* Enclosed parking garages are not counted as parking spaces)
 


Structures and Uses	
Minimum Off-Street Parking Regulations	
Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements
Residential  Strnctures (two-	2 spaces per dwelling unit	None required
family)		
Residential  Strnctures (single-family)	2 spaces per dwelling unit	None required
Residential  Strnctures (attached single-family)	2 spaces per dwelling unit	None required
Retail Sales Establishments	I space per 200 sq. ft. of gross floor area	I space per establishment
Roadside Stands	4 spaces per establishment	None required
Sanitariums, Convalescent ,
and Rest Homes Services	I space per 3 beds, plus I space per employee on the	I space per establishment
	largest shift	
Service Establishments	I space per 200 sq. ft. of gross	I space per establishment
	floor area	
Theaters, Auditoriums and	I space per 5 people in	I space per establishment
Places of Assembly	designed capacity	
Veterinary Establishments	3 spaces per staff doctor	None required
Wholesaling and Distributing	I space per 2 employees on	2 spaces per establishment
Operations	largest shift	





SECTION 1112  MOBILE HOME REGULATIONS

Rescinded in its entirety on March 8, 2005 - Ordinance No . 2022

SECTION 1113  CAMPGROUNDS

A campground may be established in specified districts according to the procedures for granting an exception, provided that the proposed campground meets all of the following requirements :

1.	A campground shall have an area of not less than one (1) acre, nor more than five (5) acres, and no camping unit or service strncture shall be closer to a street/road /highway right-of-way or other property line than twenty-five (25) feet;

2.	.  A campground  shall provide minimum facilities including central travel trailer sanitary  and water stations, toilets and refuse containers ;
 
3.	Certification of compliance with all ordinances and regulations regarding zoning, health, plumbing , electrical, building , fire prevention and all other applicable ordinances and regulations shall be a prior requirement for granting said exception ;

4.	Individual camping units, other than tents, shall have a lot area of not less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet and the total number of units per gross acre shall not exceed twenty (20);

5.	Individual tent camping units shall be located in separate areas designated for tent camping;

6.	The layout of the campground shall be such that "destrnction" of the natural vegetation and topography of the area is minimized ;

7.	A request for an exception shall set forth the location and legal description of the proposed campground property and a sketch of the proposed campground showing dimensions, roads, parking stations, location of services and any other buildings or improvements ;

8.	Licensing of campgrounds shall be completed in accord with SECTION 10-602 and  10-603 of the Blair City Code.





































(END OF SECTION)
 
SECTION 1114  SIGN REGULATIONS

All signs are required to be permanently affixed to a building , pole, post , or set in a permanent foundation in the case of some ground signs. Temporary signs authorized under Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code of the City of Blair, Nebraska shall be permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions set forth therein . Off-premise signs are not permitted in any zoning district except as permitted under Section 1114.07(±) . Mobile signs and sign boards on mobile bases are not permitted within the zoning jurisdiction of the City of Blair.

The area of a permitted sign is calculated by including the entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding , but not including the supporting structure. In the event a sign has more than one face or advertising surface, the combined area of each face or advertising surface shall be less than or equal to the total allowable area of the sign.

	ON  AND  OFF-SITE  SIGNS  ON  INTERSTATE  OR  FEDERAL  AID  PRIMARY
HIGHWAYS . The erection or maintenance of any advertising sign, display, or device which is visible to the traveled way of the National System oflnterstate and Defense Highways , and the System of Federal-Aid Primary roads of the State of Nebraska as defined by the Nebraska Department ofRoads, must be in compliance with the regulations set forth within "Rules and Regulations Relating to the Control of Advertising in Area Adjacent to the Interstate and Federal-Aid Primary Highways"; as amended , adopted and published by the Nebraska Department of Roads . A copy of the Nebraska Department of Road 's zoning regulations is on file in the office of the City Administrator.

	PERMITTED SIGNS IN AGG AND RRE DISTRICTS : The specific regulations in the AGG and RRE Zoning Districts are as follows :

(a)	Residential premises : One on-premises wall  sign not to exceed two square feet of sign area, non-illuminated  and non-reflecting , used  to identify home occupations .

(b)	Nonresidential premises : One on-premises ground sign or wall sign per frontage not exceeding thirty-two square feet in area announcing the business  or activity  being conducted on the premises . Ground signs shall be spaced a minimum of 150 feet apart along any street frontage .  No ground sign shall exceed eight feet in height.

(c)	Any permit granted by the City of Blair for a sign to be located along a State or Federal Aid Highway is also subject to compliance with applicable sign regulations of the Nebraska Department of Roads .

	PERMITTED SIGNS; RL, RM AND SHM: The specific regulations in the RL and RM zoning districts are as follows :

(a)	Residential premises : One on-premises wall sign, not to exceed two square feet of sign area, non-illuminated  and non-reflecting , used  to identify home occupations .

(b)	Uses, other than dwellings, permitted in the district :  One on-premises wall sign, not to
 
exceed thirty-two square feet of sign area per building facade or, one on-premises ground sign not exceeding thirty-two square feet in area for each main building limited to identifying the building or activity being conducted on the premises . Such signs may be illuminated .

(c)	Ground signs in this section shall not exceed six feet in height.


(d)	Any permit granted by the City of Blair for a sign to be located along a State or Federal Aid Highway is also subject to compliance with applicable sign regulations of the Nebraska Department of Roads .

	PERMITTED SIGNS; RML, RMH, AND CL DISTRICTS : The specific regulations in the RML and RMH districts are as follows :

(a)	All uses : One on-premises wall sign, not to exceed two square feet of sign area, non­ illuminated and non-reflecting , used to identify home occupations .

(b)	For multiple-family  dwellings :
(i)	One on-premises wall sign or ground sign, not to exceed six square feet of sign area, non-illuminated and non-reflecting , identifying the name and use of the building ;

(ii)	One on-premises wall sign or ground sign, not to exceed one square foot in sign area, non-illuminated and non-reflecting , identifying the quarters of an on-premises building manager  or custodian .

(c)	Uses, other than dwellings, permitted in the district : One on-premises wall sign, not to exceed thirty-two square feet of sign area per building facade or, one on-premises ground sign  not exceeding thirty-two square feet in area for each main building limited to identifying the building or activity being conducted on the premises . Such signs may be illuminated .

(d)	Ground signs in this section shall not exceed six feet in height.


(e)	Any permit granted by the City of Blair for a sign to be located along a State or Federal Aid Highway is also subject to compliance with applicable sign regulations of the Nebraska Department of Roads .

	PERMITTED	SIGNS	ACH	AGRICULTURAL /COMMERCIAL	HIGHWAY
DISTRICT : The specific regulations in the ACH zoning district are as follows :


(a)	For lots with highway frontage, one on-premises pole sign or one on-premises ground sign per buildable lot per frontage is permitted . Such sign shall be spaced a minimum of fifty feet from any other pole or ground sign on the same or adjacent property . Maximum size for a pole  sign shall be the frontage length of the building x 1.6, not to exceed 200 square feet. Maximum size for a ground sign shall be the frontage length of the building x
 
0.9, not to exceed 100 square feet. A pole sign shall have a maximum height oftwenty­ five (25) feet and a ground sign shall have a maximum height often (10) feet. Lots with more than one street frontage may consolidate the per frontage signs into one pole or ground sign, not to exceed the maximum size limits stated above .

(b)	For lots without highway frontage, one on-premises ground sign per buildable lot per frontage is permitted . Such sign shall be spaced a minimum of fifty feet from any other pole  or ground sign on the same or adjacent property . Maximum size for a ground sign shall be the frontage length of the building x 0.9, not to exceed 100 square feet. A ground sign shall have a maximum height often (10) feet.

(c)	In lieu of the signs permitted in (a) or (b) above, any commercial subdivision with frontage along a highway and that consists of at least two (2) buildable lots may place one center identification sign per commercial entrance within the boundaries of the subdivision . Center identification signs may only be located along highway frontage . For subdivisions smaller than five (5) acres the maximum size shall be 200 square feet and the maximum height shall be 20 feet. For subdivisions five (5) acres or larger the maximum size shall be 300 square feet and the maximum height shall be 25 feet. No center identification sign shall be within 350 feet of any other center identification sign or within 150 feet of any other pole or ground sign on the same or adjacent property .
(i)	Lots with highway frontage may have one uniformly designed on-premises ground sign per buildable lot. Such sign shall be located along the highway frontage and shall be  spaced a minimum of fifty feet from any other pole or ground sign on the same or adjacent property . Maximum size shall not exceed 60 square feet, with a maximum  height of five (5) feet.
(ii)	Any lot which is in excess of ten (10) acres, with highway frontage and with at least 70,000 square feet of retail space, may, instead of option (i), have one pole sign per buildable lot, the maximum size of such pole sign shall be equal to the frontage length of such retail building x 0.9, but not to exceed 100 square feet, and the maximum height of such pole sign shall be twenty-five (25) feet, except that the maximum height of such pole sign upon any lot with at least 90,000 square feet of retail space shall be thirty (30) feet. Such pole sign shall be located along the highway frontage, shall have a minimum setback equal to the pole sign height , and shall be spaced a minimum of fifty feet from any other pole or ground sign on the same or adjacent property .

(d)	On-premises wall signs are permitted . The sign area of such wall signs per building facade shall not exceed thirty percent coverage of the wall face, or a total of 500 square feet, whichever is lesser. Any marquee sign shall not exceed three feet in height or the height or vertical thickness of the marquee, whichever is greater. One pedestrian marquee sign per entrance not exceeding one foot in height and six square feet in area is permitted .

(e)	No off-premises  signs are allowed .


(f)	In lieu of signs permitted in subsection (a) and (b) above, one on-premise projecting sign
 
is permitted . Said projecting sign may project from a building a maximum of six feet six inches and may project into a required front yard, but it shall not extend above the roof line or top of a cornice wall. Such sign shall have a minimum ground clearance of eight feet above the walk or grade below and may project over the public right-of-way when the building is erected adjacent to the front property line. The maximum area of such sign shall be 50 square feet.

(g)	One temporary sign per premise for grand openings or other special events for a maximum of 15 days in a six (6) month period .

(h)	Any permit granted by the City of Blair for a sign to be located along a State or Federal Aid Highway is also subject to compliance with applicable sign regulations of the Nebraska Department of Roads .

	PERMITTED  SIGNS IN THE CCB AND OPD DISTRICTS :  The specific regulations in the CCB zoning district are as follows :

(a)	One on-premises pole sign for each business not to exceed 100 square feet in area nor thirty-five feet in height is permitted . Where a premise has more than one street frontage, one additional pole sign is permitted on the additional frontage under the same size and heights as this section allows.
(b)	One on-premises ground sign for each business not to exceed 100 square feet in area nor fifteen feet in height is permitted . Where a premise has more than one street frontage, one additional on-premises ground sign is permitted on the additional frontage . In those instances where a single business has a frontage along any one street of 150 feet or more, it may have a maximum of two ground signs as otherwise permitted in this section on any such frontage with a minimum spacing of 100 feet.

(c)	In lieu of the signs permitted in subparagraphs (a) or (b) above, projecting signs may be substituted . Such projecting signs may project from the building a maximum of six feet six inches and shall not project above the roof line or top of a cornice wall. Such sign may project over the public right-of-way when the building is erected adjacent to the front property line. Such sign shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet above the walk or grade below and a maximum area of 35 square feet.

(d)	On-premises wall signs are permitted . The sign area of such walls signs per building facades shall not exceed thirty percent coverage of the wall face or a total of 500 square feet, whichever is lesser. Marquee signs shall not exceed three feet in height or the height or vertical thickness of the marquee , whichever is greater, except marquee signs for theaters, which may be up to four feet in height or the height or vertical thickness of the marquee , whichever is greater. Those signs projecting above or below the marquee shall be erected at a ninety degree angle to the building and shall project no more than six feet six inches with a minimum clearance of eight feet above the cornice wall or roof of the building . All such marquee signs below the marquee shall not exceed twelve square feet 111 area.
 

(e)	One temporary sign per premise for grand openings or other special events, provided that the sign remains in place for a maximum of 15 days.

(f)	Any permit granted by the City of Blair for a sign to be located along a State or Federal Aid Highway is also subject to compliance with applicable sign regulations of the Nebraska Department of Roads .

	PERMITTED  SIGNS IN A/ML AND A/MH DISTRICTS:   The specific regulations in the A/ML and A/MH zoning districts are as follows :

(a)	One on-premises wall sign is permitted . The contents of the sign are to be limited to describing products or services sold or produced on the premises , or giving the name of the establishment. The sign area of such wall signs per building shall not exceed thirty percent coverage of the wall face or a total of 500 square feet, whichever is lesser. Any wall sign attached to the face of a marquee shall not exceed three feet in height or the thickness of the marquee , whichever is greater. One pedestrian marquee sign per entrance one foot in height and six square feet in area is allowed .

(b)	There may be one ground sign per frontage not exceeding 100 square feet in area or eight feet in height , not located in the required side or rear yards . If located in the required front yard , such ground signs shall not be located more than one-half of the distance into said required front yard .

(c)	In addition to the sign permitted in paragraphs (a) and (b) above, one on-premises pole sign not exceeding fifty square feet in area and twenty-five feet in height is permitted .

(d)	When a building is more than 300 feet from major street frontage, the permitted wall sign may exceed the five hundred square feet limit ifthe resulting larger sign does not exceed ten percent of the area of the wall in elevation view or 700 square feet.

(e)	One directional sign not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height.  This sign shall be located at least 150 feet from any other authorized sign.

(f)	By conditional use permit , off-premise industrial park signs, with a maximum of 160 square feet of sign area (total of both sides) and maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, along  a State or Federal Aid Highway in the A/CH District as long as four or more businesses  sign the conditional use permit application to  locate  on the  sign.  The Governing Body  shall take into consideration sign appearance, materials, landscaping , lighting, and other factors when granting a conditional use permit.  Off-premise industrial signs are not permitted  in the sight triangle per Section 1101 and cannot be located on public right-of-way .

(g)	One temporary sign per premise for grand openings or other special events, provided that the sign remains in place for a maximum of 15 days.
 

(h)	Any permit granted by the City of Blair for a sign to be located along a State or Federal Aid Highway is also subject to compliance with applicable sign regulations of the Nebraska Department of Roads .























































(END OF SECTION)
 
SECTION 1115   PERFORMANCE  STANDARDS FOR INDUSTRIAL USES

These performance standards shall apply as minimum standards in those districts where compliance with said standards is required .

	LIMITED INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS : To be a permitted industrial use in ML Light Industrial and Manufacturing District , whether as a permitted use or as an exception, such use must meet the following performance standards :

(1)	Physical Appearance : All operations shall be carried on within an enclosed building except that new materials or equipment in operable condition may be stored in the open. Normal daily wastes of an inorganic nature may be stored in containers not in a building when such containers are not readily visible from the street.

(2)	Fire Hazard : No operation shall involve the use of flammable gasses, acid , liquids, grinding processes , or other inherent fire hazard , except that such operation shall be allowed  for such flammable gases, acids, liquids, grinding processes , or other inherent fire hazards if same are contained , stored , utilized , processed , or restricted to a building or structure, or area or portion of same that is so constructed as to be explosion proof No part of this section shall be construed as to prohibit the use of normal heating fuels, motor fuels, and welding gasses when handled in accordance with other City regulations . Notwithstanding any other provision herein, such flammable gasses, acids, liquids, and fuels may be stored outside of an explosion proof building or structure so long as they are not located within 600 feet of a residential structure and further providing same are stored in full compliance with all Nebraska State Fire Marshall Rules and Regulations .

(3)	Sewage and Liquid Wastes : No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into a sewer, water course or the ground of liquid wastes of any radioactive nature, or liquid wastes of a chemical nature which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and installations .

(4)	Air Contaminants : Air contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a density designed as Number One shall be permitted for one (1) four (4) minute period in each one-half (1/2) hour. Light colored contaminants of such an opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted .

Particulate matter of dust as measured at the point of emission by any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of two-tenths (.2) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit , except for a period of four (4) minutes in any one-half (1/2) hour, at which time it may equal but not exceed six-tenths (.6) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit.

Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contamination cannot reasonably be comprehensively covered in this section there shall be applied the general rule that there shall not be discharged from
 
any sources whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public in general or to endanger the comfort , repose, health or safety of any such considerable number of persons or to the public in general or to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business , vegetation or property .

(5)	Odor : The emissions of odors that are generally agreed to be obnoxious to any considerable number of persons, shall be prohibited . Observations of odor shall be made at the property line of the establishment causing the odor. As a guide to classification of odor it shall be deemed that strong odors of putrefaction and fermentation tend to be obnoxious and that such odors as associated with baking or the roasting of nuts and coffee shall not normally be considered obnoxious within the meaning of this Ordinance .

(6)	Gasses : The gasses sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfide and carbon monoxide shall not exceed five
(5) parts per million . All nitrous fumes shall not exceed (1) part per million . Measurements shall be taken at the property line of the particular establishment involved .

(7)	Vibration : All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be so mounted as to minimize vibration and in no case shall such vibration exceed a displacement of three thousandths (3/1000) of an inch measured at the property line. The use of steam or broad hammers shall not be permitted .

(8)	Glare and Heat : All glare, such as welding arcs and open furnaces, shall be shielded so that they shall not be visible from the property line. No heat from furnaces or processing equipment shall be sensed at the property line to the extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than five
(5) degrees Fahrenheit.


(9)  All EPA and DEQ standards pertaining to noise shall be met.


	INDUSTRIAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS : To be a permitted industrial use in the HL Heavy Industrial and Manufacturing District , whether as a permitted use or an exception, such use must meet the following performance standards;

(1)	Appearance : Junk, salvage, auto wrecking and similar operations shall be shielded from view from streets and from adjacent properties in another district by means of a sturdy, sight-obscuring fence in good repair , or two rows of alternate planted evergreen trees.

(2)	Fire Hazard : All flammable substances involved in any activity established in the district shall be handled in conformance with the Life Safety Code published by the National Fire Protection Association .  All elements of SECTION 7 of the Blair Code shall be complied with .

(3)	Sewage and Liquid Waste : No operation shall be carried on which involves the discharge into a sewer, water course or the ground of liquid wastes of any radioactive nature, or liquid waste of a chemical nature which are detrimental to normal sewage plant operation or corrosive and damaging to sewer pipes and installations .
 
(4)	Air Contaminants : Air contaminants and smoke shall be less dark than designated Number One on the Ringleman Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines, except that smoke of a density designated as Number Two shall be permitted for an aggregate ten (10) minute period in each one-half(l /2) hour. Light colored contaminants of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a degree equal to or greater than the aforesaid shall not be permitted . Particulate matter or dust as measured at the point of emission by any generally accepted method shall not be emitted in excess of two-tenths (.2) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit, except for a period of four (4) minutes in any one-half (1/2) hour, at which time it may equal but not exceed six-tenths (.6) grains per cubic foot as corrected to a temperature of five hundred (500) degrees Fahrenheit.

Due to the fact that the possibilities of air contaminants cannot be comprehensively covered in this section there shall be applied the general rnle that there shall not be discharged from any source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material in such quantity as to cause injury, detriment, nuisance or annoyance to any considerable number of persons or to the public in general or to endanger the comfort , repose, health or safety of any such considerable number of persons or the general public or to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business , vegetation or property .

(5)	Odor : Odor causing operations shall be controlled so as to reduce escape of odors to the minimum practical within the limits of technology and economics .

(6)	Gasses : All noxious gasses shall be controlled to the extent that they will not be injurious to life and property . The gasses sulfur dioxide and hydrogen sulfide shall not exceed five (5) parts per million , carbon monoxide shall not exceed twenty-five (25) parts per million , and nitrous fumes shall not exceed five (5) parts per million .  All measurements shall be made at the property line.

(7)	Vibration : All machines including punch presses and stamping machines shall be mounted so as to minimize vibration . Vibration shall not be so excessive that it interferes with industrial operations on nearby lots.

(8)	All EPA and DEQ standards pertaining to noise shall be met.



SECTION 1116 SPECIAL CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS.

	CONFLICTING REQUIREMENTS : The following conditions and requirements shall be required for all residential condominiums and shall supersede any other requirements or conditions directly in conflict with the following requirements .

	MINIMUM LOT AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS : All height and lot area requirements in the primary zoning district shall apply except as follows when a conditional use permit is granted for the placement of a residential condominium :
 
1.	Lot area requirements shall be reduced by fifty (50) percent , and each lot owner shall receive credit for his prorata share of common ground .

2.	.  Side yard and rear yard requirements shall be zero, but only in the event that such side or rear lot line is abutted by an adjoining structure or is abutted by a common ground of a width or depth of at least that required for a side yard or a rear yard in the primary zoning district.

	OTHER  APPLICABLE  PROVISIONS :
1.	A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces per dwelling unit shall be located on the same lot.


2.	.  Any dwelling with a zero side yard or rear yard shall have no openings on that side abutting the lot lines unless that side abuts common ground .

3.	Only one (1) building for living purposes shall be permitted on a lot.



SECTION 1117	MANUFACTURED  HOMES


1117.01   MANUFACTURED  HOMES  STANDARDS :   All manufactured  homes located  outside mobile home parks shall meet the following standards :

(1)	The home shall have no less than nine hundred (900) square feet of floor area.


(2)	The home shall have no less than an eighteen (18) foot exterior width .


(3)	The roof shall be pitched with a minimum vertical rise of two and one-half (2 1/2) inches for each twelve (12) inches of horizontal nm.

(4)	The exterior material shall be of a color, material and scale comparable with those existing in residential site-built , single family construction .

(5)	The home shall have a non-reflective roof material which is or simulates asphalt or wood shingles, tile or rock.

(6)	The home  shall have wheels, axles, transporting  lights and  removable  towing  apparatus removed .

(7)	Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to supersede any valid restrictive covenants ofrecord .


(8)	The home shall conform to all requirements of Ordinance numbers 1762 and 1766.






(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 12:  NONCONFORMANCE  USES SECTION 1201  INTENT
Within the zoning districts established by this Ordinance or amendments that may be adopted later, there exists (1) lots, (2) structures, (3) uses of land and structures, and (4) characteristics of use which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended, but which would be prohibited , regulated , or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendment , it is the intent of this Ordinance to permit these non-conformities to continue until they are removed , but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended , nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.

Non-conforming uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the zoning districts involved . A non-conforming use of structure, a non-conforming use of land , or a non-conforming use of structure and land in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises , or by the addition of other uses, of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the zoning district involved .

To avoid undue hardship , nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently . Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding , such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction , provided that work shall be carried on diligently .



SECTION 1202  NON-CONFORMING  LOTS OF RECORD

In any zoning district in which single-family structures are permitted , a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance , notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance . Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership . This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width or both that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the lot, shall conform to the zoning regulations for the district in which such lot is located . Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the City Board of Zoning Adjustment.
Iftwo (2) or more lots or combinations oflots and portions oflots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance , and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the land involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this Ordinance and no portion of said parcel
 
shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this Ordinance .



SECTION 1203 NON-CONFORMING USES OF LAND WITH MINOR STRUCTURES ONLY

Where, at the time of passage of this Ordinance, lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the zoning regulations imposed by this Ordinance, and where such use involved no individual strncture with a replacement cost exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000), the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided :

1.	If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one (1) year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the zoning district in which such land is located .

2.	.  No additional strncture not conforming to the requirements of this Ordinance shall be erected  in connection with such non-conforming use of land .

3.	Provided , however , that no such non-conforming use shall be allowed to continue longer than for a period of five (5) years from the date of passage of this Ordinance . At the end of said five (5) year period , such non-conforming use ofland or land with minor strnctures shall be terminated . Provided , however , all non-conforming signs, billboards , and junk yards shall be terminated , or otherwise made to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance within two (2) years from the date of passage of this Ordinance .

4.	No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance .

5.	No such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased , nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance .



SECTION 1204  NON-CONFORMING  STRUCTURES


Where a lawful strncture exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason ofrestrictions on area, lot coverage, height , yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the strncture, such strncture may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions :

1. No such non-conforming strncture may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its non-conformity, but any strncture or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its non-conformity .
 
2.	.  Should such non-conforming stmcture or non-conforming portion of stmcture be destroyed  by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent ofits replacement cost at time of destmction, it shall not be reconstmcted except in conformity with provisions of this Ordinance .

3.	Should such stmcture be moved for any reason for any distance whatever , it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved .

4.	Provided , however , that except for single-family and multi-family dwellings and their accessory uses, no non-conforming stmcture shall be allowed to continue longer than for a reasonable amortization period of the non-conforming stmcture . For the purposes of this section, a reasonable amortization period shall be defined as a period of thirty (30) years from the date of adoption of this Ordinance . Following the conclusion of the amortization period , such non-conforming stmcture shall be removed or brought into conformance .

5.	Provided , however , that no non-conforming mobile home stmcture which is not placed on a permanent foundation at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance shall be allowed to continue longer than for a reasonable amortization period of the non-conforming stmcture . No mobile non-conforming home stmcture which occupies a lot upon which there exists another principal stmcture shall be allowed to continue longer than for a reasonable amortization period of the non-conforming stmcture . For the purpose of this section, a reasonable amortization often (10) years from the date of adoption of this Ordinance . Following the conclusion of the otherwise lawful period , it is provided :
a.	If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one amortization period , such non-conforming stmcture shall be removed or otherwise brought into conformance .



SECTION 1205 NON-CONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN COMBINATION

Iflawful use involving individual stmctures with a replacement cost of one thousand dollars ($1,000), or more, or of stmctures and premises in combination , exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance , that would not be allowed in the zoning districts under the terms of this Ordinance , the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions :

1.	No existing stmcture devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged , extended , constmcted , reconstmcted , moved or stmcturally altered except in changing the use of the stmcture to a use permitted in the zoning district in which the stmcture is located , except upon the approval of a conditional use permit. The conditional use permit may include but not be limited to requirements for additional landscaping , screening, parking , etc.



2.	. Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building or area which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance,
 
but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building or area, except upon the approval of a conditional use permit. The conditional use permit may include but not be limited to requirements for additional landscaping , screening, parking , etc.

3.	If no stmctural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a stmcture, or stmcture and premises , may as an exception, be changed to another non-conforming use upon the approval of a conditional use permit. It shall be the burden of the applicant to prove the proposed use is equally appropriate for the zoning district as the existing non-conforming use . Further, the City Planning Commission or the City Council may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the provisions of the Ordinance .

4.	Any stmcture, or stmcture and land in combination , in or on which a non-conforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the zoning district and the non-conforming use may not thereafter be resumed .

5.	When a non-conforming use of a stmcture, or stmcture and premises in combination , is discontinued or abandoned for twelve (12) consecutive months except when government action impedes access to the premises , the stmcture, or stmcture and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located .

6.	Where non-conforming use status applies to a stmcture and premises in combination , removal or destmction of the stmcture shall eliminate the non-conforming status of the land . Destmctionforthe purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost at time of destmction .

7.	Provided , however , no such non-conforming use of a stmcture or stmcture and premises in combination shall be allowed to continue longer than for a period of thirty (30) years from the date of passage of this Ordinance or at the end of said thirty (30) year period , such non-conforming use of a stmcture and premises in combination shall be terminated .

SECTION 1206  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE

On any non-conforming stmcture or portion of a stmcture containing a non-conforming use, work may be done if any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring , or plumbing , to an extent not exceeding twenty-five (25) percent of the current replacement cost of the non-conforming stmcture or non-conforming portion of the stmcture as the case may be, provided that the cubic content existing when it became non-conforming shall not be increased .

If a non-conforming stmcture or portion of a stmcture containing a non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance , and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unsafe or unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored , repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located .
 




SECTION 1207 USES UNDER EXCEPTIONS, PROVISIONS NOT NON-CONFORMING USES

Any use which is permitted as a conditional use or exception in a zoning district under the terms of this Ordinance , shall not be deemed a non-conforming use in such zoning district, but shall, without action, be considered a conforming use .



SECTION 1208 NON-CONFORMING  USES, LIMITED EXTENSION OF NONPERMANENT  NATURES.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of Article 12, the City Council may by a nonconforming use permit , after public hearing and referral to a recommendation from the Planning Commission, authorize and permit an extension of a nonconforming use where the following conditions and criteria are met.

1.	Such extension must be temporary in nature and may be removed or discontinued without any alteration of the premises , and that no permanent improvements are made to or placed on the premises except as are allowable as a permitted use within the existing district designation .

2.	. No stmcture as defined by the municipal building code may be constmcted except as is allowable as a permitted use within the existing district designation .

3.	Any such temporary extension shall be on the same terms and conditions as the nonconforming uses . Any temporary extension permit shall terminate at the earlier of the termination of the original nonconforming use or a time period specified in the terms of the permit. The applicants shall enter into a written agreement acknowledging all conditions and terms of the permit. The agreement shall be binding upon the heirs, personal representatives , successors, grantees, and assigns of the applicant.

4.	The City Council may also subject such extension to any and all other conditions as may be necessary considering the location and characteristics of the use and shall not grant such extension if it is detrimental to the health , safety, morals, and general welfare of the area.

5.	The extension of the nonconforming use shall be for no other use other than as the original nonconforming use .

6.	All other conditions and requirements of the current zoning regulations must be complied with and met in their entirety .

7.	The use may not be extended to lands or premises outside of the boundary of the tract which existed for the nonconforming use at the time such use became nonconforming .
 


SECTION 1208.01 APPLICATION REQUIREMENT. A request for such nonconforming use permit may be initiated by the property owner or his attorney by filing an application with the City Administrator upon forms prescribed for the purpose . The application and procedure for hearing same shall be the same as set forth under Article 16 of the Zoning Regulations . The application shall pay and the application must be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution , and shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix for permit , license, and application fees.















































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 13.  CITY BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT SECTION 1301  CREATION, TERMS, MEETING, AND RULES
All requirements of Chapter 2-3 of the Blair City Code shall be satisfied .



SECTION 1302  ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
In addition to the immediately above, the following shall be included as requirements , administrative duties and conditions of the City Board of Zoning Adjustments .

	REQUIREMENT FOR WRITTEN APPLICATION AND CONDITIONS :  A variance
from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the City Board of Zoning Adjustment unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land , stmcture, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, stmctures, or buildings in the same district ; that literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this Ordinance ; that the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant ; and that granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Ordinance to other land , stmctures, or buildings in the same district.

	EFFECT OF NON-CONFORMANCE : No non-conforming use of neighboring lands, stmctures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or non-conforming use of lands, stmctures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance .

	PUBLIC HEARING AND FINDINGS OF THE BOARD : The City Board of Adjustment shall hear and determine appeals from or other matters referred to it regarding the application of this Ordinance . The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of an appeal or any other matter referred to it. Notice of the time, place and subject of such hearing shall be published once in the official City newspaper at least ten (10) days prior to the date fixed for the hearing . A copy of said notice shall be mailed to the applicant , all owners of land within 300 feet of the property in question and to the City Board of Adjustment. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney; the City Board of Adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of this section have been met by the application for a variance ; the Board shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land , building , or stmcture; the Board shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood , or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare .

	CONDITIONS IMPOSED : In granting any variance , the City Board of Adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance . Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the Variance is granted is punishable under SECTION 1702 of this Ordinance .

	USE VARIANCES : Under no circumstances shall the City Board of Zoning Adjustment
 
grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said district.

	APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS : An application for a variance shall be in writing and made upon forms supplied by the City for such purpose . The application shall be accompanied by a scale drawing of the area for which the variance is requested , together with the dimension thereof, lot or boundary locations the location of all existing and proposed improvements or stmctures . Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution , and shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix for permit , license, and application fees.

Written notices shall be mailed to all owners ofland within three hundred (300) feet of the property . Such land owners shall have ten days from the date of notification to notify the City Administrator of any protests which they may have concerning the application .

A "Variance Action Pending" sign will be posted on the front yard of the property under consideration for a variance at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearings  of the Planning Commission and City Council.





































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 14.  CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED BY SPECIAL REVIEW SECTION 1401  GENERAL POWERS
The City Council may by conditional use permit after a Public Hearing and referral to a recommendation from the Planning Commission, authorize and permit conditional uses that are designated in the district use regulations if it is found that the location and characteristics of the use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the area.

Allowable conditional uses may be permitted, enlarged, or altered upon application for a conditional use permit in accordance with the rules and procedures of this Ordinance. The City Council may grant or deny a conditional use permit in accordance with the intent and purpose of this Ordinance. In granting a conditional use permit, the City Council will authorize limitations and shall prescribe and impose appropriate conditions, safeguards, and a specified time limit for the performance of the conditional use permit.

Any conditional use permit granted pursuant to the provisions for this Article 14 shall run with the land subject only to satisfactory compliance with the conditions, safeguards and specified time limit required under the conditional use permit, as established by the Mayor and City Council. A conditional use permit shall not terminate merely because the conditional use permit applicant sells, transfers, conveys or assigns, voluntarily or involuntarily, its interest in the property subject to the conditional use permit. However, if the project granted by a Conditional Use Permit is not started within one (1) year of issuance, the use of the property changes or a Conditional Use Permit is granted on the basis of a conditional purchase agreement that expires, the Conditional Use Permit shall be terminated.

SECTION 1402  APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS

A request for a conditional use permit may be initiated by a property owner or his attorney by filing an application with the City Administrator upon forms prescribed for the purpose. The application shall be accompanied by drawings or a site plan and other such plans and data showing the dimensions, arrangements, description data, and other materials constituting a record essential to an understanding of the proposed use in relation to the provisions set forth herein. The applicant shall submit and the application must be accompanied with a non-refundable application fee. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution, and shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix for permit, license, and application fees.

Written notices shall be given to all owners ofland within three hundred (300) feet of the property. Such land owners shall have ten days from the date of notification to notify the City Administrator of any protests which they may have concerning the application.

A "Conditional Use Action Pending" sign will be posted on the front yard of the property under consideration for a conditional use permit at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearings of the Planning Commission and City Council.
 


SECTION 1403   RULES GOVERNING EXCEPTIONS

The Planning Commission shall put its findings and recommendations in writing which state the extent of compliance with the specific rules governing individual exceptions and the extent that satisfactory provision and arrangement have been made concerning the following, where applicable, and submit them to the City Council:

SECTION 1403.01 ACCESS ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in case of fire or catastrophe;

SECTION 1403.02 PARKING off-street parking and loading areas where required, with particular attention to the items in (1) above and the noise, glare, odor or economic effects of the exception on adjoining properties and properties generally in the district;

SECTION 1403.03 SERVICE refuse and service areas, with particular reference to the items in (1) and (2) above;
SECTION 1403.04 UTILITIES, with reference to location, availability, and compatibility; SECTION 1403.05	SCREENING and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character; SECTION  1403.06		SIGNS, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic
safety, economic effect and compatibility and  harmony with properties in the district;


SECTION 1403.07    YARDS required yards and other open space;


SECTION 1403.08 COMPATIBILITY general compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district.

SECTION 1403.09 UNLESS SPECIFICALLY WAIVED by the City Council, all rules, regulations, and requirements of each respective zoning district shall apply.



SECTION 1404 CITY COUNCIL PUBLIC HEARING, CONSIDERATION AND PROCEDURE

Before issuance of any conditional use permit, the City Council will consider the application for the conditional use permit together with the recommendations of the Planning Commission at a public hearing held within thirty (30) days or a reasonable time after the filing of the application and after prior notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing has been given by publication in a legal paper of general circulation in the City of Blair, one time at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing. The concurring vote of three fourths of the members of the City Council shall be necessary to grant a
 
conditional use permit.


SECTION 1405   EXPIRATION OF CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS


No order of the City Council granting a conditional use permit shall be valid for a period longer than twelve months from the date of such order, unless the City Council specifically grants a longer period of time upon the recommendation of the City Planning Commission.
 
ARTICLE 15.  ADMINISTRATIVE  PROCEDURE AND ENFORCEMENT


SECTION 1501 DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIAL, BOARD OF ZONING ADJUSTMENT,  AND COURTS ON MATTERS OF APPEAL

An administrative official, who shall be known as the Zoning Administrator and who shall be designated by the City Council, shall administer and enforce this Ordinance . He may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the City Council may direct.

Ifthe Zoning Administrator shall find that any of the provisions of this Ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance ofillegal use of land , buildings , or strnctures ; removal of illegal buildings or strnctures or of illegal additions, alterations, or strnctural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Ordinance to insure compliance with or to prevent violation of its prov1s1ons .



SECTION 1503   BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED

All requirements of Section 9-104 through 9-108 of the Blair City Code shall be satisfied .



SECTION 1504  APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT

In addition to all requirements of Section 9-106 through 9-108 of the Blair City Code, all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in triplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon ; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration .

The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the Zoning Administrator , including existing or proposed building or alterations; existing or proposed uses of the building and land ; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designated to accommodate ; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of this Ordinance .

One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Zoning Administrator after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature on such copy. If a building permit is refused , the Zoning Administrator shall state the reasons for such refusal in writing . The original and one copy of the plans, similarly marked , shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator. The issuance of a building permit , shall, in no case, be constrned as waiving any provisions of this Ordinance .



SECTION 1505 Revoked in its entirety on January 22, 2002-0rdinance No . 1940.
 


SECTION 1506 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS, PERMITS, AND CERTIFICATE  OF ZONING COMPLIANCE

Building permits issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator authorize only the use, arrangement and constmction set forth in such approved plans and applications , and no other use, arrangement or constmction . Use, arrangement or constmction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance , and punishable as provided by SECTION 1702 hereof



SECTION 1507  NEW BUILDINGS ON UNAPPROVED STREETS

No building permit shall be issued for, or no building shall be erected on any lot within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of, a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the City Council. Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful stmcture and the City may bring action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed .































(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE  16.  AMENDMENT


SECTION 1601   GENERAL

The City Council may from time to time supplement , change or generally revise the boundaries or regulations contained in this Ordinance by amendment. A proposal for such amendment may be initiated by the City Council, Planning Commission or upon application of the owner of the property affected . The applicant shall pay and the application must be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution , and shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix for permit , license, and application fees.

Any revisions of boundaries , changes in zoning or appending of special districts shall be allowed only to entire and complete lots or tracts ofland and shall not be granted to partial or portions oflots and tracts of land .



SECTION 1602  SUBMISSION TO PLANNING COMMISSION

All such proposed amendments shall first be submitted to the Planning Commission for recommendation and report . Upon the development of tentative recommendations , the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and shall cause an accurate written summary to be made of the proceedings , and shall give notice in like manner as that required for the original zoning recommendations . Such notice shall fix the time and place for such hearing and contain a statement regarding the proposed changes in regulations or restrictions or in the boundary of any district.

If such proposed amendment is not a general revision of an existing provision of this Ordinance and will affect specific property , it shall be designated by legal description and general street location and in addition to such publication notice, written notice of such proposed amendment shall be mailed to all owners oflands located within three hundred (300) feet of the area proposed to be altered and an opportunity granted to interested parties to be heard .

Written notices shall be mailed to all owners ofland within three hundred (300) feet of the property . Adjacent land owners shall have ten days from the date of notification to notify the City Administrator of any protests which they may have concerning the application .

A "Zoning Action Pending" sign will be posted on the front yard of the property under consideration for a zoning change at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearings of the Planning Conunission and City Council. Failure to receive such notice shall not invalidate any subsequent action taken . Such notice shall be considered sufficient to permit the Planning Commission to recommend amendments to regulations which affect only a portion of the land described in the notice or which give all or any part of land described a zoning classification of lesser change than that set forth in the notice ; provided , that recommending a zoning classification of a greater change than that set forth in the notice shall not be valid without republication and , where necessary , remailing .
 
SECTION   1603  AMENDMENT CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION

The procedure for the consideration and adoption of any such proposed amendments shall be in like manner as that required for the consideration and adoption of this Ordinance except hereinbefore or hereinafter modified . For action on zoning amendments , a quonun of the Planning Commission is more than one-half (1/2) of all members . A vote either for or against an amendment by a majority of all the Planning Commission is more than one-half (1/2) of all the members . A vote either for or against an amendment by a majority of all the Planning Commission members present constitutes a recommendation of the commission ; whereas a vote either for or against an amendment by less than a majority of the Planning Commission present constitutes a failure to recommend .

When the Planning Commission submits a recommendation of approval or disapproval of such amendment , the City Council, if it approves such recommendation , may either adopt such recommendation by Ordinance or take no further action thereon as appropriate . In the event the Planning Commission submits a failure to recommend , the City Council may take such action as it deems appropriate . Ifsuch amendment shall affect the boundaries of any district, the Ordinance shall define the change or the boundary as amended , shall order the Official Zoning Map to be changed to reflect such amendment and shall amend the section of the Ordinance incorporating the same and reincorporate such Map as amended .



SECTION 1604  PROTEST

Regardless of whether or not the Planning Commission approves or disapproves a proposed zoning amendment or fails to recommend , if a protest against such amendment be filed in the office of the City Clerk prior to hearing thereon before the City Council, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent (20%) or more of any real property proposed to be rezoned  or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the total area excepting public streets and ways, located within or without the corporate limits of the municipality and located within three hundred (300) feet of boundaries of the property proposed to be rezoned , the Ordinance adopting such amendment shall not be passed except by at least three-fourths (3/4) vote of all members of the City Council.


















(END OF SECTION)
 
ARTICLE 17.  COMPLAINTS, PENALTIES, REMEDIES SECTION 1701  COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS
Whenever a violation of this Ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred , any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. He will immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this Ordinance .



SECTION 1702  PENALTIES

The owner, lessee, or agent of a building or premises in or upon which a violation of any provisions of this Ordinance has been committed or shall exist or lessee or tenant of an entire building or entire premises in or upon which such violation shall exist, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) for any one offense recoverable with costs. Each and every day that such violation continues after notification shall constitute a separate offense. Any architect , builder , contractor , agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided .

Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation .



SECTION 1703  REMEDIES

In case any building or stmcture is erected , constmcted , reconstmcted , altered , repaired , converted , or maintained or any building , stmcture or land is used in violation of this Ordinance the appropriate authorities of the City may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, constmction, reconstmction , alteration, repair , conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation ; to prevent the occupancy of said building , stmcture or land ; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct , business or use in or about such premises .
















(END OF SECTION)
 
(Blank Page)
 
ARTICLE 18  LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS SECTION 1801  SEPARABILITY
Should any article, section or provisions of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid , such decision shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid .



SECTION  1802  PURPOSE OF CATCH HEADS

The catch heads appearing in connection with the foregoing sections are inserted simply for convenience , to serve the purpose of an index and they shall be wholly disregarded by any person , officer, court or other tribunal in constrning the terms and provisions of this Ordinance .



SECTION  1803  REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this Ordinance full force and effect.



SECTION  1804  EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.



Passed and approved this 3th day of March, 2005


Mayor James E . Realph ATTEST :

Brenda Wheeler , City Clerk












(END OF SECTION)
 
(Blank Page)
 








Subdivision
Regulations

2005

















City of Blair
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE
INTRODUCTION.   ORDINANCE NO. 2023 ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 101  TITLE

SECTION 102  JURISDICTION

SECTION 103  PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES OF THE ORDINANCE

ARTICLE 2.  APPLICATION  OF REGULATIONS
SECTION 201  GENERAL

SECTION 202  APPLICABILITY

SECTION 203  PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS

ARTICLE 3.  CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION 301  CONSTRUCTION
301.1	TENSE
301.2	NUMBER
301.3	SHALL AND MAY
301.4	GENDER
301.5	HEADINGS

SECTION 302  GENERAL TERMINOLOGY

SECTION 303  DEFINITIONS
303.01	TEXT OF DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE 4.   PLAT REVIEW AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 401  PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE
401.1	PRE-APPLICATION  CONFERENCE
401.2	NOTIFICATION  OF REQUIREMENTS
401.3	WAIVER OF FEES

SECTION 402  PROCEDURE FOR CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
402.1	PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
402.2	FEES
402.3	SCALE AND PRELIMINARY PLAT CONCERNS
402.4	NOTIFICATION  OF IMPROVEMENTS  SCHEDULE
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE

402.5	NOTIFICATION  OF THE COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION AND COUNTY HIGHWAY  SUPERINTENDENT
402.6	NOTIFICATION  OF SCHOOL BOARD
402.065  NOTIFICATION  OF WASHINGTON COUNTY SURVEYOR
402.7	NOTIFICATION  OF FIRE DEPARTMENT
402.8	NOTIFICATION OF ADJACENT LAND OWNERS
402.9	PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL/REJECTION
402.10	RECORDING OF ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION
402.11	APPROVAL IS CONDITIONAL

SECTION 403  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT
403.1	PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
403.2	FEES
403.3	SCALE AND FINAL PLAT CONTENTS
403.4	SUPPLEMENTARY DATA REQUIRED
403.5	PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS
403.6	NOTIFICATION OF ADJACENT LAND OWNERS
403.7	CITY COUNCIL REVIEW AND ACTION

SECTION 404  PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A REPLAT OF A SUBDIVISION
404.11	REPLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
404.22	SCALE AND REPLAT CONTENTS
404.33	SUPPLEMENTARY DATA REQUIRED

ARTICLE 5.  SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION 501  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

SECTION 502  STREETS
502.1	STREET EXTENSIONS
502.2	DEDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR NEW STREETS
502.3	DEDICATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR EXISTING STREETS
502.4	INTERSECTIONS
502.5	HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL STREET CURVES
502.6	STREET GRADES AND ELEVATIONS
502.7	MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS
502.8	STREET JOGS
502.9	CUL-DE-SACS
502.10	STREETNAMES
502.11	PRIVATE STREETS AND RESERVE STRIPS SECTION 503  ALLEYS
SECTION 504  BLOCKS
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE

504.1	BLOCK LENGTHS
504.2	BLOCK WIDTHS AND TIERS
504.3	PEDESTRIAN WAYS

SECTION 505  LOTS
505.1	LOT DIMENSIONS
505.2	CORNER LOTS
505.3	ACCESS TO LOTS
505.4	DOUBLE FRONTAGE AND REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS
505.5	ANGLE OF SIDE LOT LINES SECTION 506  FLOOD HAZARDS
SECTION 507  OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING FACILITIES SECTION 508  EASEMENTS
SECTION 509  COMMUNITY ASSETS

SECTION 510  CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS

SECTION 511  RESERVATION AND DEDICATION OF PUBLIC LAND AND OPEN SPACE
511.1	RESERVATION
511.2	DEDICATION

SECTION 512  PARKLAND DEDICATION AND PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF DEDICATION

SECTION 513  LARGE TRACTS OF PARCELS

ARTICLE 6   REQUIRED  SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 601  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS SECTION 602  MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND PINS
SECTION 603  STREETS
603.1	GRADING SPECIFICATIONS
603.2	MINIMUM PAVEMENT WIDTHS
603.3	STREET SURFACING
603.4	CURB AND GUTTER
603.5	STREET NAME SIGNS
603.6	NO PARKING DESIGNATION
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE

SECTION 604  SIDEWALKS

SECTION 605  DRIVEWAYS

SECTION 606  STREET AND WALKWAY LIGHTING SECTION 607  STREET TREES
SECTION 608  UTILITY AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES
608.1	GENERAL
608.2	WATER SUPPLY IMPROVEMENTS
608.3	SANITARY SEWER IMPROVEMENTS
608.4	DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS
608.5	STORM SEWERS AND STORM WATER DRAINAGE
608.6	CULVERTS AND BRIDGES
608.7	EROSION CONTROL
608.075	SETBACK REQUIREMENTS-CREEK/WATERCOURSES
608.8	FIRE PROTECTION
608.9	ELECTRIC, GAS, AND TELEPHONE IMPROVEMENTS

SECTION 609  SHARED IMPROVEMENT COSTS
609.1	OVER-SIZE AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
609.2	EXTENSIONS TO BOUNDARIES
609.3	OFF-SITE EXTENSIONS

SECTION 610  SUBDIVISION  IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
610.1	SURETY PERFORMANCE BOND
610.2	ESCROW ACCOUNT
610.3	SEQUENTIAL APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION SEGMENTS WITHOUT GUARANTEE
610.4	SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
610.5	TIME LIMITS
610.6	FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS
610.7	INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION
610.8	REDUCTION OF GUARANTEES
610.9	RELEASE OF GUARANTEE

SECTION 611  OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

ARTICLE 7 VARIAN CE
SECTION 701  GRANTING OF VARIANCES; CONDITIONS SECTION 702  RECORDING OF PLAT
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE



SECTION 703  PLAN DEVELOPMENT

SECTION 704  WAIVER FOR SMALL SUBDIVISIONS SECTION 705  LOT SPLIT
ARTICLE  9  REPEALS

ARTICLE 10 SEVERABILITY ARTICLE 11 EFFECTIVE DATE SCHEDULE A; SCHEDULE B
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE

(Page Blank)
 

ORDINANCE NO. 2023

A ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS REGULATING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND, REQUIRING AND REGULATING THE PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS FOR SUCH PURPOSE: ESTABLISHING MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: PROVIDING MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS TO BE MADE OR GUARANTEED TO BE MADE BY THE SUBDIVIDER; SETTING FORTH THE PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE BLAIR CITY COUNCIL IN APPLYING THESE RULES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS: AND PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS, AND FOR THE REPEAL OF ALL SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HEREWITH; FOR THE CITY OF BLAIR, NEBRASKA.

WHEREAS, Section 18-1301 through 18-1307 and 19-901 through 19-914, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full) empowers the City to enact a subdivision ordinance and to provide for its administration, enforcement and amendment, and

WHEREAS, the City Council deems it necessary for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the City to enact such an ordinance, and
WHEREAS, land subdivision is the first step in the process of community expansion, and WHEREAS, once land has been divided into streets, blocks, lots and open spaces, a pattern has been
established which  usually  determines  how well  community needs  for residence,  business  and
industry will be met, and


WHEREAS, once land has been subdivided and publicly recorded, it is extremely difficult to correct defects and deficiencies in the subdivision layout and in the facilities provided, and

WHEREAS, the guidance ofland development in harmony with community objectives is a matter of serious public concern and community welfare, and

WHEREAS, it is in the interest of the public, the developer, and future landowners that subdivisions be conceived, designed, and developed in accordance with sound minimum standards, and

WHEREAS, the City Council of Blair has established a Planning Commission, pursuant to Section 18-1301through19-307 and 19-901through19-914, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full), and

WHEREAS, the Planning Commission has made a preliminary report and held public hearings thereon, and submitted its final report to the City Council, and

WHEREAS, the City Council has given due public notice of hearings relating to proposed subdivision plats, regulations and restrictions, and has held such public hearings, and

WHEREAS, the City Council deem it necessary for the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
 

morals or the general welfare of the City; of providing for the harmonious development and coordinated layout for the subdivided area; for the proper arrangements of streets; for adequate and convenient open spaces for traffic, utilities, recreation, light, air, and access of fire fighting equipment; for avoidance of population congestion through requirements for minimum lot widths and lot area; for adequate sanitary facilities; and for reducing flood damage potentials to the greatest extent possible; and

WHEREAS, all requirements of Section 18-306, Reissue Revised Statutes of 1943 (in full), with regard to the preparation of the report of the Planning Commission and subsequent action of the Blair City Council have been met:

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF BLAIR, NEBRASKA:
 

ARTICLE 1.  GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 101 TITLE

This ordinance may be known and may be cited and referred to as "Subdivision Regulation Ordinance of the City of Blair, Nebraska" to the same effect as if the full title were started.

SECTION 102 JURISDICTION


The provision of this Ordinance shall apply within the area of plamringjurisdiction as defined on the Official Zoning Map of Blair, Nebraska, as the same may be  amended by subsequent annexation.

SECTION 103 PURPOSES AND OBJECTIVES OF THE ORDINANCE


The Subdivision Regulation Ordinance is adapted to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety, peace, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, more specifically the Subdivision Regulation Ordinance is adopted in order to insure that new development resulting in land subdivision in the City shall conform to minimum development practices and standards. Further, it is intended that such land subdivision shall result in properly coordinated design and construction of lots, blocks, streets, utilities, public facilities, and other community assets.

ARTICLE 2.  APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS

SECTION 201  GENERAL


Any plat, hereinafter made, for each subdivision or each part thereof lying within the jurisdiction of this Ordinance, shall be prepared, presented for approval and recorded as herein prescribed. The regulations contained herein shall apply to the subdivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts or other division of land for the purpose of sale or of building development, whether immediate or future, including the resubdivision or replatting ofland or lots. Further, the regulations set forth by this Ordinance shall be minimum regulations which shall apply unifmmly throughout the jurisdiction of this Ordinance except as hereinafter provided.

SECTION 202 APPLICABILITY


1.	Each separate principal use building within the planning jurisdiction of the City shall be situated on a separate and single subdivided lot of record unless otherwise provided in the Zoning Regulations for Blair, Nebraska.

2.	No subdivision ofland shall be permitted within the City Planning Jurisdiction unless a plat is approved in accordance with provisions of these Regulations.

3.	These Regulations shall apply not only to subdivision as herein set forth but shall also apply, insofar  as  payment  of  costs  for  improvement  of  subdivisions  is  concerned,  to  those
 

subdivisions, or parts thereof, already platted and approved, which are undeveloped, wholly or partially.

4.	These Regulations shall not apply to subdivision of burial lots in cemeteries.

5.		These Regulations shall not apply to a division ofland into lots or parcels of ten and one­ hundreths (10.01) acres or more and not involving a new street.

SECTION	203	PROVISIONS	OF	ORDINANCE	DECLARED	TO	BE	MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS

In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of this Ordinance require or impose higher standards than are required in any other Ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other Ordinance require or impose higher  standards than are required by the provisions of this Ordinance the provisions of such Ordinance shall govern.






































(END OF SECTION)
 

ARTICLE 3.  CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS

SECTION 301  CONSTRUCTION

The following rules of construction shall apply unless inconsistent with the plain meaning of the context of this Ordinance.

301.1	TENSE:  Words used in the present tense include the future tense.


301.2	NUMBER:   Words use in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular.

301.3	SHALL AND MAY:  The word 11shall11  is mandatory; the word 11may11  is permissive.


301.4	GENDER:  The masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.


301.5	HEADINGS: In the event that there is any conflict of inconsistency between the heading of an  article, section or paragraph  of this Ordinance and the context thereof, the said heading shall not be deemed to affect the scope, meaning or intent of such context.

SECTION 302  GENERAL TERMINOLOGY

The word 11city11 shall mean the City of Blair, Nebraska. The word "city council" shall mean the City Council of Blair, Nebraska. The words "planning commission" shall mean the Planning Commission duly appointed by the City Council.

SECTION 303  DEFINITIONS

303.01   TEXT OF DEFINITIONS:   Words or terms not herein defined shall have their ordinary meaning in relation to the context.

For the purposes of this Ordinance certain words and terms used herein are defined as follows:


(1)	ALLEY:  See Thoroughfare


(2)	BLOCK:  A tract or parcel or land bounded by public streets or lands, streams, railroads, unplatted lands or a combination of same.

(3)	BUILDING LINE:  See Setback Line


(4)	COLLECTOR STREET:  See Thoroughfare


(5)	COMMON OPEN SPACE: An area ofland or water or combination thereof planned for passive or active recreation, but does not include area utilized for streets, alleys, driveways or private  roads,  off-street parking  or loading  areas.   However,  the  areas  of recreational
 

activities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, shuffleboard courts, etc., may be included as common open space.

(6)	COMMON SEWER SYSTEM: A sanitary sewage system in public ownership which provides for the collection and treatment of domestic effluent in a central sewage treatment plant which meets the minimum requirements of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality for primary and secondary sewage treatment and which does not include individual septic tanks or portable sewage treatment facilities.

(7)	COMMON WATER SYSTEM: A water system which provides for the supply, storage and distribution of potable water on an uninterrupted basis and which is in public ownership.

(8)	COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: A comprehensive, long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of a community or region that typically includes inventory and analytic sections leading to recommendations for the community's future economic development, housing, recreation and open space, transportation, community facilities, and land use, all related to the community's goals and objectives for these elements.

(9)	CORNER LOT:  See Lot, Comer.

(10)	COVENANT:  A written promise or pledge.


(11)	CUL-DE-SAC: A local street ofrelatively short length with one open end to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular tum around. No cul-de-sac shall be allowed with a vehicular tum around ofless than 50 feet in radius and any cul-de-sac shall also provide for not less than a dedicated right of way of 12.5 feet surrounding the tum around.

(12)	CULVERT:  A transverse drain that channels under a bridge, street, or driveway.


(13)	DEAD-END STREET:  See Thoroughfare.


(14)	DEDICATION:  The intentional appropriation ofland by the owner to some public use.


(15)	DEVELOPER: Any individual, subdivider,  firm,  association,  syndicate,  partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under these regulations to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself/herself or for another.

(16)	DISTRICT:  See Zone or District.

(17)	DWELLING: Space, within a building, comprising living, dining, sleeping room or rooms, storage closets, as well as space and equipment for cooking, bathing, and toilet facilities, all used by only one (1) family and its household employees.

(18)	EASEMENT: Is a grant by the property owner to the public, a corporation, or persons of the use of a tract of land for a specific purpose or purposes.
 


(19)	ENGINEER: Any person registered to practice professional engineering by the Nebraska State Board of Registration who is designated by the City to approve portions of proposed subdivisions as specified in these regulations as requiring an engineers approval.

(20)	FLOODWAY: A floodway whose limits have been designated and established by order of the Corp of Engineers and published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the form of a FIRM Flood Insurance Rate Map.

(21)	FRONTAGE:  The length of the property abutting on one side of a street measured along the dividing line between the property and the street.

(22)	GOVERNING BODY:  That Body having jurisdiction in the zoning area.


(23)	IMPROVEMENTS: Street pavement or resurfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, water lines, sewer lines, storm drains, street lights, flood control and drainage facilities, utility lines, landscaping, and other related matters normally associated with the development ofraw land into building sites.

(24)	LOCATION MAP: A drawing located on the plat which sets forth by dimensions or other means, the relationship of the proposed subdivision or use to other nearby developments or landmarks and community facilities and services within the Zoning Area of the City of Blair, Nebraska, in order to better locate and orient the area in question.

(25)	LOOP STREET:  See "Thoroughfare, Street or Road."


(26)	LOT: For purpose of this Ordinance a lot is a parcel ofland of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning and subdivision requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as are herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on an improved public street, and may  consist of a single lot of record; a portion of a lot of record; a combination of complete lots of record, of complete lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of records; a parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel be created which does not meet the requirements of this Ordinance.

(27)	LOT DEPTH: Depth of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between the mid-points of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.

(28)	LOT FRONTAGE:  The front of a lot shall be constrned to be the portion nearest the street.
For the purposes of determining yard requirements on comer lots and through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be provided as indicated under "Yards" in this Article.

(29)	LOT OF RECORD:   A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the
 

Register of Deeds, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds the description of which has been so recorded.

(30)	LOT WIDTH: Width of a lot shall be considered to be the distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard, provided, however, that width between side lot lines at their foremost points where they intersect with the street line, shall not be less than eighty (80) percent of the required lot width except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs, or on loop streets, where the eighty (80) percent requirement shall not apply.

(31)	LOT, CORNER: Indicated as A in Diagram S-1, a corner lot is defined as a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five
(135) degrees.


(32)	LOT, INTERIOR:  Indicated as Bin Diagram S-1, an interior lot is defined as a lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a street.

(33)	LOT, THROUGH:  Indicated as C inDiagram S-1, a through lot is defined as a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on more than one street. Through lots abutting two (2) streets may be referred to as a double frontage lot.

Diagram S-1


 
.\\   ,",  \
- ,	B
-(	'
I	'
;A(1)
 



1 A-0	A
I	I	---­	I
 
:  8	:  B  18-0.
t _ -- .1.- _j._...,  	
I	I	1	I
 
----..{----
C-D \
 
I	I  8	I  B  I BI
 
....-·	\
 
:A(1)
 
I	I	: A	I	\
 
I ,,..,,
<...  B
 
I	A	'
 
I	'· I 8
I	', I
I	{	I
I	,,'">,....._....1I	:	A	8
/	I	--..,.._ - ..,._

(34)	LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE:    All lots withaD inDiagram S-1, a reversed frontage lot is defined as a lot in which the frontage is at right angles or approximately right angles, interior angle less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, to the general pattern in the area. A reversed frontage lot may also be a corner lot (A-D in Diagram S-1), an interior lot (B-D) or a through lot (C-D).

(35)	LOT, ZONING:  A parcel of land or tract used, developed, or built upon as a unit under
 

single ownership or control.  Said parcel or tract may consist of one or more lots of record, one or more portions of a lot or lots of record or any combination thereof.

(36)	MAJOR THOROUGHFARE PLAN: The comprehensive plan adopted by the City Planning Commission indicating the general location recommended for arterial, collector, and local thoroughfares within the planning jurisdiction of the City.

(37)	MONUMENTS: Permanent concrete or iron markers used to establish definitely all lines of the plat of a subdivision, including all lot corners, boundary line corners, and points of change in street alignment.

(38)	OPEN SPACE: An area open to the sky which may be on the same lot with a building. The area may include, along with the natural environmental features, swimming pools, tennis courts, any other recreational facilities that the Planning Commission deems permissive. Streets, structures for habitation, and the like shall not be included.

(39)	OUT LOT: Property shown on a subdivision plat outside of the boundaries of the land which is to be developed and which is to be excluded from the development of the subdivision.

(40)	PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: For the purpose of this Ordinance an off-street parking space shall consist of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room. Required off-street parking areas for three (3) or more automobiles shall have individual spaces marked, and shall be so designed, maintained and regulated that no parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk, or alley, and so that any automobile may be parked and unparked without moving another.

(41)	PEDESTRIAN WAYS: Is a tract of land dedicated to public use, which cuts across a block to facilitate pedestrian access to adjoining streets or properties.

(42)	PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: Special development of certain tracts of land, planned and designed as a unit for one or more land uses under the regulations and procedures contained in the Zoning Ordinance and as approved by the City Council.

(43)	PLAT: The map, drawing, or chart on which the developer's plan of subdivision is presented to the City Planning Commission and City Council for approval and, after such approval, to the Washington County Register of Deeds.

(44)	PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: A water system which provides for the supply, storage, and distribution of potable water which is owned and maintained by a governmental subdivision licensed by the State Department of Health or a privately owned water system which is licensed, regulated, and monitored by the State Depmiment of Health.

(45)	PUBLIC WAY: An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch, easement, expressway, freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, sidewalk, street, subway, tunnel, viaduct,
 

walk, or other ways in which the general public or a public entity have a right, or which are dedicated, whether improved or not.

(46)	RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip ofland taken or dedicated for use as a public way. In addition to the roadway, it normally incorporates the curbs, lawn strips, sidewalks, lighting, and drainage facilities, and may include special features (required by the topography or treatment) such as grade separation, landscaped areas, viaducts and bridges.

(47)	SETBACK LINE: A  line established by the Subdivision Regulations and/or Zoning Ordinance, generally parallel with and measured from the lot line, defining the limits of a yard in which no building, other than accessory building, or structure may be located above ground, except as may be provided in said codes.  (See Yards.)

(48)	SEWERS, ON-SITE: A septic tank or similar installation on an individual lot which utilizes an aerobic bacteriological process or equally satisfactory process for the elimination  of sewage and provides for the proper and safe disposal of the effluent, subject to the approval of health and sanitation officials having jurisdiction.

(49)	SIDEWALK OR WALKWAY: That portion of a dedicated right-of-way or easement intended for pedestrian use only.

(50)	STREET LINE: A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel ofland and the contiguous street.  The right-of-way line of a street.

(51)	SUBDIVIDER:  See Developer.


(52)	SUBDIVISION:


1.	The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two (2) or more parcels, sites or lots any one of which is less than ten (10) acres for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that the division or partition ofland into parcels of more than ten (10) acres not involving any new streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional building sites, shall be exempted; or

2.	The improvement of  one or more  parcels of land for residential, commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the division or allocation ofland for the opening, widening, or extension of any street or streets except private streets serving industrial structures; the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners, occupants, or lease holders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or other public facilities.

(53)	SUBDIVISION DESIGN  CLASSIFICATIONS: Two subdivision classifications which establish minimum design criteria and required improvements for all subdivisions in the
 

City.  The classifications are defined as follows:

A.	CLASS I SUBDIVISION:  Rural low density subdivisions which include:




1.	All residential subdivisions in the following zoning districts as defmed in the Zoning Ordinance for Blair, Nebraska.
AGG	General Agricultural District RRE	Rural Residential Estates

B.	CLASS II SUBDIVISION:  Subdivisions which include:

1.	Industrial  subdivisions  containing  four  (4)  or more  lots  or  a total  area exceeding ten (10) acres.

2.	Commercial subdivisions  containing four (4) or more lots or a total area exceeding three (3) acres.

3.	All residential subdivisions in the following zoning districts as defined in the Zoning Ordinance for Blair, Nebraska.
RL	Residential Low Density District RM	Residential High Density District
RML	Multi-Family Residential Low Density District RMH   Multi-Family Residential High Density District

(54)	SURVEYOR:  Any person registered to practice land surveying in the State of Nebraska.

(55)	THOROUGHFARE, STREET, OR ROAD: The full width between property lines bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be used for vehicular traffic and designated as follows:

A.	ALLEY: A dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street, which provides only a secondary means of access to abutting property, the right-of-way of which is 20 feet or less in width.

B.	ARTERIAL STREET: A street which provides for through traffic movement between and around streets with direct access to abutting property, subject to necessary control of entrances, exits, and curb use.

C.	COLLECTOR STREET: A street which provides for traffic movement between arterials and local streets, with direct access to abutting property.

D.	LOCAL STREET: A street which provides direct access to abutting land, and local traffic movement whether in business, industrial or residential land.
 


E.	CUL-DE-SAC: A local street of relatively short length with one (1) end open to traffic and the other end terminating in a vehicular turnaround.

F.	DEAD-END STREET: A street temporarily having only one (1) outlet for vehicular traffic and intended to be extended or continued in the future.

G.	LOOP   STREET:	A  type  of  local  street,  each  end  of  which  terminates  at  an intersection with the same arterial or collector street or other local street and whose principal radius points of the one hundred and eighty (180) degree system of turns are not more than one thousand (1000) feet from said arterial or collector street, nor normally more
than six hundred (600) feet from each other.


H.	MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A local or collector street, parallel and adjacent to an arterial or collector street, providing access to abutting properties and protection from arterial or collector streets. (Also called Frontage Street.)

(56)	VARIAN CE:  A relaxation of the terms of the Subdivision Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the Ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship.

(57)	YARD: A required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lot upward; provided, however, that fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary yard accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstruction of visibility and subject to the district regulations of any zoning regulations.

A.	YARD, FRONT: A yard extending between side lot lines across the front lot line to the front of the principal building.

B.	YARD, REAR: A yard extending between side lot lines across the rear of a lot and from the rear lot line to the rear of the principal building.

C.	YARD, SIDE: A yard extending from the principal building to the side lot line on both sides of the principal building between the line establishing the front and rear yards.

D.	YARD, SPECIAL: A yard behind any required yard adjacent to a public street, required to perform the same functions as a side or rear yard, but adjacent to a lot line so placed or oriented that neither the term "side yard" no the term "rear yard" clearly applies.

(58)	ZONE  OR DISTRICT:  A  section of the Zoning Area for which uniform regulations governing the use, height, area, size and intensity of the use of buildings, land, and open spaces about buildings are established.
 


(59)	ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The person or persons authorized and empowered by the Governing Body having jurisdiction to administer the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations.

(60)	ZONING AREA OR ZONING  JURISDICTION: The area subject to the provisions of Zoning and Subdivision regulations  as set out on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Blair, Nebraska.

DIAGRAMS-2
LOCATION AND MEASUREMENTS  OF YARDS ON LOTS


 LEGEND 	
Frout ynrd     l·:}H\!f(i/· I
Side yard	ise:;;:::AA:J
Rear.)· rd	r Amh. ·"'1 !
Spee.In.lye.rd
Lot Lines:
Y11rd Measurement Llne.s:













'fhe mustrations depict front )'ard (double frontage nnd half.depth corner lots), side yMd, nnd rear yMd setbacks. Note that at tho loft illustration, a special )'Md is shown indicating treatment whore \lsual side or rear yard terminology would be difficult to apply, b\lt the p1ttpose of the yard is clear.




















(END OF SECTION)
 

(Blank Page)
 

ARTICLE4.	PLAT REVIEW AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS

SECTION 401  PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE


401.1	PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE: Before filing a preliminary plat the subdivider shall consult with the Planning Commission and/or its staff for advice regarding general requirements affecting the proposed development. A sketch of the proposed subdivision drawn on the topographic survey map shall be submitted. The subdivider shall also submit a location map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing or platted streets and arterials and existing community facilities.

401.2	NOTIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS: The Planning Commission and/or its staff shall inform the subdivider of the requirements pertaining to the proposed subdivision as such requirements are established by these Regulations.

401.3	WAIVER 0F FEES: The Pre-application procedure does not require formal application, fee, or filing of plat with the Planning Commission.



SECTION 402		PROCEDURE  FOR  CONDITIONAL APPROVAL  OF PRELIMINARY PLAT

402.01 PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: The subdivider shall submit to the Zoning Administrator three (3) full size copies and one (1) reproducible copy not more than eleven
(11) inches x seventeen (17) inches of the preliminary plat and supplemental material specified with written application for conditional approval. Ifthe subdivision contains more than ten (10) lots, then 30 full-sized copies must be submitted. An electronic version of the maps must also be submitted. Said complete submittal shall occur at least twenty-one (21) days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which the request shall be heard.

SECTION 402.02 FEES: A nonrefundable plat review fee shall accompany the application for conditional approval. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution, and shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of any appendix for permit, license, and application fees.

SECTION 402.03 SCALE AND PRELIMINARY PLAT CONCERNS: Preliminary plats shall be a scale of one (1) to one hundred (100) feet or 111 = 200' if seventy-five percent (75%) of the lots are one acre or larger, and shall be prepared with the following information:

(1)	Name, location map, acreage, owner and designer of the subdivision.


(2)	Present zoning.


(3)	Date, north point, and graphic scale.
 


(4)	Location of property lines, roads, existing utilities with size of lines, and other underground installations and easements.

(5)	Names of adjoining properties or subdivisions.


(6)	Proposed utility system, water system, and sewer system (type, capacity and the location of major transmission lines and treatment plants). Developer must describe the type of sewer system and water system proposed.  If developer proposes to use a non-central sewer waste system, then the proposed sewer system shall comply with title 124 of Chapter 4 of the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality Rules and Regulations.

(7)	Names of new streets.

(8)	Dimensions of existing and proposed lot lines

(9)	Location of existing and  proposed culverts, retention ponds, and other drainage provisions.	That Section 606 be amended to read as follows: The City will direct OPPD to design and install street lighting once all paving has been completed on subdivisions in the City limits. Installation of street lighting in subdivisions outside City limits will be the responsibility of the subdivider if required by the Planning Commission and City Council.

(10)	Existing and proposed contours at intervals of two (2) feet or five (5) feet intervals at 1"
= 200" Scale, as established by field topography survey analysis; provided however, field topography survey is required only on subdivisions which include lots ofless than thirty thousand square feet; provided further, that for good cause shown, the field topography survey may be waived by the Planning Commission in the preliminary plat process. Ifmore than one acre of soil is to be disturbed according to the preliminmy plat grading plan, the developer must obtain a NPDES permit or a written waiver from the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality before submitting a final plat application. The Governing Body or staff may require a drainage plan be submitted along with a preliminary plat application.

(11)	Proposed improvements and grading concepts.

(12)	Location of existing buildings.

(13)	Location of existing trees with trunks at least six (6) inches in diameter, measured two
(2) feet above the ground level. Clumps of numerous trees may be identified as a tree group without precisely locating each tree. Notwithstanding the above, for good cause shown, the requirement of this subsection may be waived by the Planning Commission during the preliminary plat process.

(14)	Proposed easements, dedications, and reservations of land required shall be provided.
 


(15)	Square footage of each lot.


(16)	All front, rear and side yard setback requirements and any adjustments thereto (See Section 1110 and 1110.5 of the City of Blair Zoning Regulations).

402.4	NOTIFICATION OF IMPROVEMENTS SCHEDULE: The subdivider shall indicate by a letter when improvements as required will be provided. Any proposed restrictive covenants for the land involved shall accompany the letter.

402.5	NOTIFICATION  OF THE COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION AND COUNTY
HIGHWAY SUPERINTENDENT: The City shall notify the Washington County Planning Commission and County Highway Superintendent at least ten (10) days prior to the Blair Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered for approval, and provide them with all available materials on the proposed plat, when such proposed plat lies partially or totally within the extraterritorial subdivision jurisdiction being exercised by the City of Blair. The commission and highway superintendent shall be given Thirty (30) days to officially comment on the appropriateness of the design and improvements proposed in the plat. The review period shall run concurrently with subdivision review activities of the City of Blair after the County Planning Commission and Highway Superintendent receives all available material for a proposed subdivision plat.

402.6	NOTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BOARD: At least ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered for approval, the Planning Commission shall submit a copy of the proposal to the school board of each school district which the proposed  development affects, and shall notify the school board of the meeting date. Copies of the plat may be submitted to any other agency which may be affected.

402.065	NOTIFICATION OF WASHINGTON COUNTY SURVEYOR: At least ten (10) days
prior to the Planning Commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered for approval, the Planning Commission shall submit a copy of the proposal to the Washington County Surveyor and shall notify said Surveyor of the meeting date.

402.7	NOTIFICATION OF FIRE DEPARTMENT: At least ten (10) days prior to the Planning  Commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered for approval, the Planning Commission shall submit a copy of the proposal to the Blair Volunteer Fire Department.

402.8	NOTIFICATION  OF ADJACENT  LAND  OWNERS:   All persons  which  are the recorded title owners of land within three hundred (300) feet of any point along the perimeter  of the  land to be subdivided shall be notified in writing of the pending subdivision. The letter of notification shall be mailed to recipients no later than ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission's public hearing.  Adjacent land owners shall
 

have ten days from the date of notification to notify the City Administrator  of  any protests which they may have concerning the application. A 11 Subdivision  Action Pending 11 sign will be posted on the front yard of the property under consideration for subdivision at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearings of the Planning Commission  and  City  Council.

 
402.09











402.10







402.11
 
PLANNING COMMISSION APPROVAL/REJECTION: After review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the subdivider, the Planning Commission shall reject or conditionally approve the preliminary plat within forty (40) days after the official meeting at which the plat was considered. The Planning Commission will consider the Preliminary Plat at a public hearing, of which a ten (10) day notice will be given in a newspaper of general circulation in Blair, Nebraska. After recommendation of Planning Commission, recommendation should be forwarded to the City Council for consideration.

RECORDING  OF ACTION  BY PLANNING  COMMISSION:    The action of the
Planning Commission shall be noted on three (3) copies of the Preliminary Plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy relayed to the City Council, and one copy retained by the Planning Commission.

APPROVAL IS CONDITIONAL: Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval or conditional approval of the submitted plat as a guide for the preparation of the final plat, which will be subject to further consideration by the Planning Commission and City Council. Any conditional approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one (1) year unless an extension is granted by the Planning Commission.
 


SECTION 403	PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT

 
403.01













403.02
 
PLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS:  Final plats shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator  within  one  (1) year  of  approval  of the  preliminary  plat  unless  an extension is granted by the Planning Commission.  The final plat shall confmm to the preliminary plat as approved and to the requirements of all applicable Ordinances and state laws; and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved Preliminary Plat which he/she proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these Regulations. Submittal of any portion of the approved area shall be interpreted as satisfying the one
(1) year submission requirement.

FEES: A final plat review fee shall accompany the application for final approval of the plat. The applicant shall pay and the application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution, and shall be appended
 

to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix for permit, license, and application fees.



403.3	SCALE AND FINAL PLAT CONTENTS: Four (4) Mylar originals, two (2) full size paper, and one (1) reproducible copy not more than eleven (11) inches x seventeen (17) inches and other exhibits required for approval shall be submitted. Ifthe subdivision contains more than ten (10) lots, 30 full-size copies must be submitted. An electronic version of the maps must also be submitted as part of the Final Plat application. The Final Plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth, Mylar, or similar material, and shall be at a scale of one inch (l ")to one hundred feet (100') or larger. The final plat shall show the following:

(1)	Date, title, name, and location map of subdivision.

(2)	Street and street names, lots and lot numbers.

(3)	Graphic scale and arrow or indicator.

(4)	Monuments or pins unless waived pursuant to Section 602.

(5)	Dimensions, angles, and/or bearings, and complete legal description of the property.
(6)	Sufficient survey data to reproduce any line on the ground.

(7)	Names of adjoining properties.

(8)	Locations, dimensions, and purpose of any easements.

(9)	Purpose  for  which  sites  are  dedicated  or  reserved,  and  the  transfer  of ownership of the same.

(10)	Certification by surveyor certifying to accuracy of survey and plat.

(11)	Certification by the County Treasurer that all assessed taxes for the current year have been paid in full.

(12)	Certification signed and acknowledged by all parties holding title or having any title interest in the land subdivided and consenting to the preparation and recording of the plat as submitted.

(13)	Location of street trees, size, and species.

(14)	Certificate certifying consideration  of review by the Planning Commission and signature of the Chairman.
 

(15)	Certificate for approval by the Council and signatures of the Mayor and City Clerk.

(16)	Square footage of each lot.


(17)	All adjustments to front, rear and side yard setback requirements (See Section 1110 and 1110.5 of the City of Blair Zoning Requirements.)

 
403.04













403.05






403.06
















403.07
 
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA REQUIRED:  The final plat shall be accompanied by:


(1)	A guarantee pursuant to the provisions of Section 610.01 of these regulations.


(2)	Protective covenants (if any) in form for recording.

(3)	An operation and maintenance program pursuant to the provisions of Section 611 of these regulations.



PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS: The Planning Commission shall approve or reject the final plat and prepare a recommendation to the City Council for approval or rejection. All reasons for recommending rejection shall be clearly stated.

NOTIFICATION OF ADJACENT LAND OWNERS: All persons which are the recorded title owners of land within three hundred (300) feet of any point along the perimeter of the land to be subdivided shall be notified in writing of the pending subdivision. The letter of notification shall be mailed to recipients no later than ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission's Public Hearing. Adjacent land owners shall have ten days from the date of notification to notify the City Administrator of any protests which they may have concerning the application.

A "Subdivision Action Pending" sign will be posted on the front yard of the property under consideration for subdivision at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearings of the Planning Commission and City Council.

CITY COUNCIL REVIEW AND ACTION: After receipt and review of the Planning Commission's recommendations on the final plat the City Council shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of reviewing the final plat. The notice for the hearing shall be published at least ten (10) days before the hearing date. If rejected, the reason for rejection shall be listed and forwarded to the subdivider within ten (10) days.
 

 
ARTICLE4.
 
PLAT REVIEW AND SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
 

SECTION 404	PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OF A REPLAT OF A SUBDIVISION
 

Replat of Subdivision. A replat replaces all or part of a recorded Final Plat. A replat is used to reconfigure existing platted lots and easements in an existing subdivision and may increase or decrease the number of lots in the subdivision. In the event that a proposed replat does not involve a change in subdivision class and type, a change in zoning district, or a change in surface drainage, the subdivider may apply for a replat under the provisions of this section. The utilization of the replat does not relieve the subdivider of its obligation to comply with minimum design standards under Article 5 of the  Subdivision Regulations and required improvements under Article 6 of the Subdivision Regulations. The necessity of establishing and dedicating easements for utilities shall not bar the utilization of the administrative subdivision. The procedure for such application will be as follows:

 
404.01



404.02






404.03
 
REPLAT SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS: Application will bemadetothePlanning Commission under the procedures outlined for a replat.

FEES: A nonrefundable replat application fee shall accompany the replat application. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution, and shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix for permit, license, and application fees.

SCALE AND REPLAT CONTENTS: The subdivider shall submit four (4) Mylar originals, two (2) full size paper, and one (1) reproducible copy not more than eleven
(11)	inches x seventeen (17) inches of the replat and other exhibits required for approval shall be submitted. An electronic version of the maps must also be submitted as part of the replat application. The original shall be at a scale of one (1) to one hundred (100) feet or 1" equals 200' if seventy-five percent (75%) of the lots are of one acre or larger. The replat shall contain the following:

(1)	Date, title, name, and location map of the subdivision.

(2)	Names and locations of abutting streets and lots identifying street names and lot and block numbers.

(3)	Identification of the new lot and block numbers and set back lines.

(4)	Graphic scale, true north point and full legend depicting all map symbology.

(5)	Monuments.

(6)	Dimensions, angles and bearings and complete legal description of the property.

(7)	Sufficient engineering data to reproduce any line on the ground.
 

(8)	Location, dimensions, and purposes of any existing easements.

(9)	Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to the accuracy of the survey and plat.

(10)	Certification signed and acknowledged by all parties holding title or having any title interest in the land subdivided and consenting to the preparation and recording of the replat as submitted.

(11)	Certification by the County Treasurer all  assessed taxes for the current year have been paid in full.

(12)	Square footage of each lot.


(13)	Location of all existing buildings, structures, fences and retaining walls.

(14)	If applicable, utility easements signed by the owner or owners to permit all tax lots created access to all utilities available, including but not limited to, sanitaty sewer, storm sewer, water, electrical, telephone, and cable television.

 
404.04







404.05




404.06
















404.07
 
SUPPLEMENTARY DATA REQUIRED: The replat shall be accompanied by:

Utility easements signed by the owner or owners to permit all lots created access to all utilities available in the City, including but not limited to, sanitary sewer, stmm sewer, water, electrical, telephone, and cable television.

PLANNING COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS: The Planning Commission shall approve or reject the replat and prepare a recommendation to the City Council for approval or rejection.  All reasons for recommending rejection shall be clearly stated.

NOTIFICATION OF ADJACENT LANDOWNERS: All persons which are the recorded title owners of land within three hundred (300) feet of any point along the perimeter of the land to be replatted shall be notified in writing of the pending replat. The letter of notification shall be mailed to recipients no later than ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission's Public Hearing. Adjacent land owners shall have ten days from the date of notification to notify the City Administrator of any protests which they may have concerning the application.

A "Subdivision Action Pending" sign will be posted on the front yard of the property under consideration for replat at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearings of the Planning Commission and City Council.

CITY COUNCIL REVIEW AND ACTION:  After receipt and review of the Planning
 

Commission's recommendations on the replat the City Council shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of reviewing the replat. The notice for the hearing shall be published at least ten (10) days before the hearing date. If rejected, the reason for rejection shall be listed and forwarded to the applicant within ten (10) days.

SECTION 404.08		PROCEDURE  FOR  APPROVAL  OF ADMINISTRATIVE  TWO  LOT REPLATS

The Zoning Administrator may approve Administrative Two Lot Replats of two contiguous platted lots within the same subdivision without further approval by the Planning Commission or City Council if all of the following conditions are met:

A.	The proposed two lot replat does not involve a change in subdivision class and type, a change in zoning district, or a significant change in surface drainage.

B.	The proposed two lot replat is a transaction between owners of two contiguous platted lots within the same subdivision, which involves only a change in the boundary between the two platted lots owned by such persons, does not create an additional lot, and does not result in the creation of a substandard-size platted lot.

Following the mailing of the written notices required in Section 404.06, if a protest or protests against such two lot replat be filed in the office of the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the notice of such two lot replat, which are duly signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the total area, excepting public streets and ways, located within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the properties proposed to be replatted, approval of such two lot replat shall not be made by the Zoning Administrator under this section, and the approval of such replat shall be made by the procedure as set forth hereinabove by hearing before the Planning Commission and City Council.
 

(END OF SECTION)
(Blank Page)
 

ARTICLES.	SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS

SECTION 501  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, erosion or other menace. If, following adequate investigation, conducted by all public agencies concerned, it is determined that land to be subdivided cannot be used without endangering the health, safety, welfare or prosperity of the community, or would necessitate an excessive expenditure of public financial resources for sewage and water facilities, other public facilities and streets, then the subdivision plat shall not be approved unless the subdivider formulates adequate methods for meeting such problems.

All subdivision design shall conform to standards of the Comprehensive Development Plan and to the City Zoning Regulations.

All required improvements shall be constructed or installed to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance and City specifications.

SECTION 502 STREETS


The an-angement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall confmm to the Comprehensive Plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.

 
502.01














502.02










502.03
 
STREET EXTENSIONS: The street layout of the proposed subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of streets and alleys already existing in areas being subdivided. Where, at the determination of the Planning Commission it is desirable to provide street access to adjoining properties, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundaries of such properties. Where the Planning Commission deems it  necessary, such dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a radius of at least fifty (50) feet. The street system for the proposed subdivision shall provide for extending existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case shall a street extension be of less width than the minimum width required in these Regulations for a street in its categmy.

DEDICATIONOFRIGHT-OF-WAYFORNEWSTREETS: Thededicationofright­ of-way for new streets measured from lot line to lot line shall be as shown in the Comprehensive Plan, or, if not shown thereon, shall meet the right-of-way requirements as provided in Schedule A of these regulations. All streets classified as arterial streets by the Comprehensive Plan shall have all points of access approved by the Planning Commission. Marginal access streets may be required by the Planning Commission for subdivisions fronting on arterial streets.

DEDICATION  OF RIGHT-OF-WAY  FOR EXISTING  STREETS:    Subdivisions
 

platted along existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way if necessary to meet the minimum street width requirements set forth in these Regulations. The entire minimum right-of-way width shall be dedicated where the subdivision is on both sides of an existing street. When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half (1/2) of the required right-of-way width, measured from center line of the existing roadway, shall be dedicated. Dedication of one-half (1/2) of the right-of­ way for proposed streets along the boundaries ofland proposed for subdivision shall be prohibited.

 
502.04
























502.05


















502.06
 
INTERSECTIONS:   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at an angle of ninety
(90) degrees, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than eighty (80) degrees. Street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at least twenty (20) feet. When the smallest angle of street intersection is less than seventy-five (75) degrees, the Planning Commission may require curb radii of greater length. Wherever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without reducing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such curb construction. No lot or other parcel of land which abuts on and has access to either a collector or a minor street shall have a service drive, curb cut, or other means of access to an arterial street within seventy-five (75) feet of the right-of-way of any street which intersects such arterial street on the side on which such lot or parcel is located.

When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten
(10) degrees, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than four hundred (400) feet for collector streets, and of such greater or less radii as the Planning Commission shall determine for special cases.

HORIZONTAL AND VERTICAL STREET CURVES: A tangentatleastonehundred
(100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. Where there is a deflection angle of more than ten (10) degrees in the alignment of a street, a curve with a radius adequate to insure safe sight distance shall be made. The minimum radii of curves provided in Schedule A of these regulations shall be required.

Every change in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve constructed so as to afford a minimum sight distance of two hundred (200) feet, said sight distance being measured from a driver's eyes, which are assumed to be four and one-half (4-1/2) feet above the pavement surface, to an object four (4) inches high on the pavement. Profiles of all streets showing natural or finished grades, drawn to an approved scale, may be required by the Planning Commission.

STREET GRADES AND ELEVATIONS: All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface water from the pavement and from the right-of-way by grading and drainage. For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall be not less than one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent.   The Planning Commission shall not approve
 

streets which will be subject to inundation or flooding. All streets must be located at elevations which will make them flood-free in order that portions of the subdivisions will not be isolated by floods. Where flood conditions exist, the Planning Commission shall require profiles or elevations of streets in order to determine the advisability of permitting the proposed subdivision activity. Fill may be used in areas subject to flooding in order to provide flood-free streets if such fill does not increase flood heights. Drainage openings shall be designed so as not to restrict the flow of water and thereby increase flood heights.

Street grades shall conform to the minimum requirements provided in Schedule A of these Regulations.

 
502.07




























502.08



502.09







502.10
 
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS: Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the Planning Commission may require access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of adjacent properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic.

Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon or contains an existing or proposed arterial street or highway on which traffic volumes and vehicular speeds warrant special safety considerations, the Planning Commission may require that marginal access streets be provided in order that no lots front on such existing or proposed arterial street or highway.

Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.

STREET JOGS: Street jogs with center line offsets ofless than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be prohibited.

CUL-DE-SACS: Minor terminal or dead ends streets or courts which are designed so as to have one end permanently closed shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a tum-around having a radius at the outside of the pavement of at least 50 feet and a radius at the outside of the right-of-way of at least
62.5 feet.

STREET NAMES: Proposed streets which are in alignment with other already existing and named streets shall bear the names of such existing streets. The name of a proposed street which is not in alignment with an existing street, shall not duplicate the name of
 

any existing street, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, lane, road, pike, highway, parkway, or similar suffix.

Whenever a street  alignment changes direction more than forty-five (45) degrees without a return to the original alignment within a distance of five hundred (500) feet, then the name of the street shall be changed at the point of curvature.

To avoid duplication and confusion, the proposed names of all streets shall be approved by City Planning Commission prior to such names being assigned or used.

 
502.11
 
PRIVATE STREETS AND RESERVE STRIPS: There shall be no private streets platted within a subdivision. There shall be no reserve strips in a subdivision except where their control is definitely vested in the municipality or county under conditions approved by the City Council as authorized in these Regulations.
 

SECTION   503	ALLEYS

Alleys shall be provided to give access to the rear of all lots used for commercial and industrial purposes except when lots are located within Highway Commercial or Industrial zoned properties when the size or configuration of said facilities would not necessitate alley access. The minimum width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, comers shall be cut off sufficiently to pe1mit safe vehicular movement. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate facilities at the dead-end as determined by the Planning Commission. Alleys shall not be provided in residential areas except in cases where the subdivider produces evidence of the need for alleys which is satisfactory to the Planning Commission.

SECTION	504	BLOCKS

The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to the provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; and limitations and opportunities of topography.

 
504.01




504.02







504.03
 
BLOCK LENGTHS: Block lengths shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) feet or be less than three hundred sixty (360) feet, except as the Planning Commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street layout.

BLOCK WIDTHS AND TIERS: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, provided, that where this would require lots to front on an arterial street or highway or where topographical conditions or the size of the property prevent two (2) tiers oflots, the Planning Commission may approve a single tier oflots of minimum depth.

PEDESTRIAN  WAYS:   Pedestrian ways not less than ten feet (10') wide may be
 

required in blocks  longer than five hundred feet (500') where such crosswalks are deemed by the Planning Commission to be essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation or other community facilities.

SECTION  505	LOTS


The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.

 
505.01







505.02


505.03



505.04









505.05
 
LOT DIMENSIONS: Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the Zoning Regulations. Residential lots where not served by public sewer shall not be of less width or area than that required by the Zoning Regulations, and in no case shall such lots be of less width than sixty (60) feet and of less area than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet.

CORNER LOTS: Comer lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets.
ACCESS TO LOTS: The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public street, each lot with a minimum of 30' access to an existing public street.

DOUBLE FRONTAGE AND REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS:  Double frontage and
reverse frontage lots, shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use.

ANGLE OF SIDE LOT LINES: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines.
 

SECTION  506	FLOOD HAZARDS


Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable for residential development shall not be platted for residential use or for any other use which may increase the danger to health, life, or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazards.   Such land within the subdivision shall be set aside on the plat for such uses as will not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation contrary to the public welfare.  To insure that lots will be located only where they will provide flood-free building sites, the Planning Commission may require the subdivider to provide  elevation  and  flood profiles  sufficient  to  demonstrate  that the building  sites will  be completely free from the danger of flooding.  If a stream flows through or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, the plat plan shall provide for easement of right-of-way along the stream for a :floodway. For the smaller streams, the plan shall also provide for channel improvement to enable then to cany all reasonable floods within banlcs. The floor elevations of structures intended for human habitation shall be high enough to be above the level of one hundred (100) year frequency flood. The :floodway
 

easement shall be wide enough to provide for future enlargement of the stream channel as adjacent areas become more highly developed and run-off rates are increased.

SECTION  507	OFF-STREET LOADING AND PARKING FACILITIES

All lots or parcels platted shall provide sufficient space for off-street loading and parking facilities to meet the requirements of the zoning district within said lot of parcel is platted.

SECTION  508	EASEMENTS


Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least sixteen (16) feet wide.

Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainageway, channel, or street, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose.  Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith.

SECTION  509	COMMUNITY ASSETS

In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for natural features such as large trees, unusual rock formations, and water courses; for sites which have historical significance; and for similar assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision and to the area. The Planning Commission may prepare a list of all such features within its Area of Planning Jurisdiction which it deems worthy of preservation.

SECTION  510	CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS

No final plat ofland within the area of force and effect of existing Zoning Regulations will be approved unless it conforms with such regulations. Whenever there is a variance between the minimum standards set forth in these Regulations and those contained in the building code, or other official regulations, the highest standard shall apply.

SECTION  511	RESERVATION  AND DEDICATION  OF PUBLIC LAND AND OPEN SPACE

511.1	RESERVATION: Before final plat approval is given the subdivider, he/she may be required to reserve sites for parks, playgrounds, open spaces and schools and other public land as determined by the Planning Commission to be sufficient and in compliance with the Comprehensive Plan. Reservation of land for public acquisition and/or use shall be for a period not to exceed three (3) years from the date the plat is officially approved and recorded unless otherwise provided in these regulations.

(1)	Where a park, playground, school or other site for public use shown on the Comprehensive  Plan  is  located  in  whole  or  in  part  in  the  applicant's
 

subdivision, the City may require the acquisition or accept the dedication or reservation of such area within the subdivision.

(2)	Where deemed essential by the Planning Commission upon consideration of the type of development proposed in the subdivision, and especially in large­ scale developments not anticipated in the Comprehensive Plan, the City may request the dedication or reservation of such other areas or sites of a character, extent or location suitable to the needs created by such development for school, parks and other neighborhood facilities.

(3)	Where a tract ofland is being subdivided includes land proposed to be used for parks under the duly adopted Comprehensive Plan of the City, the subdivider shall indicate the location of such areas on the subdivision plat.

·	(4)             Where a tract ofland is being subdivided includes land proposed to be used for a future school site, under the adopted Comprehensive Plan, the subdivider shall indicate the general location of such areas on the preliminary plat. School sites are to be reserved for two years giving the Community School District the right to purchase the land at a negotiated value or at a value dete1mined in the same manner as required by the Nebraska State Statutes for proceedings under the power of eminent domain, plus one-half the cost of grading, utilities, and paving, including curbs, of any streets contiguous to the site, plus other approved special assessments. Should the school site not be purchased within the time limit specified above, the subdivider may then sell said site for an alternate purpose as shown on the approved subdivision plat.

511.2	DEDICATION: Before final plat approval is given to the subdivider, he/she shall be required to dedicate to the public use all streets, alleys, buffer strips and parks as may be required by the Planning Commission. Acceptance of these dedicated lands shall be recorded in the minutes of the City Council and on the subdivision plat.

SECTION  512	PARKLAND	DEDICATION	AND	PAYMENTS	IN	LIEU	OF DEDICATION

The subdivider who subdivides land shall dedicate a portion of such land, or pay a fee, as set forth in this Article for the purpose of providing park, recreational facilities, and open spaces to serve future residents.

The amount ofland to be dedicated by a subdivider pursuant to this ordinance shall be 5% or
.5	acre, whichever is greater, of the land area comprising the total land area in the proposed subdivision as reflected in the final subdivision plat. If a subdivider so desires, the subdivider may elect to pay a fee in lieu of land dedication, provided, however, the City may reject subdividers election and require land dedication. Where a subdivider is required to pay a fee in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land
 

comprising the total land area as indicated in the final subdivision plat. The amount of such fee shall be 8% of the fair market value of the total land area comprising the proposed subdivision as indicated in the final subdivision plat.

Fair market value shall be determined as of the time of filing the final plat in accordance with the following:

(1)	The fair market value as determined by the City Council based upon fair market value appraisals considering all of the uses and purposes for which it might reasonably be used; or

(2)	Ifthe subdivider objects to the amount of valuation the subdivider may, at its expense, obtain an appraisal of the property based on the highest and best use of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser approved by the City, which appraisal may be accepted by the City Council if found reasonable; or

(3)	The City and the subdivider may agree as to the fair market value.


The procedure for determining whether the subdivider is to dedicate land or pay a fee shall be as follows:

(1)	At all times, the City Council shall have the power to require land dedication or a fee in lieu ofland dedication, regardless of subdivider's election to dedicate land or pay a fee. The City Council shall not approve any preliminary plat or final plat which has not complied with this ordinance.

(2)	At the time of the filing of the preliminary subdivision plat for approval, the subdivider of the property shall, as a part of such filing, indicate whether subdivider desires to dedicate land for park and recreational purposes, or whether subdivider desires to pay a fee in lieu thereof or provide private recreational areas if accepted by the City Council. If subdivider desires to dedicate land for this purpose, subdivider shall designate the area thereof on the preliminary plat as submitted and all dedicated land shall be contiguous.

(3)	At the time the preliminary plat is submitted for approval, the City Council shall determine as a part of such approval, whether to accept a dedication of land within the subdivision, or a payment of a fee in lieu thereof. The minimum size of a dedication of land for park purposes shall be .5 acre.

(4)	Where a dedication ofland is required, it shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivisions Regulations. Further the subdivider shall convey the dedicated land to the City by deed, and the deed shall be delivered to the City upon anival of the final plat. The final plat will contain all dedicated park land and the name of the park.
 

(5)	Where fees are required, the same shall be paid and deposited with the City prior to the approval of the final plat, or in the alternative, the subdivider shall pay the fees within twelve months from the date of the approval of the final plat, provided that subdivider furnishes written agreement to pay said fees and personal note for total amount of fees, subject to the approval of the City, to the City prior to the approval of the final plat. The City shall not issue any building permits for construction on more than one-third of the lots in any subdivision until the fees are paid and shall not issue any building pe1mits for construction on any lots after the expiration of the twelve month period until said fees are paid.

(6)	At the time the final plat is approved, and land is dedicated, the City Council shall designate the time when the development of the park and recreational facility shall be commenced.

Land and fees received under this Ordinance shall be used only for the purpose of providing park, recreational facilities and open spaces to serve the approximate area of the subdivision for which received and location of the land and amount of fees shall bear a reasonable relationship to the use of the park, recreational facilities and open spaces by the future inhabitants of the subdivision.

Exceptions: The following subdivisions shall be exempt from mandatory land dedication for park, recreational, and open spaces, or fees in lieu of mandatory dedication of land for park, recreational and open spaces, as follows:

(1) All lot split subdivisions as provided in Article VII, Section 705, of this Subdivision Regulations Ordinance.

(2)	All light or heavy industrial park subdivisions (except those areas specifically designated as parks, recreational areas or open space on the Comprehensive Plan). An industrial park subdivision shall require all of the real estate within the subdivision to be zoned industrial pursuant to the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Blair.

(3)	All agricultural/business and commercial district subdivisions (except those areas specifically designated as parks, recreational areas or openspace on the Comprehensive Plan). An agricultural/business and commercial district subdivision shall require all of the real estate within the subdivision to be zoned business or commercial pursuant to the Zoning Ordinances of the City of Blair.

(4)	All other subdivisions a portion of which are not either contiguous to or located within the city limits of the City of Blair, Nebraska (except those areas specifically designated as parks, recreational areas or open space on the Comprehensive Plan).

SECTION  513	LARGE TRACTS OF PARCELS

When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical resubdivision.
 





























































(END OF SECTION)
 

ARTICLE6	REQUIRED SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS

SECTION  601	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

The subdivider shall design and construct improvements not less than the standards outlined in these Regulations. The work shall be done under City supervision and inspection and shall be completed within the time fixed or agreed upon by the City Engineer. The minimum requirements for materials shall be in accordance with the standards currently in effect in the City or as approved by the City Engineer. Standards applicable to health and sanitation as required by the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Nebraska Department of Health shall be the minimum standards required.

Schedules of improvements shall be prepared by the subdivider. The schedules shall contain standards and classes of construction which are consistent within the zoning districts as identified in the

Zoning Regulations of the City of Blair. The subdivider shall furnish copies of pertinent schedules and certificates of compliance as required by the City Engineer.

All inspection costs and costs for required tests shall be paid by the subdivider. SECTION  602	MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND PINS
Pe1manent concrete monuments or solid iron pins or iron pipe monuments shall be accurately set and established at the intersections of all outside boundary lines of the subdivision; at the intersections of those boundary lines with all street lines; at the beginning and end of all curves; at points on curves where the radius or direction changes; and at such other points as necessary to establish definitely all lines of the plat, including all lot comers. Stone or concrete monuments shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter, and shall be provided with an appropriate center point. Solid iron pins or iron pipe monuments shall be at least one (1) inch in diameter and at least thirty (30) inches long.

The requirement monuments or pins be in place prior to approval of the final plat may be waived by the City when the developer obtains a bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State ofNebraska or the developer posts a cash deposit with the City in an amount estimated by the City to cover all costs and expenses of the actual placement of said monuments or iron pins. The bond shall be payable to the City and shall be held until such time as the placement of said monuments or iron pins is completed. Said waiver shall be for a period not to exceed six (6) months from the date of approval of the final plat and in the event the developer fails within the waiver period to place said monuments or iron pins the City may do so and apply the proceeds of the bond or cash deposit to the cost thereof. In addition to the surety bond or cash deposit, the City may also delay filing the final plat with the County Clerk pending completion of the placement of the monuments or iron pins as required.

SECTION 603	STREETS
 


 
603.01





















603.02




603.03










603.04














603.05



603.06
 
GRADING SPECIFICATIONS: All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full widths by the subdivider so that street pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level plane. Deviation from this standard due to special topographical conditions will be allowed only with the approval of the City Council. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared of all tree stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and of all trees not intended for preservation. The subgrade shall be properly shaded, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform with the accepted cross-section and grades. In cuts, all tree stumps, boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy material and other objectionable materials shall be removed to a depth of at least two (2) feet below the graded surfaces. Rock, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of at least twelve (12) inches below the graded surface. In fills, all tree stumps, boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy material and other objectionable matter, as well as similar matter from cuts, shall be removed from the right-of-way area and disposed of in such a manner that it will not become incorporated in fills or hinder proper operation of the drainage system.

MINIMUM PAVEMENT WIDTHS: Pavement widths shall be measured between the backs of curbs. Minimum pavement or surface widths shall be provided as indicated in Schedule A of these Regulations.

STREET SURFACING: Street surfacing shall be provided in conformance with Schedule B of these Regulations or as determined by the City Engineer. Requirements for paving including curb and gutter may be waived at the request of the subdivider in the case of a subdivision wherein all of the lots in the subdivision have a minimum frontage width of three hundred (300) feet or more subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Streets in such subdivisions shall have a crushed rock or gravel surface which meets the specifications of the City.

CURB AND GUTTER: Curb and gutter shall as a minimum be provided in conformance with Schedule B of these regulations. In areas of notable flash flooding or heavy run-off, curbs shall be required on all streets designed for areas where the existing or anticipated residential density of the area surrounding the proposed subdivision equals or exceeds three (3) dwelling units per net acre. In commercial developments, or where other similar intensive urban uses exists or are anticipated, curbs shall be required. Where curbs exist on abutting properties, their extension shall be required throughout the proposed subdivision. All curb and gutter shall be constructed in confmmance with the minimum standards of the City and as approved by the City Engineer.

STREET NAME SIGNS: Street name signs, of a type in use throughout the City shall be erected by the subdivider at all intersections.

NO PARKING DESIGNATION: According to City guidelines, No Parking will generally be on the east and south side of street.
 

SECTION 604            SIDEWALKS

Sidewalks shall be provided in conformance with Schedule B of these Regulations and shall be constructed of portland cement concrete or other acceptable materials as approved by the Director of Public Works. Sidewalk in all new approved subdivisions shall be constructed at the same time as the construction of the streets therein, unless the developer at the time of filing of the plat files an agreement and covenant against each of the lots in such subdivision. All sidewalks shall be located a minimum of eight (8) feet from the curb of the street, shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide and shall be between 2" or 5" above the top of the finished curb. Such agreement and covenant shall provide sidewalks will be installed and constructed on each lot in the subdivision not later than: a) at such time as construction on said lot which is made which required the issuance of a building permit,
b) three (3) years after the date of City Council approval of the plat, or c) at such time as there has been construction on seventy-five percent (75%) of the lots within the subdivision, whichever is earliest. At the time the owner of each lot not having a sidewalk shall construct such sidewalk pursuant to City specifications. In the event any owner fails to construct such sidewalk within 90 days from the date of notice from the City to do so, the City shall cause such sidewalk to be constructed and the cost thereof shall be assessed against such property in the manner as provided by law.

In subdivisions or other tracts existing as of June 1, 1993, wherein the construction of sidewalks was not required at the time of construction thereon, sidewalks shall be constructed on any such lot or tract at the time any building pe1mit is issued for improvements on said property except in the event the building permit is for an amount less fifteen percent (15%) of the assessed value of the property or if the construction is necessitated by a natural disaster and act of God.

In any subdivision or tract created or existing on or before June 1, 1993, the sidewalk construction requirement may be waived by the City Administrator and Building Inspector ifthere are no sidewalks on any adjacent lots or parcels and the owner of such real estate enters into an agreement with the municipality which shall run with the land and which shall provide in part the waiver may be withdrawn at any time by the municipality and at the time of such withdrawal, the owner or owners of said lot or parcel shall immediately construct such sidewalks as may be required by the City and that said owner or owners shall not object to such construction either privately or by an improvement district.

The municipality may also waive sidewalks on one side of the streets within subdivisions wherein all of the lots are in excess of one acre. The developer, with the approval of the Mayor and City Council, shall designate on the plat which side of said streets are designated as requiring sidewalks.

SECTION 605            DRIVEWAYS

Driveways shall have a maximum grade of ten (10) percent. Driveways and curb cuts shall be located not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line on City property. Curb cuts for straight curbs and the flare for rolled curbs shall be three (3) feet wider than the driveway pavement on each side.
 


SECTION 606	STREET AND WALKWAY LIGHTING


The City will direct OPPD to design and install street lighting once all paving has been completed on subdivisions in the City limits. Subdivisions outside City limits will be the responsibility of the subdivider if required by the Planning Commission and City Council.

SECTION 607	STREET TREES

Subdivider may be required to provide trees. If required, trees shall be species which are resistant to damage and disease and which do not cause interference with underground utilities, street lighting, or visibility at street intersections. Existing trees should be retained in new subdivisions wherever possible.

SECTION 608	UTILITY AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES


608.1	GENERAL: Sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water distribution, shall be installed in street right of ways unless approved otherwise by Director of Public Works. All other utilities shall be installed underground (in rear lot easements wherever practical).

When it is impossible to install sanitary and storm sewer lines in the unpaved portion of the street right-of-way all such utility lines, including service connections shall be completely installed, and inspected and approved by the Public Works Director, following the grading of the street and prior to the application of any pavement base.

Where sanitary and stmm sewer lines are to be installed in the unpaved portion of the street right-of-way, the installation of service connections may be delayed, provided, that at such time as these  service connections are installed, they shall be installed without breaking or weakening the existing pavement. Where rock is known to exist beneath the pavement area at such depth as to interfere with the installation of service connections, the complete installation of service connections shall be required prior to the application of any pavement base.

608.2	WATER SUPPLY IMPROVEMENTS: Where a public water supply is located five hundred (500) feet or less from the subdivision or required because of pollution problems, in the determination of the Planning Commission, the subdivision shall be provided with a complete water distribution system, including a connection for each lot and appropriately spaced fire hydrants. Public water distribution and public well systems shall meet the requirements of the City and the Nebraska Department of Health.

Where public water supply is not available or not required, the subdivider shall supply acceptable evidence of the availability of water.   The subdivider may be required to make one (1) or more test wells in the area to be platted if such evidence is deemed not acceptable.  Copies of well logs which are obtained shall include the name and address of the well driller and shall be submitted with the preliminary plat to the Planning
 

Commission.
Where public water supply is not available or otherwise not provided inthe subdivision, the minimum lot size shall conform to the minimum lot size specified in the Zoning Regulations, provided, that in no case shall said minimum lot be less than two and one­ half  (2 1/2) acres in area.

608.3	SANITARY SEWER IMPROVEMENTS:   The following requirements shall govern sanitary sewer improvements.

(1)	Where an adequate public sanitary sewer system is located five hundred (500) feet or less from the subdivision in the determination of the Planning Commission, public sanitary sewers shall be installed to adequately serve all lots, including lateral connections to the public system. Public sewer system extensions shall meet the requirements of the city standards and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and the Department of Health. Combinations of sanitary sewers and storm sewers shall be prohibited.

(2)	Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, the subdivider may provide:

	a.	A central treatment plant for the group provided that such central treatment plant is installed in accordance with City and Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality and Department of Health requirements; or
	
b.	
Lots may be served by individual disposal systems if the provisions of
		Section 608.03 (3) are met.

(3)	
a.	
Where the installation of individual disposal systems is considered, the suitability of the soil for individual systems, the absorptive ability
		of the soil, surface drainage, groundwater level, and topography shall
		be the  criteria for  determining whether  or not the installation  of
		individual systems is permissible.   Criteria shall be in accordance
		with the requirements of the City and the Nebraska Department of
		Environmental Quality and Department of Health.
	
b.	
Each lot so served shall be a size and shape to accommodate  the
	necessary length of tile field at a safe distance from and at a lower
	elevation than the proposed building (s).   Such lot size and shape
	shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which they
	are located, provided, that in no case shall said minimum lot be less
	than  one  (1)  acre  in  area where  there  is  a public  water  supply
	available at the lot and two and one-half (2-1/2) acres where there is
	no public water supply available.
 

c.	At least one (1) percolation test shall be made for each lot area being plotted, and each test shall be located in close proximity to the proposed individual sewage disposal unit, be numbered and its location shown on the preliminary plat. All percolation tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the Planning Commission and the Nebraska Department ofEnvironmental Quality.

d.	Where the installation of individual disposal units is considered and where the average natural ground slope exceeds ten (10) percent, the installation of a step-up disposal system may be required subject to specification by the Planning Commission and the Nebraska Department of Environmental Quality.

 
608.04











608.05














608.06
 
DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS: The subdivider shall construct all necessary facilities including underground pipe, inlets, catch basins, or open drainage ditches, as determined by the City Engineer, to provide for the adequate disposal of subsurface and surface water and maintenance of natural drainage courses. The velocity of flow in an open ditch shall not exceed four (4) feet per second in soil ditches or six (6) feet per second in turf gutters. Paved gutters will be required if velocities of flow are greater than those specified or if it is otherwise likely that destructive erosion will result. Drainage ditches shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer facilities.

STORM SEWERS AND STORM WATER DRAINAGE: Where an adequate public storm sewer system is located five hundred (500) feet or less from the subdivision the subdivider shall construct a storm sewer system and connect with such storm sewer line. If such a storm sewer system is not accessible, natural drainage channels with easements of adequate width shall be provided, as determined by the City Engineer and approved by the Planning Commission. Paved gutters or storm sewers shall be required if velocities of flow are greater than specified in Section 608.04 of these Regulations or cause destructive erosion. Storm drainage, including drain tile around basements, shall not be permitted to discharge into any sanitaty sewer facility, but shall connect to an adequate drainage outlet.

CULVERTS AND BRIDGES: Where natural drainage channels intersect any street right-of-way, it shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to have satisfactory bridges and/or culverts constructed. Where culverts are required, minimum requirements shall be observed as follows:

(1)	All culverts shall extend across the entire right-of-way width of the proposed street. The cover over the culvert and its capacity shall be determined by the City Engineer. The minimum diameter of a culvert pipe shall be eighteen inches.	Depending on existing drainage conditions, head walls may be required.

(2)	Driveway culverts shall have a minimum length of twenty (20) feet, and a
 

minimum diameter of twelve (12) inches. The driveway culverts shall be laid so as to maintain the flow lines of the ditch or gutter. Head walls may be required.

608.07		EROSION CONTROL: The subdivider shall be required to provide for the control of erosion of areas  of the subdivision which are disturbed by grading operations by constructing temporary terraces on slopes, temporary silting basins, sod swales and spillways, and whatever may be necessary to prevent erosion and damage to adjacent properties from surface drainage as approved by the City Engineer and the Planning Commission.
608.075	SETBACK REQUIREMENTS - CREEKS/WATERCOURSES: No person shall be
granted a permit for the construction of any structures, bank stabilization structures, poles, and sign structures adjacent to any creek or watercourse unless such structure is located so that no portion thereof is any closer to the creek or watercourse than will allow a maximum three-to-one slope plus 20 feet between the water's edge of the creek or watercourse. "Water's edge" shall be deemed to be that point constituting the edge of the water during normal flow conditions.

A property shall be exempt from the provisions of this Section upon an application filed by the property owner supported by a showing by a registered professional engineer that adequate bank stabilization structures or slope protection will be installed in the construction of said structure, having an estimated useful life equal to that of the structure, which will provide adequate erosion control conditions coupled with adequate lateral supp01i so that no portion of said structure adjacent to the creek/watercourse will be endangered by erosion or lack of lateral support. In the event that the structure is adjacent to any stream which has been channelized or otherwise improved by any agency or government, then such certification providing an exception to this Section may take the form of a certification as to the adequacy and protection of the improvements installed by such governmental agency.

608.8	FIRE PROTECTION: Fire hydrants shall  be provided by the subdivider in all subdivisions with public water supplies. The hydrants should be located between property lines and curbs with all outlets facing or parallel to the street. Hydrants shall be placed at the corners of all blocks  and at mid-block for blocks exceeding eight hundred (800) feet in length. Hydrants shall also be required at the entrance and end of all cul-de-sacs exceeding four hundred (400) feet in length. The type of hydrant and control valves and the location of the hydrant shall be approved by the Fire Chief. The minimum size of any water line serving any hydrant shall not be less than six (6) inches in diameter and shall be circulation water lines. The size and location of water lines shall be approved by the City Engineer and the Fire Chief.

608.9	ELECTRlC, GAS, AND TELEPHONE IMPROVEMENTS:

(1)	Electric  service  and  telephone  service  shall  be  provided  within  each subdivision.	Gas service may be required  where reasonably  accessible.
 

Whenever such facilities are reasonably accessible and available, they may be required to be installed within the area. Telephone, electric, and street lighting wires, conduits and cables shall be constructed underground except in cases where the City Engineer determines that topographic, bedrock or underground water conditions would result in excessive costs to the subdivider.

(2)	Whenever a sanitary sewer line and electric and/or telephone line are each placed underground in the same utility easement, the following provisions shall be applicable:

a)	The total easement width shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet, and


b)	The sanitary sewer line shall be installed within three (3) feet of the easement, and the electric and/or telephone lines shall be installed within three (3) feet of the opposite side of the easement.

 
SECTION 609
 
SHARED IMPROVEMENT COSTS
 

 
609.01







609.02




609.03
 
OVER-SIZE AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS: The utilities, pavements and other land improvements required for the proposed subdivision shall be designed of over-size and/or with extensions provided to serve nearby land which is an integral part of the neighborhood service or drainage area as determined by the Planning Commission and City Engineer.

EXTENSIONS TO BOUNDARIES: The subdivider may be required to extend the necessary improvements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining unsubdivided land, as determined by the City Planning Commission.

OFF-SITE EXTENSIONS: If streets or utilities are not available at the boundary of a proposed subdivision, and if the Planning Commission finds the extensions across undeveloped areas would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or as a municipal expense until some future time, the subdivider may be required, prior to approval of the final plat, to obtain necessaiy easements or rights-of­ way and construct and pay for such extensions. Such improvements shall be available for connections by subdividers of adjoining land.
 

SECTION 610	SUBDIVISION  IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES

The subdivider shall complete in a manner satisfactory to the City Council and the City Engineer, all improvements required in these Regulations specified in the final subdivision plat, and as approved by the City Council and shall dedicate same to the City in accordance with Section
610.7	of these Regulations.


The City shall, at its discretion,  enter into  a contract with the subdivider whereby the
 

subdivider shall guarantee to complete all improvements required by this Ordinance or otherwise specified by the City Council in a manner satisfactory to the City Council To secure this contract, the subdivider shall provide, subject to the approval of the Planning Commission, one of the guarantees provided in Sections 610.01through610.04.

 
610.01










610.02



























610.03
 
SURETY PERFORMANCE BOND: The subdivider shall obtain a security bond in the amount of 110% of the total estimated cost of the project from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the State ofNebraska. The bond shall be payable to the City and shall be in an amount to cover the entire cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer, of installing all contracted improvements. The duration of the bond shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the City in accordance with Section 610.07.

ESCROW ACCOUNT: The subdivider shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value in the amount of 110 percent of the total estimated cost of the project, either with the City, or in escrow with a bank. The use of any instrument other than cash, and in the case of an escrow account, the bank with which the funds are to be deposited, shall be subject to the approval of the City Council. The deposit, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the City Engineer, shall cover the cost of installing all required improvements.

In the case of an escrow account, the subdivider shall file with the City Council an agreement between the financial bank and himself/herself guaranteeing the following:

(1)	That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the City Council and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider as security in any other matter during that period;

(2)	And that in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete said improvements, then the bank shall immediately make the funds in said account available to the City for  use in the completion of those improvements.

SEQUENTIAL    APPROVAL    OF    SUBDIVISION    SEGMENTS    WITHOUT
GUARANTEE: Where a subdivision is to be developed in several sections, the City Council may, at its discretion, waive the use of a guarantee on the initial sections, provided that such sections may not be larger than twenty-five (25) lots, or fifty (50) percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision, whichever is less. The City Council shall grant final plat approval for each succeeding section being contingent upon completion of all contracted improvements in each preceding section, and acceptance of those improvements in accordance with Section 610. Completion of improvements in the final section of the subdivision, which shall include at least twenty­ five (25) lots, or fifty (50) percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision, whichever is less, must be guaranteed through the use of one of the other methods detailed under Section 610 of this Ordinance.
 


 
610.04









610.05







610.06


















610.07
 
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT: The City may, at its discretion, enter into an agreement with the subdivider to pay the cost of the required improvements through the use of a special assessment. The City shall make such arrangements for actual construction and interim financing as its deems appropriate, provided that construction of improvements in any section of the subdivision shall be completed in a time period not longer than would be allowed if another form of improvement guarantee were used.

TIME LIMITS: Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the subdivider and the Planning Commission shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all required improvements, such deadline not to exceed two (2) years from the date of final plat approval. The Planning Commission shall have the power to extend that deadline for one (1) additional year where the subdivider can present substantial reason for doing so.

FAILURE  TO  COMPLETE  IMPROVEMENTS:	If any  portion  of  the  required improvements shall fail to be accepted for dedication in compliance with section 610.07 within the allocated time period, either for reason of incompletion or for  reason of substandard  construction,  then  the  City  Council  shall  take  the  following  action: Where improvements have been guaranteed under  Section 610.02 of this Ordinance, the City Council shall declare whatever  security has been pledged as a guarantee to be forfeit.  Where the City Council is not already in possession of said guarantee, it shall immediately take the actions necessary to obtain it. Upon receipt of these securities, the City Council shall use them, or receipts from their sale if that be necessary, to finance the completion of contracted improvements or the rebuilding of such improvements to the proper specifications.  Unused portions of these securities shall be returned to the subdivider, bonding company, or crediting institution, as is
appropriate.

INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION: The City Engineer, or other knowledgeable official as specified by the Planning Commission, shall regularly inspect for defects in the construction of required improvements. Upon completion of these improvements, the City Engineer shall file with the Planning Commission a statement either certifying that the improvements have been completed in the specific manner or listing the defects in those improvements.

Upon completion of the improvements, the subdivider shall file with the Planning Commission a statement stipulating the following:

(1)	That all required improvements are complete;

(2)	That these improvements  are in compliance with the minimum  standards specified by the Planning Commission for their construction;

(3)	That  the  subdivider  knows  of  no  defects  from  any  cause,  m  those improvements; and
 


(4)	That these improvements are free and clear of any encumbrance or lien. If the City Engineer has certified that the contracted improvements are complete and free from defect, then upon receipt of the other statements and agreements detailed above, the City shall accept the dedication of those improvements. The City may, at its discretion, accept the dedication of any portion of the required improvements, provided that all statements and agreements specified above have been received for that portion of the improvements.

610.8	REDUCTION OF GUARANTEES: Inthose cases where improvement guarantees have been made under Section 610.02 of this Ordinance, the amount of the guarantee may be reduced upon acceptance, in compliance with Section 610.07 of the dedication of a portion of the required improvements.

610.9	RELEASE OF GUARANTEE: Upon acceptance, in accordance with Section 610.07 of the dedication of the final portion of improvements, the City shall authorize the release of the remaining portion of the improvement guarantee.

SECTION 611	OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE

It is the intention of the City to provide no services other than planning and zoning administration to its zoning area beyond the corporate boundaries of the City. Therefore, it will be the obligation of the subdivider to present to the Planning Commission and City Council a precise approach for the provision of these services. Said approach may include the formation of district, homeowners organizations or other methods to operate and provide for long term maintenance and service.  Said approach shall be made binding on the subdivider in a form, agreement, or contract in a manner which is accepted by the City Attorney.























(END OF SECTION)
 

(Blank Page)
 

ARTICLE 7 VARIAN CE


SECTION701	GRANTING OF VARIANCES; CONDITIONS


The Planning Commission may recommend and the City Council may grant variances from the provisions of these regulations, but only after determining that:

1.	There are unique circumstances or conditions affecting the property.
2.	The variance is necessary for the reasonable and acceptable development of the property in question.
3.	The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to adjacent property.

SECTION702	RECORDING OF PLAT


In no case shall the requirement of filing and recording a plat for subdivision be waived. SECTION703	PLAN DEVELOPMENT
The Planning Commission may recommend and City Council may also grant reasonable variances to these Regulations if the subdivider concurrently submits an application for, and obtains approval of, a Planned Development District. The subdivider shall indicate where his/her plans vary from these regulations and shall present sufficient evidence to support his/her request, indicating why his/her request will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare.

SECTION704	WAIVER FOR SMALL SUBDIVISIONS


The subdivider may make application for and the Planning Commission may grant a waiver of some or all of the requirements provided in Article 5 and Article 6 of these regulations for small residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions where the following conditions exist:

1.	The subdivision contains no more than five (5) lots.


2.	All lots of the proposed subdivision shall be platted on existing streets.


3.	Street surfaces of all streets serving the subdivision shall meet or exceed street surface standards of the City.

4.	Public water, sanitary sewer, and facilities are available to all lots in the subdivision.

5.	The development of the subdivision will not increase erosion or flooding potential.


A subdivision requesting a waiver under the provisions of Section 704 of these Regulations shall submit said request in writing to the  Planning Commission prior to submission of the Preliminary Plat.  The request for a waiver shall include a list of all requirements for which a waiver
 
is sought by reference to the Section numbers and the descriptive catch-heads which appear in these Regulations.

SECTION705	LOT SPLIT OF TAX LOTS OR PARCELS

An existing tax lot or parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous units on the January 1, 1979 Tax Rolls, of sufficient size, may be divided into no more than two (2) tax lots, upon recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of the City Council. In AGG a lot split is allowed where a tax lot, tract or parcel ofland is divided into one tax lot that is at least three (3) acres and a second tax lot that is greater than ten (10) acres. The subdivider, developer or owner shall file with the City an application upon forms prescribed therefor and shall comply with these minimum lot requirements. Requests for lot split approval shall be made by the owner of the land to the City Administrator.

The subdivider shall submit four (4) full-size paper originals and one (1) reproducible copy not more than eleven (11) inches x seventeen (17) inches of a survey of the lots, certified by a surveyor, showing the location of the structure(s) thereon, together with the precise nature, location and dimensions of the split. Such drawings shall include a scale drawing of the entire tract being divided. An electronic version of the survey maps capable of being imported into the City's GIS system must also be submitted. The application shall be accompanied by a list of names and addresses of all owners of land within three hundred (300) feet of the property who shall receive notices.

The submitted drawing shall also contain the following:


(1)	Date, title (such as "Lot Split of Tax Lot .."), and location map of the tax lot being split.


(2)	Names and locations of abutting streets and lots, identifying street names and tax lot or lot and block numbers.

(3)	Identification of the new tax lot and set back lines.


(4)	Graphic scale, true north point and full legend depicting all map symbology.


(5)	Monuments.

(6)	Dimensions, angles and bearings and complete legal description of the property.


(7)	Sufficient engineering data to reproduce any line on the ground.


(8)	Location, dimensions, and purposes of any existing easements.

(9)	Certification by surveyor or engineer certifying to the accuracy of the survey and drawing.


(10)	Certification signed and acknowledged by all parties holding title or having any title interest
 
in the land subdivided and consenting to the preparation and recording of the drawing as submitted.

(11)	Certification by the County Treasurer all assessed taxes for the current year have been paid in full.

(12)	Square footage of each tax lot.


(13)	If applicable, utility easements signed by the owner or owners to permit all tax lots created access to all utilities available, including but not limited to, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water, electrical, telephone, and cable television.

(14)	Location of all existing buildings, structures, fences and retaining walls.


Written notices shall be mailed to all owners of land within three hundred (300) feet of the property. Adjacent land owners shall have ten days from the date of notification to notify the City Administrator of any protests which they may have concerning the application.

The applicant shall pay and the application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. Said fee shall be set and determined from time to time as deemed necessary by the Mayor and City Council by resolution, and shall be appended to the Municipal Code as part of an appendix for permit, license, and application fees.

A "Lot Split Action Pending" sign will be posted on the front yard of the property under consideration for a lot split at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearings of the Planning Commission and City Council.

1.	Approval or disapproval of tax lot splits shall be made based on the following guidelines in which:

A.	No tax lot split shall be approved if:


(1)	A new street or alley is needed or proposed.


(2)	A vacation of streets, alleys, setback lines, access control of easements is needed or proposed.

(3)	Such action will result in significant increases in service requirements, utilities, schools, traffic control, streets, etc.; or will interfere with maintaining existing service levels, additional repaving etc.

(4)	There is less street right-of-way than required by these Regulations or the comprehensive plan, unless such dedication can be made by separate instrument.

(5)	All easement requirements have not been dedicated.
 

(6)	The tax lot split results in a tract which does not border on and provide direct access for ingress and egress to a public right-of-way. Said direct access shall not be less than thirty (30) feet in width. An easement shall not be considered as providing direct access.

(7)	A substandard tax lot or parcel would be created, as determined by the existing zomng.

(8)	Any assessed, current year taxes are not paid.


(9)	Approval has not been granted by the Public Works Director for access to proposed lots in corporate limits or County Roads Superintendent for access to proposed lots in the two-mile jurisdiction.

B.	Additional  requirements  or provisions  pertaining  to tax lot split applications  are as follows:

(1)	Tax lot splits platted along existing streets shall include dedication to the public of right-of-way pursuant to the provisions of Section 502.03 of these Subdivision Regulations.

(2)	The Planning Commission may make such additional requirements deemed necessary to carry out the intent and policy of existing land development regulations and goveming body policy which may include, but not be limited to, installation of public facilities and submission of covenants for the protection of other landowners in the original subdivision.

(3)	The City Council, after recommendation of the Planning Commission, may waive any of the restrictions herein prohibiting the approval of a tax lot split upon the following conditions:

(a)	Lot split to be appended to an existing tax lot: If the tax lot split application includes a letter from the County Surveyor indicating that upon granting of the tax lot split any resulting substandard size tax lot will be combined with an existing tax lot or tract and redesignated as one tax lot or tract, the tax lot split may be approved if such redesignated tax lot or tract meets all of the requirements for the granting of tax lot splits herein; or

(b)	Lot split to be appended to an existing platted lot: Ifthe tax lot split application includes an agreement of the owners thereof and owners of adjacent platted lot(s) to which any part of the split lot is to be appended, binding the transferees, grantees, and the assignees of the owners, requiring the resulting  split tax lot(s) will be permanently appended to the contiguous platted lot(s) with common ownership. Permanently appended shall mean that the resulting partial tax lot or the contiguous platted lot may not be conveyed without the other in a simultaneous transaction to
 
the same grantee, pursuant to the terms of a contiguous parcel agreement in form satisfactory to the Planning Commission and City Council.

C.	The Planning Commission shall consider the tax lot split within thirty (60) days of application. The chairman of the Planning Commission shall sign and furnish a certificate of approval or disapproval to be affixed to the lot split survey.

D.	The tax lot split application shall then be submitted to the City Council for appropriate action.

E.	Following approval by the City Council, an original survey bearing the land surveyor's certificate, the signatures of the chairman of the Planning Commission and Mayor, indicating City Council approval, shall be filed by the City Clerk in the office of the Washington County Register of Deeds.

2.	The Zoning Administrator may approve an Administrative Tax Lot Line Adjustment without further approval by the Planning Commission or City Council which involves a transaction between owners of adjoining tax lots, which involves only a change in the boundary between the tax lots owned by such persons, which does not create an additional tax lot, and which does not result in the creation of a substandard tax lot.

Following the mailing of the written notices required in Section 705, if a protest or protests against such tax lot split be filed in the office of the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the notice of such split, which are duly signed by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the total area, excepting public streets and ways, located within three hundred feet of the boundaries of the property proposed to be split, approval of such tax lot split shall not be made by the Zoning Administrator under this section, and the approval of such tax lot split shall be made by the procedure as set forth hereinabove by hearing before the Planning Commission and City Council.

3.	Conveyances or transfers of real estate otherwise subject to the provisions of this section shall be exempt in the following instances:

A.	A conveyance of land or interest therein for use as right-of-way  by railroad or other public utilities subject to state or federal regulation, where no new street or easement of access is created.

B.	Any transfer by operation oflaw.


C.	A conveyance ofland to any governing body for right-of-way or other public use when such acceptance is in the public interest and not for the purpose of circumventing these regulations.
 

ARTICLE 9  REPEALS

All Ordinances of the City inconsistent herewith to the extent of such inconsistency, and no further, are hereby repealed.

The repeal of any of the above-mentioned does not revive any other Ordinances or portions thereof repealed by said Ordinances.

Such repeals shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for the violation of any Ordinance repealed hereby, for any offense committed prior to the repeal.

ARTICLE 10 SEVERABILITY

It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that the several provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable, in accordance with the provisions set forth below.

If any provision of this Ordinance is declared to be invalid by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that:

1.	The effect of such decision shall be limited to that lot, building, other structure or tract of land immediately involved in the controversy, action or proceeding in which the judgement or decree of invalidity was rendered.
2.	Such decision shall not affect, impair or nullify this Ordinance as a whole or the application of any provisions thereof, to any other lot, building, other structure, or tract of land.

ARTICLE 11 EFFECTIVE DATE

This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law.

Passed and Approved this gth day of March, 2005.




James E. Realph, Mayor



ATTEST:



Brenda Wheeler, City Clerk



(END OF SECTION)
 
Addendum No. 1 to Schedule B o(Subdivision Regulation for Blair, Nebraska


The City Administrator and Building Inspector of the City of Blair may waive the sidewalk requirements as set forth in Schedule Band Section 604 hereof where the proposed residential construction is located in one of the following: College Heights Addition, Westridge Addition, Baronage Valley Addition, Marquardt's Hillcrest Addition, on South 13th Avenue south of Wilbur Street, and 16th Street south of Wilbur Street. Such waiver may be made only in the event that said residential construction is not adjacent to any lot or parcel of real estate on which a sidewalk has previously been constructed. Such waiver further may be granted only if the owner provides to the City an agreement which shall run with the land and shall provide in part that said owner understands and agrees that the waiver may be withdrawn at any time and that at such time, said owner will not object to the construction of sidewalks as may be required or promulgated by the City.

SCHEDULE A:	MJNIMUMSTREETSTANDARDS
Minimum	Surface	No. of	Minimum	Shoulder	Maximum	Minimum	Min. Spacing
Right of	Width	Traffic	No. of	Width (ft)	Grade%	Center	intersection
Way (ft)	(ft)	Lanes	Parking			Line	with arterial
			Lanes			Radius	street (ft)
CLASS I SUBDMSIONS (REFER TO SECTION 303.01 (51))
Arterial Street

Collector Street
 
Local Street 	50
 
24 (2)
 

Cul-de-Sac	62.5	50 (2)
and Loop
CLASS II SUBDIVISIONS (REFER TO SECTION 303.01 (51))
Arterial Street

Collector  Street Local Street
Cul-de-Sac and Loop


(1)	Minimum standards are not applicable to roads and streets which are included on the Federal-Aid Primary or Federal­ Aid Secondary system of on the county or municipal One and Six Year Road and Street Plan.
(2)	Add greater width if parking and/or turning lanes are to be provided:  minimum turning lane= 10 feet and minimum
parking lane = 8 feet
(3)	Ifa greater surface width is provided for parking lanes or turning lanes an equivalent footage of the additional surface width shall be added to the minimum right of way.

SCHEDULEB:	REQUIRED SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS
Subdivision	Curb&	Sidewalks	Street Surface	Storm	Street	Central	Central
Class (Section	Gutter		Type Minimum	Drainage	Lights	Lights	Water
303.01 (51))

Class I	

N.R.	

N.R.	

Agg	

N.R.	

N.R.	System

N.R.	System

N.R.
Class II	Yes	Yes	Bit-Con	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes

N.R. =Not Required, but subject to approval of Planning Commission and City Engineer AGG =Aggregate,  crushed rock or gravel	Bit-Con= Bituminous  or concrete surface
 
(Blank Page)
